CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HUNTINGTON WOODS, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ronald F. Gillham 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert F. Paul III, Mayor Pro-Tem 
Jeffrey Jenks 
Mary L. White 
Phyllis B.C. Kramer 
City Commission 
____________ 
Shifman & Carlson, P.C. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Ruth A. Franzoni 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1988 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Ricardo Lewis, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ruth A. Franzoni, Clerk, Tony Lehmann, Finance Director, and John Carlson, Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 2008. 
CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS 
ORDINANCE NO. 527 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS ORDAINS: 
SECTION 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Huntington Woods, Michigan" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of all ordinances of the City adopted by the City Commission through Ordinance No. 524, adopted June 17, 2008, including Supplement 1 thereto, which includes all ordinances of the City adopted by the City Commission as of July 15, 2008, (the "Code") and codified into Chapters 1 through 42, each inclusive, is adopted pursuant to Section 5-b of the Home Rule Cities Act, MCL 117.5b; MSA 5.2084(2). The city clerk shall maintain and keep one copy of the Code of Ordinances, City of Huntington Woods, Michigan, published by Municipal Code Corporation, and any amendments thereto adopted by the City, which shall be available for inspection and use by the public. 
SECTION 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 15, 2008, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
SECTION 3. Nothing in this ordinance shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance. The adoption of this ordinance shall not be interpreted as authorizing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the City in effect on the date of adoption of this ordinance, except as otherwise provided in the Code. 
SECTION 4. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinances or part thereof that have been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
SECTION 5. Additions or amendments to the Code adopted after July 15, 2008, and passed in form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that references to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
SECTION 6. In the event any portion, section or subsection of this ordinance shall be held invalid for any reason, such invalidation shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other part or portion of this ordinance or of the Code of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 
SECTION 7. Ordinances adopted after July 15, 2008, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
SECTION 8. This ordinance shall become effective twenty (20) days from the date of its passage and shall be published as required by the Charter of the City of Huntington Woods. 
    MADE, PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Commission of the City of Huntington Woods on this 18th day of November 2008. 
_____
RONALD F. GILLHAM, Mayor 
    I, RUTH FRANZONI, duly authorized Clerk of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan, do hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance was adopted by the Commission of the City of Huntington Woods at its regular meeting held on November 18, 2008. 
_____
RUTH FRANZONI, 
City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
      
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 454  4-24-2001 Omit 2 527 11-18-2008 Include 2 528 12-16-2008 Include 2 529  8-18-2009 Include 2 530  8-18-2009 Include 2 531  1-19-2010 Include 2 532  6-15-2010 Include 2 533  7-20-2010 Include 2 534  9-14-2010 Include 2 535 12-21-2010 Include 2 536  3-22-2011 Include 2 537  4-26-2011 Include 2 538  5- 3-2011 Include 2 539  6-14-2011 Include 2 540  6-14-2011 Include 2 541 10-18-2011 Include 3 542 10-18-2011 Include 3 543  1-17-2012 Include 3 544  1-17-2012 Include 3 545  2-21-2012 Include 3 546  2-21-2012 Include 3 547  3-20-2012 Include 3 548  5- 1-2012 Include 3 549  7-17-2012 Include 4 550  8-21-2012 Include 4 551  8-21-2012 Include 4 552  8-21-2012 Include 4 553 10-16-2012 Include 4 554 10-16-2012 Include 4 555 11-20-2012 Include 4 556 12-18-2012 Include 4 557  1-15-2013 Include 4 558  1-15-2013 Include 4 559  5-21-2013 Include 4 560  6-18-2013 Include 5 561  7-16-2013 Include 5 562  8-20-2013 Include 5 563  4-29-2014 Include 5 564  6-17-2014 Include 5 565  6-17-2014 Include 5 566  6-17-2014 Include 5 569  8-19-2014 Include 6 570  8-19-2014 Include 6 571 10-21-2014 Include 6 572 11-18-2014 Include 6 573  3-17-2015 Include 6 574  3-17-2015 Include 6 575  4- 7-2015 Include 6 576  6-16-2015 Include 6 577  7-21-2015 Include 6 578  8-18-2015 Include 7 579 10- 6-2015 Include 7 580 10-20-2015 Include 7 581  3-15-2016 Include 7 582  5-24-2016 Include 7 583  7-19-2016 Include 7 584  7-19-2016 Include 7 585  7-19-2016 Include 7 586  8-16-2016 Include 8 587 10-10-2016 Include 8 588 12-20-2016 Include 8 589  3-28-2017 Include 8 592  6-20-2017 Include 8 593  6-20-2017 Include 8 594  8-15-2017 Include 9 595  9-19-2017 Include 9 596 10-17-2017 Include 9 597 10-17-2017 Omit 9 598 11-21-2017 Include 9 599 12-19-2017 Include 9 600  1- 8-2018 Include 9 601  4-10-2018 Include 9 602  4-10-2018 Include 9 603  4-10-2018 Include 9 604  4-10-2018 Include 9 605  6-28-2018 Include 9  
CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Huntington Woods, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Huntington Woods City Code." 
(Code 1988, § 1.4) 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the commission may be effectuated. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms, technical phrases, and term and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 
    City commission and commission. The terms "city commission" and "commission" mean the City Commission of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 
    Civil infraction. The term "civil infraction" means an act or omission prohibited by law which is not a crime and for which civil sanctions may be ordered. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Huntington Woods, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Oakland County, Michigan. 
    Crime. The term "crime" means an act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a civil infraction and that is punishable, upon conviction, by any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Imprisonment. 
(2)  A fine not designated as a civil fine. 
(3)  Other penal discipline. 
    Delegation of authority means a provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through authorized subordinates. 
    Gender. Terms of one gender include the other genders. 
    Health department and department of public health. The terms "health department" and "department of public health" mean the county health department. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" means the director of the county health department. 
    Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place, or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Joint authority. The term "joint authority" means a grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" is construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn and affirmed. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" shall include the term "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees. References to "officers, departments, boards, commissions" or "employees" are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person that appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
    Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, limited liability company, governmental unit and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to "public acts" shall be references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to the act as amended. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom, or by invitation, express and implied. 
    Real property, real estate and land. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Street, highway and alley. The terms "street" and "highway" mean the entire width, subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
    Tenses. The present tense shall include the past and future tenses. The future tense shall include the present tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all terms used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
    Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1988, §§ 1.8-1.10) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections, or that otherwise appear in footnote form, are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters, articles, divisions and subdivisions or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(d)  No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any chapter, article, division, subdivision or section heading. 
(Code 1988, § 1.5) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving provision therein. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any rights, privileges, suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4. 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of any ordinance: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Granting any specific right or franchise, or establishing the procedure for granting a right or franchise. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for the duties of city officers or employees not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits. 
(9)  Adopting or amending a master plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessments. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Not codified in this Code that levies, imposes or otherwise relates to taxes, exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes. 
(15)  Pertaining to rezoning property. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution, or other official act of the commission, which will cause the law to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-9. - Fees. 
    Where a fee is set or established by the city commission and amended from time to time by resolution or ordinance, a list of such fees will be available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 1.7) 
Sec. 1-10. - Notice. 
(a)  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisance or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at the owner's residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing said notice by first class mail to such owner at the owner's last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting said notice in some conspicuous place on the premises for five days. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by said officer to remove said notice. 
(Code 1988, § 1.11) 
Sec. 1-11. - Publication of rules and regulations. 
    All rules and regulations made by the administrative officers which are subject to approval by the commission under the provisions of this Code, after such approval is given, and all rules and regulations adopted by the commission on its own initiative, shall be published in the manner provided in the City Charter for the publication of city ordinances. Copies of all such rules and regulations shall be kept in the office of the clerk for public inspection and distribution. 
(Code 1988, § 1.12) 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)  It is the legislative intent of the city commission in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants, and should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 1.14) 
Sec. 1-13. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section ____________ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Huntington Woods, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section ____________ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Huntington Woods, Michigan, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 1.2) 
Sec. 1-14. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be numbered so that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be prepared so that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the terms "this ordinance," or similar terms, to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalties and sanctions for violations of Code and city ordinances; continuing violations; injunctive relief. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation, or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Any provision of this Code that is made or declared to be a misdemeanor, civil infraction or municipal civil infraction is a violation of this Code. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or city ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.), and other applicable laws. Unless otherwise specifically provided for, a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall not be less than as set out in the fine schedule in subsection (d) of this section. In addition, the district court may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce the Code and/or city ordinance. 
(f)  Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise, or other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 1988, § 1.13; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 5-19-1998; Ord. No. 433, § 1, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 4-29-2014) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.4i(k), 117.4l. 
Sec. 1-16. - Responsibility. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do said act. 
(Code 1988, § 1.6) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

Secs. 2-19-2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; conflicts of interests as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq.; legal defense of public employees, MCL 691.1408; incompatible offices, MCL 15.181 et seq.; nondiscrimination in employment, MCL 37.2102. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-40. - Division of administrative service. 
    The administrative service shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager, except as otherwise provided by the city Charter, and shall be divided into the following offices and departments, each of which shall be the responsibility of and under the control of a head as listed under such office or department: 
Office or Department Official Head Clerk City clerk Treasurer City treasurer Department of public safety Director of public safety Department of public services Director of public services Department of recreation Director of recreation Department of law City attorney Library Library director  
(Code 1988, § 1.31) 
Secs. 2-41-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-71. - City manager. 
    The city manager shall see that all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations adopted by the commission, and the provisions of this Code, are properly enforced. The city manager shall attend all meetings of the commission, regular and special. During the absence or disability of the manager, the commission shall designate some qualified person to temporarily perform the duties of the manager. 
(Code 1988, § 1.101) 
Sec. 2-72. - Department heads. 
(a)  All department heads other than the attorney are responsible to the manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned to them. As to these department heads, the manager may set aside any action by them taken and may supersede them in the functions of their respective offices. 
(b)  In case of a vacancy in office or during the absence of any department head, the manager may designate an interim acting head or perform personally the functions of the office. All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(Code 1988, § 1.102) 
Sec. 2-73. - Delegation of duties. 
    The manager may direct any department, division or bureau responsible to such manager to perform the work for any other department, division or bureau, or may delegate to any officer or employee any duties other than those established for the department, division or bureau to which the officer or employee may be assigned. 
(Code 1988, § 1.103) 
Sec. 2-74. - Reports and records. 
    Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the manager as required by such manager. A summary of all such reports shall be made by the manager and submitted to the commission as required by it. Each department head shall establish a system of records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the manager. The manager shall submit a written report to the commission as soon as possible after the close of each month, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding month and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the monthly allowances made for such departments in the annual budget. The manager shall keep the commission fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 1.104) 
Sec. 2-75. - Preservation of public records. 
    Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public records under the department head's jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of the manager. 
(Code 1988, § 1.105) 
Sec. 2-76. - Payment of moneys. 
    All moneys belonging to the city shall be paid out as authorized by the Charter or action of the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.106) 
Sec. 2-77. - Approval of legal documents. 
    The mayor and manager or clerk shall sign all contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the city, unless otherwise provided for by law, the Charter, ordinance or the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 1.107) 
Secs. 2-78-2-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Ethics Code[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 

Sec. 2-101. - Public policy. 
(a)  Public office and employment are public trusts. For government to operate properly, each city officer and employee must earn and honor the public trust by integrity and conduct. 
(b)  The city hereby declares that all city officers and employees must avoid conflicts between their private interests and the public interest. Public officers and employees must: 
(1)  Be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; 
(2)  Make governmental decisions and policy in the proper governmental channels; 
(3)  Not use public office for personal gain. 
(c)  To enhance public trust, the city must provide its officers and employees with adequate guidelines for separating their roles as private citizens from their roles as public servants. 
(d)  This subdivision sets minimum standards of ethical conduct for all city officers and employees, elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. It proscribes actions incompatible with the public interest and directs disclosure of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. It is intended to supplement and not replace applicable statutes regarding conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1(1.110), 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 2-102. - Responsibilities of public office. 
(a)  City officers and employees are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state and to comply with and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, the state, and the Charter and this Code. City officers and employees must not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so. City officers and employees are bound to observe, in their official acts, the highest standards of morality and to discharge the duties of their offices faithfully, regardless of personal consideration, recognizing that their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach. 
(b)  All city officers and employees shall safeguard public confidence by being honest, fair and respectful of all persons and property with whom they have contact, by maintenance of nonpartisanship in all official acts, and by avoiding conduct which may tend to undermine respect for city officers and employees and for the city as an institution. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1(1.111), 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 2-103. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compensation means any money, property, thing of value or benefit conferred upon or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be rendered by that person. 
    Financial interest means any interest in money, property or other thing of value or benefit. 
    Governmental decision means a determination, action, vote, or disposition upon a motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, ordinance, or measure on which a vote by the members of a legislative or governing body of a public entity is required and by which a public entity formulates or effectuates public policy. 
    Immediate family means a city officer or employee, the city officer's spouse, parents or children. 
    Officer or employee of the city means a person elected, appointed, employed, or otherwise serving in any capacity with the city in any position established by the city Charter or by city ordinance which involves the exercise of a public power, trust or duty. The term includes all officers and employees of the city, whether or not they receive compensation, including persons who serve on advisory boards and commissions, unless specifically excluded from coverage. The term shall not include election inspections and student representatives appointed to city boards or commissions. 
    Official duties or official action means a decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval or other action or failure to act, which involves the use of discretionary authority. 
    Personal interest means an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or any business association. 
    Private gain means any interest or benefit, in any form, received by a city employee or officer. 
    Significant value means having a market value in excess of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1(1.112), 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 2-104. - Intent of subdivision. 
(a)  It is the intention of section 2-105 that city officers and employees avoid any action, whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-105, which might result in, or create the appearance of: 
(1)  Using public employment or office for private gain; 
(2)  Giving or accepting preferential treatment, including the use of city property or information, to or from any organization or person; 
(3)  Losing complete independence or impartiality of action; 
(4)  Making a city decision outside official channels; or 
(5)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the city government. 
(b)  This subdivision is intended to be preventative and not punitive. It should not be construed to interfere with or abrogate in any way the provisions of any federal or state statute, the city Charter, the city ordinances, or any rights and/or remedies guaranteed under a collective bargaining agreement. 
(c)  This declaration of policy is not intended to apply to contributions to political campaigns, which are governed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1(1.113), 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 2-105. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No officer or employee of the city shall use or disclose confidential information required in the course of the officer's or employee's duties to further their own or another person's interest, or divulge such information other than in the manner and at the time prescribed or permitted by law. 
(2)  No officer or employee of the city shall represent the personal opinion of such officer or employee as that of the city. 
(3)  No officer or employee of the city shall use personnel resources, property and funds under the official care and control of the officer or employee, other than in accordance with prescribed constitutional, statutory and regulatory procedures, for personal gain or benefit. 
(4)  No officer or employee of the city shall, in connection with the official responsibilities of such officer or employee, solicit or accept any gift or loan of money, goods, services or other thing of significant value for the benefit of such employee, or any person or organization other than the city under circumstances where it can be reasonably inferred that the solicitation or acceptance is intended to influence the officer or employee or may tend to impair the independent judgment or action of such officer or employee in the performance of the official duties of that officer or employee on behalf of the city. 
(5)  No officer or employee of the city shall engage in a business transaction in which the officer or employee may profit because of their official position or authority or benefit financially from confidential information which the officer or employee has obtained or may obtain by reason of such position or authority. 
(6)  No officer or employee of the city shall engage in or accept employment or render services for any private or public interest when that employment or service is incompatible or in conflict with the discharge of the officer's or employee's official duties or when that employment may tend to impair the officer's or employee's independence of judgment or action in the performance of the official duties of such officer employee. 
(7)  No officer or employee of the city shall participate, as an agent or representative of the city, in the granting of subsidies, fixing of rates, issuance of licenses, permits or certificates, or other regulation or supervision, relating to any business entity in which the officer or employee has, directly or indirectly, a financial or personal interest, or make, vote on, recommend, or otherwise participate in making a governmental decision in which the officer or employee has directly or indirectly a financial or personal interest. 
(8)  No officer or employee of the city shall use, or attempt to use, the officer's or employee's official position to secure, request or grant any special consideration, privilege, exemption, advantage, contract or preferential treatment for such officer or employee, or others, beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(9)  Subsequent conflict of interest. No officer or employee of the city shall acquire any financial interest in or accept any employment concerning any project which has been granted approval by the city or any commission, board, department or employee thereof within one year of the officer's or employee's participation in any manner in considering or recommending the approval or disapproval of said project. 
(10)  Subsections (a)(6) and (a)(7) of this section shall not apply and a public officer shall be permitted to vote on, make, or participate in making a governmental decision if all of the following occur: 
a.  The requisite quorum necessary for official action on the governmental decision by the public entity to which the public officer has been elected or appointed is not available because the participation of the public officer in the official action would otherwise violate subsection (a)(6) or (a)(7) of this section. 
b.  The public officer is not paid for working more than 25 hours per week for the city. 
c.  The public officer promptly discloses any personal, contractual, financial, business, or employment interest the public officer may have in the governmental decision and the disclosure is made part of the public record of the official action on the governmental decision. 
(b)  Contracts. 
(1)  Conflict of interest prohibited. No city officer or employee of the city shall be a party, directly or indirectly, to any contract with the city, except as provided by this section. 
a.  This subsection shall not prevent the renewal or renegotiation of an employment or independent contractor agreement with a city officer or employee. 
b.  This subsection shall not prevent collective bargaining or contracts with any bona fide union. 
(2)  No officer or employee of the city shall directly or indirectly solicit any contract between the city and: 
a.  Such officer or employee. 
b.  Any partnership, limited liability company or other unincorporated association of which the officer or employee is a partner, member, or employee. 
c.  Any corporation in which the officer or employee is a stockholder of more than one percent of the total outstanding stock of any class if the stock is not listed on an exchange, or stock having a value of $25,000.00 or more if the stock is listed on a stock exchange, or of which the officer or employee is a director, officer, or employee. 
d.  Any trust of which the officer or employee is a beneficiary or trustee. 
(3)  In regard to a contract described in subsection (b)(2) of this section an officer or employee of the city shall not do either of the following: 
a.  Take any part in the negotiations for such a contract or the renegotiation or amendment of the contract, or in the approval of the contract. 
b.  Represent either party in the transaction. 
(4)  Subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section shall not apply to a city officer or employee paid for working an average of 25 hours per week or less, if the requirements set forth in subsection (b)(5) of this section, concerning disclosure of the pecuniary interest in the contract, approval of the contract by a two-thirds majority, and inclusion of the specified terms of the contract in the minutes of the city commission, are met. 
(5)  Any contract permitted under subsection (b)(4) of this section must meet all the following requirements: 
a.  Public disclosure on the record to the city commission of any pecuniary interest in the contract of the city officer or employee. 
b.  Approval of the contract by not less than two-thirds of the full membership of the city commission, not counting the vote of the disclosing member. 
c.  City commission minutes must contain the following: 
1.  The terms of the contract; 
2.  Duration of contract; 
3.  Consideration; 
4.  Facilities or services included; 
5.  Nature and degree of assignment of public employees for fulfillment of contract; 
6.  Names of all parties; and 
7.  The nature of any pecuniary interest. 
(6)  Provided further that subsections (b)(1)-(b)(5) of this section shall not prevent an officer or employee from making or participating in making a governmental decision to the extent required by law. If two-thirds of the members of city commission are not eligible to vote on a contract or to constitute a quorum because of this section or state law, a member may be counted for a quorum and vote on the contract if the member: 
a.  Will benefit directly $250.00 or less and less than five percent of the cost of the contract; 
b.  Files a sworn affidavit to that effect which is recorded with the official minutes of the meeting. 
(7)  Provided still further that the prohibitions set forth in subsections (b)(1)-(b)(5) of this section shall not apply to: 
a.  Contracts between public entities; 
b.  Contracts awarded to the lowest qualified bidder, other than an officer or employee of the city provided: 
1.  The bid is pursuant to published notice and sealed bids; and 
2.  No qualified bidder is prohibited from bidding except by law. 
c.  Subsection (b)(7)b of this section shall not apply to amendments, renegotiations of any existing contract or additional payments on any contract not authorized at the time of contract. 
(8)  Disclosure of conflict of interest and disqualification. Any city officer or employee who has a conflict of interest, as defined herein, in any matter before the city shall disclose such fact on the appropriate record of the city as set forth below prior to discussion or action thereon, and shall thereafter refrain from participating in any discussion, voting or action thereon, except as specifically provided in subsection (a)(10) of this section: 
a.  A city commissioner shall disclose any conflict of interest and the nature and extent of such interest on the record of the city commission. 
b.  A member of any city board, commission or committee shall disclose any conflict of interest and the nature and extent of such interest on the record of said board, commission or committee. 
c.  A city employee who has a financial or other interest in a matter before the city commission or any city board, commission or committee and who participates in discussion with, or gives an official opinion to the city commission, or to such other city board, commission or committee relating to such matter, shall disclose on the record of the city commission or such other city board, commission or committee, as the case may be, any conflict of interest and the nature and extent of such interest. 
d.  Otherwise, any appointed city officer or employee shall address such disclosure to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1(1.114), 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 2-106. - Violation, enforcement and advisory opinions. 
(a)  Board of ethics. 
(1)  The city commission shall appoint a board of ethics, consisting of three regular members, as an advisory board for the purpose of interpreting this subdivision. The city commission may also appoint up to three alternate members to serve on the board of ethics in the event of a conflict of interest of a member of the board or due to the absence of a member of the board. Both regular and alternate members will be appointed to staggered three-year terms, with the term of one regular and alternate member expiring on December 31 of each year. 
(2)  The initial three members of the board of ethics shall be appointed for one, two, and three year terms of office respectively, which shall begin on January 1, 2006. Terms of office shall expire on December 31 of the respective years. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed to three-year terms. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. The city commission shall fill a vacancy by an appointment for the unexpired term only. 
(3)  The board of ethics shall be made up of residents of the city who possess legal, administrative or other desirable qualifications. 
a.  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation, and shall not be elected officers, persons appointed to elective office, fulltime appointed officers or city employees, nor shall they be currently serving on any other city board or commission. 
b.  The board shall select its own presiding officer from among its members. 
c.  The board shall establish such procedures it deems necessary or appropriate to perform its functions as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Functions of the board of ethics. The board of ethics shall: 
(1)  Receive requests for advisory opinions from city officers or employees. 
(2)  Receive complaints concerning alleged unethical conduct by a city officer or employee from any person or entity. 
(3)  Receive and retain on file copies of disclosure statements, advisory opinions, and other materials required to be filed under this subdivision. 
(c)  Hearings. 
(1)  The board of ethics shall establish a hearing procedure applicable to all cases involving complaints concerning alleged unethical conduct by public officers and employees. Such procedure shall be designed to afford all persons alleged to have violated this section due process of law, including notice, the opportunity to be heard, and the right to representation of their choice. Hearings shall be subject to the state's open meetings act. 
(2)  All findings and opinions of the board of ethics following board hearings shall be published in permanent form and communicated to the city commission and public, subject to the requirements of the open meetings act. 
(d)  Advisory opinions. Upon request for an advisory opinion, the board shall perform such investigation as it deems necessary. All advisory opinions so issued shall also be published in permanent form and communicated to the city commission and the public subject to the requirements of the open meetings act. 
(e)  Advisory opinions and hearing findings published. After the board of ethics' advisory opinions and hearing findings have been published: 
(1)  The city commission shall be responsible for imposing any sanction for a violation of this subdivision on one of its members or any officer or employee appointed by the commission, or appointed by the mayor subject to commission approval. 
(2)  If it becomes necessary to seek the removal of a city officer after the board of ethics' advisory opinion and/or hearing's findings, the city shall follow the requirements for removal of the public officer in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(3)  The city manager shall be responsible for imposing any discipline for a violation of this subdivision on any employee of the city, including employees appointed by the city manager pursuant to the city Charter subject to confirmation by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1(1.115), 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 581, § 1, 3-15-2016) 
Sec. 2-107. - Affidavit and disclosure statement. 
    Within 20 days following the election, employment or appointment of a city officer or employee, or within 20 days of any change in the facts set forth in the city officer's or employee's previously filed affidavit and disclosure statement, all city officers or employees shall file with the city clerk an affidavit and disclosure statement. The affidavit and disclosure statement requirement does not apply to parttime and temporary employees of the city or to regular fulltime employees below the level of assistant department head, except employees having decision making authority, employees involved in contracting or procurement functions for the city, or at the discretion of the city manager. 
(1)  The disclosure statement shall respond in detail to the following questions: 
a.  To the best of your knowledge, do you or any members of your immediate family own any interest in real property located within the city other than a single-family residence which you occupy? 
b.  If your answer to question (a) is in the affirmative, to the best of your knowledge state the following information for each such interest owned: 
1.  The nature of your interest in the real property; 
2.  The location of the real property (for improved property, provide the street address; for unimproved property state its location in relation to existing streets); and 
3.  The property's permanent real estate tax identification number. 
c.  To the best of your knowledge, do you or members of your immediate family own five percent or more of any business entity located in the city? 
d.  If your answer to question (c) is in the affirmative, state the following, to the best of your knowledge: 
1.  The name of the entity; 
2.  The address of the entity; 
3.  The nature of your relationship to the entity; and 
4.  The date relationship commenced. 
e.  To the best of your knowledge, do you or any members of your immediate family have any direct financial interest in or business relationships with any supplier, service provider or contractor of the city from which you or they derive direct compensation or financial benefit that is not reported in the prior answers? 
f.  To the best of your knowledge, have you or any members of your immediate family given or received any gifts, other than from immediate family members, the value of which exceeds $100.00, within the last year, or since the effective date of this Code, whichever time period is shorter, to or from any person or business or other legal entity doing business with the city, other than legal campaign contributions? If so, list the names and addresses of each donor or donee of each such gift, the date upon which it was made and the nature of the gift. 
(2)  An affidavit shall be submitted with the disclosure statement and shall contain the following sworn statement of the city officer or employee: 
"Statements contained in the attached disclosure statement are true to the best of my knowledge, information and belief. Further, I have read and understand the Code of Ethics of the City of Huntington Woods and, to the best of my knowledge, I am not in conflict with its provisions." 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1(1.116), 8-16-2005) 
Secs. 2-108-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- City clerk, ch. III, § 15 et seq. 

Sec. 2-131. - Office of clerk. 
    This office shall be headed by the city clerk, who shall serve as clerk of the commission and perform such other duties for the commission as may be required by it. The clerk shall be responsible for the publication, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.32) 
Sec. 2-132. - Election records. 
    The city clerk shall keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in connection with elections. 
(Code 1988, § 1.33) 
Sec. 2-133. - Other duties. 
    The city clerk shall publish all legal notices unless otherwise provided; collect all license fees required by ordinance or statute except as otherwise provided; be the custodian of the official seal; and notify the appointing authority of any board or commission 30 days prior to the expiration of the term of office of any member thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 1.34) 
Sec. 2-134. - Accounting. 
    The city clerk shall examine and audit all accounts against the city and promptly report to the city commission through the city manager, in writing, any default or delinquency the clerk may discover in the books, records or accounts of any city department. It shall be the city clerk's duty to examine, verify and approve all accounts against the city. The clerk shall not verify or approve for payment any voucher until the clerk has verified the correctness of the account for which the same is issued, neither shall the clerk approve for payment any account unless the money has been appropriated therefor, nor shall the clerk verify or sign any voucher for any account against the city unless sufficient money to pay the same is in the fund on which it is drawn. 
(Code 1988, § 1.35) 
Sec. 2-135. - Examination of books. 
    The city clerk shall have access to all books, records and documents kept by any officer, employee or department. Daily reports of all moneys collected and of the disposition thereof shall be made to the city clerk by the department or person receiving the same. The books in all departments shall be balanced each calendar month and a report thereon made by the city clerk through the city manager to the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.36) 
Sec. 2-136. - Reports. 
    The city clerk shall present to the city commission through the city manager, monthly and annually and whenever required by the city manager or the city commission at any other time, a detailed statement by the city manager or the city commission at any other time, a detailed statement of the financial condition, relative to the operating budget which shall include an account of all receipts and disbursements. 
(Code 1988, § 1.37) 
Secs. 2-137-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- City treasurer, ch. III, § 17 et seq. 

Sec. 2-161. - Duties. 
    The city treasurer shall have the duty to collect all bills, either for taxes or for services rendered by the city. The treasurer shall also receive all other moneys due or coming to the city. All moneys received by the city treasurer shall be deposited daily in the official depository from time to time designated by the commission to the credit of the city and shall be recorded on the date received, and accounted for to the city clerk immediately thereafter. 
(Code 1988, § 1.45) 
Secs. 2-162-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 2-201. - Director appointed; responsibilities. 
    The department of public safety shall be headed by the director of public safety, who shall be the chief of police. The director shall direct the police and fire work, be responsible for the enforcement of law and order, the protection of life and property against fire and the performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to the department. Any reference to chief of police or chief of the fire department contained in any statute of the state, or Charter or ordinance of the city, shall be deemed to refer to the director of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 1.61) 
Sec. 2-202. - Functions of public safety department. 
    The public safety department work shall consist of the following functions: 
(1)  The operation of motor and foot patrol units for routine investigations and the general maintenance of law and order. 
(2)  The maintenance of the central complaint desk at central police headquarters in the public safety building, the maintaining and supervising of police records, criminal and noncriminal identification, property identification, custody of property and the operation of detention quarters. 
(3)  The investigation of crimes, elimination of illegal liquor traffic and vice, and the preparation of evidence for the prosecution of criminal cases and offenses in violation of this Code. 
(4)  The prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, the handling of cases in which women are involved, the removal of crime hazards and the coordination of community agencies interested in crime prevention. 
(5)  The control of traffic, traffic educational programs, school patrols, coordination of traffic violation prosecutions, issuance of operators licenses, and the maintenance and erection of traffic signs and the painting of street and crosswalk lanes. 
(6)  The efficient and prompt extinguishing of fires which endanger or are likely to endanger life or property; the maintenance and operation of fire fighting equipment and of such other emergency equipment as may be assigned to it. 
(7)  The investigation and inspection of potential fire hazards and the abatement of existing fire hazards. 
(Code 1988, § 1.62) 
Sec. 2-203. - Department rules. 
    The city commission, subject to the provisions of the Charter of the city, shall from time to time adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem expedient for the proper administration of the department and for the governing of public safety officers. Such regulations shall become effective 24 hours after posting in the office of the director of public safety. Such rules may establish one or more divisions within the public safety department, each of which may be charged with performing one or more of the functions of the public safety department enumerated in section 2-202. It shall be the duty of all members of the public safety department to comply with such rules and orders while effective. 
(Code 1988, § 1.63) 
Sec. 2-204. - Integration of safety officers. 
    There shall be no distinction between public safety officers assigned to perform duties commonly performed by a police department and members of the department assigned to perform work commonly performed by a fire department. Every public safety officer shall perform either police work or fire work as such duties shall from time to time be assigned to the public safety officer by the director of public safety. Wherever any duties shall be imposed upon a city police officer or a city fireman by any statute of the state, or by the Charter or this Code, such duties shall be imposed upon the public safety officers and all public safety officers shall be peace officers within the meaning of such terms as used in the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1988, § 1.64) 
Secs. 2-205-2-268. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES 

Sec. 2-269. - Director appointed; responsibilities. 
    The department of public services shall be headed by the director of public services who shall be experienced in municipal engineering works. The director shall be responsible for all matters relating to the management, maintenance and operation of all the physical properties, except as provided elsewhere in this Code. This department shall have charge of the construction, operation and maintenance of the city sewerage system. It shall have charge of the maintenance of all improved and unimproved streets, the removal of snow, the construction and maintenance of sidewalks, the operation of city dumps and the operation of the garbage and rubbish collection and disposal service. 
(Code 1988, § 1.85) 
Sec. 2-270. - Division of water supply. 
    The division of water supply shall be a division of the department of public services. It shall be responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of city water mains and connections and other facilities pertaining to the water distribution system. It shall have charge of the pumping of water into and through the city water distribution system. It shall have charge of the construction, operation and maintenance of city water mains and connections and other facilities pertaining to the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1988, § 1.87) 
Secs. 2-271-2-288. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION 

Sec. 2-289. - Director appointed; functions and duties. 
    The department of recreation shall be headed by the director of recreation, who shall be in charge of the development, maintenance, management and operation of parks, boulevards and recreation facilities and shall also be in charge of the recreational use of city recreation areas and facilities. 
(Code 1988, § 1.91) 
Secs. 2-290-2-311. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-312. - Duties. 
    The city attorney shall be the legal advisor to the city commission, the city manager and to all city departments and officers. The city attorney shall represent the city in all legal proceedings or matters in which the city is interested. The city attorney shall attend the meetings of the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.94) 
Secs. 2-313-2-342. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LIBRARY DIRECTOR 

Sec. 2-343. - Appointment of director of library; responsibilities. 
    The library director shall be responsible for the operations of the city library in accordance with the directions of the city commission, and the instructions of the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 1.97) 
Secs. 2-344-2-374. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-375-2-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF REVIEW[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- General assessments and taxation, ch. XI. 
State Law reference- Board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq. 

Sec. 2-411. - Created; membership; terms. 
(a)  There is hereby created in and for the city, a board of review consisting of three members. Membership of the board of review shall consist of the three presently appointed and serving board of review members, whose terms shall continue through expiration. Upon expiration of the term of any member, the member's successor shall be appointed to a three-year term. 
(b)  The city commission may appoint two alternate members to the board of review, for the same terms as regular members of the board of review. Each alternate member shall be a property taxpayer and shall qualify by taking the constitutional oath of office within ten days after appointment. An alternate member may be called to perform the duties of a regular member of the board of review in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may also be called to perform the duties of a regular member of the board of review for the purpose of reaching a decision on issues protested in which a regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. 
(Code 1988, § 1.42; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 499, § 1, 10-25-2005; Ord. No. 515, § 1, 2-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-412. - Duties and functions. 
    The duties and functions of the board of review and qualifications of members shall be as set forth in the city Charter and in the general property tax act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.). Any provision of the city Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the board of review shall meet on the Tuesday immediately following the second Monday in March, and on such other dates and times as necessary to perform its duties and functions. 
(Code 1988, § 1.43; Ord. No. 369, § 2, 12-14-1993) 
Secs. 2-413-2-437. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 

Sec. 2-438. - Planning commission continued and reconstituted. 
    The city planning commission, previously created pursuant to Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), is hereby continued as reconstituted herein. The city planning commission shall possess and exercise such powers and duties as set forth in that act, as are set forth in Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), with respect to formulating, recommending, and administering zoning regulations and as may be delegated and expanded by action of the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 5.221; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 10-17-1995) 
Sec. 2-439. - Composition. 
    The city planning commission shall consist of nine members, eight of whom shall represent insofar as is possible different professions or occupations and shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by the city commission, and one of whom shall be a member of the commission to be selected by resolution of the commission to serve as a member ex officio, with full voting rights. 
(Code 1988, § 5.222; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 10-17-1995) 
Sec. 2-440. - Qualifications. 
    No member of the city planning commission other than the ex officio member shall hold another municipal office except that one of the appointed members may be a member of the zoning board of appeals. Every member shall have the qualifications of electors. 
(Code 1988, § 5.223; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 10-17-1995) 
Sec. 2-441. - Terms. 
    All members of the city planning commission shall serve for terms of three years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the term of the ex officio member shall be determined by the city commission and stated in the resolution selecting such member, but shall not exceed the member's official tenure. An appointed member may be removed from office by the mayor, after a public hearing, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1988, § 5.224; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 10-17-1995) 
Sec. 2-442. - Vacancies. 
    A vacancy on the city planning commission occurring otherwise than through the expiration of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor in the case of a member selected or appointed by the mayor and by the commission, in the case of a member appointed by the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 5.225; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 10-17-1995) 
Sec. 2-443. - Procedures for operation. 
(a)  The city planning commission shall elect its chairman for a term of one year, with eligibility for re-election, from amongst its appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. 
(b)  The city planning commission shall schedule at least one regular meeting in each month and shall adopt rules for transaction of business, including a procedure for canceling a regular scheduled meeting if there is no business to transact. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the open meetings act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). The city planning commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and actions, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1988, § 5.226; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 10-17-1995) 
Sec. 2-444. - Expenses and liabilities. 
(a)  The city planning commission shall not incur any expense, or create or cause liability against the city, without first having received express authority therefor by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  A fee shall be charged for all petitions and appeals to the city planning commission, the amount of which shall be prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 5.227; Ord. No. 381, § 1, 10-17-1995) 
Secs. 2-445-2-471. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC ART, BEAUTIFICATION AND TREE ADVISORY BOARD[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 535, s; 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2010, amended Div. 4 in its entirety and enacted the provisions set out herein. The former Div. 4, titled Tree Advisory Board, derived from Code 1988, §§ 3.70-3.72; Ord. No. 482, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2003; and Ord. No. 491, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 2, 2005. 

Sec. 2-472. - Creation; members. 
(a)  There is hereby created the city public art, beautification and tree advisory board (hereinafter referred to as the "advisory board" or the "board"), which shall consist of 11 members. 
(b)  All members of the advisory board shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the city commission. Prior to January 1 in each year, three members or four members, as the case may be, of the advisory board shall be appointed for terms of three years each. Upon expansion of the board from nine to 11 members, two new members shall be appointed to terms of such length as shall be designated by the city commission and which shall result in the expiration of the terms of either three or four members of the board each year thereafter. In addition, the city commission may appoint one high school student who is a resident of the city and who shall serve as a member of the advisory board for one year beginning in October. 
(c)  Any member of the advisory board may be appointed for a second three-year term. The student member may be reappointed for one additional year. 
(d)  Within ten days after appointment to the advisory board and before entering upon the appointee's duties as a member of the advisory board, each appointee shall file written acceptance with the city clerk and subscribe and file with the clerk an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state and to faithfully perform the duties of the office of advisory board member to the best of the member's ability. 
(e)  All advisory board members shall serve without compensation. Each member of the advisory board shall serve until the member's successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(f)  A representative of the department of public services will serve as an ex officio member of the advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 536, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-473. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The advisory board shall be an advisory board having the general duty of considering and advising the city commission concerning the physical appearance of public property within the city, the encouragement, promotion and facilitation of art in public places in the city, and all tree related issues. The duties of the advisory board shall more specifically include: 
(1)  Reviewing and making recommendations to the city commission regarding matters which involve the physical appearance of public property within the city; 
(2)  Conducting the annual beautification awards program, including: 
a.  Assisting city administrative staff in promoting the annual beautification awards program to raise awareness, encourage participation and publicly recognize city residents and businesses for the beautification efforts; 
b.  Nominating houses and businesses which have demonstrated an outstanding job harmonizing structure and landscaping; 
c.  Judging nominated houses by completing rating sheets utilizing established criteria; 
d.  Coordinating and hosting the beautification award program reception. 
(3)  Developing, coordinating and implementing, either as a committee or in conjunction with other city departments, boards, committees, groups or clubs, various programs and projects to beautify the city consistent with the city's master plan; 
(4)  Improving the beauty of the city by educating the community about ways to beautify their homes and neighborhood and encouraging community involvement; 
(5)  Studying and recommending to the city commission the availability of public facilities of all kinds relating to the display of art, including but not limited to libraries, other public buildings, and public parks, and shall recommend methods for coordinating such facilities and the activities in such facilities; 
(6)  Studying and recommending to the city commission the availability and acquisition of artwork, including, but not limited to, sculptures, paintings, and murals, for display in public places in the city; 
(7)  Encouraging individual creativity by recognition of individual creative achievements and by recommendations on facilities and supplies to be furnished by public bodies, nonprofit organizations and by businesses; 
(8)  Studying and observing the manner in which the city manages and maintains its urban forest; 
(9)  Making such recommendations concerning trees to the city manager or the city commission as may be expedient and not inconsistent with this division, the Charter of the city and the general laws of the state; 
(10)  Making recommendations concerning comprehensive tree management and preservation programs for the city; 
(11)  Serving as a clearinghouse for information on trees; 
(12)  Engaging in community education regarding trees; 
(13)  Encouraging the planting of trees on both public and private lands and developing resident opportunities for tree planting and preservation. 
(b)  The advisory board may accept donations, contributions and gifts, either general or for specific purposes, on behalf of the city. All monies received by the advisory board shall be deposited with the city treasurer and credited as may be determined appropriate by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 2-474. - Board organization and meetings. 
(a)  The advisory board shall organize by electing annually at its first regular meeting a chair, vice-chair, secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the duties of the board. In addition, the board shall approve a schedule of regular meetings for the next year. 
(b)  The advisory board shall adopt rules for transaction of business and keep records of its resolutions and recommendations, which records shall be a public record. 
(c)  Six members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Six votes shall be necessary for the board to pass a resolution. 
(d)  The advisory board shall conduct its business at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of each meeting shall be given in a manner as required by the Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 536, § 1, 3-22-2011) 
Secs. 2-475-2-501. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WOODS COMMUNITY FUND BOARD 

Sec. 2-502. - Creation. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Woods Community Fund Board, which shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  The seven members of the board shall be residents of or doing business in the city and shall be appointed by the city commission. Two members of the board shall be appointed from candidates recommended by the parks and recreation advisory board, two members from candidates recommended by the beautification committee, and one member from candidates recommended by the tree advisory board. The two additional members of the board shall be appointed by the city commission to represent other interests of the community. 
(c)  Two or three members, as the case may be, shall be appointed to the board each year for terms of three years, beginning January 1; provided, however, that in the first year, three members shall be selected for three-year terms, two members for two-year terms, and two members for one-year terms. 
(d)  Within ten days after appointment to the board and before entering upon an appointee's duties as a member of the board, each appointee shall subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office with the city clerk. 
(e)  All board members shall serve without compensation. Each member of the board shall serve until the member's successor is appointed and qualified. 
(f)  All other issues related to appointments of members to the board shall be governed by the city's procedures for appointment and operation of citizen advisory boards, commissions and committees. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(1.250), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 2-503. - Purpose. 
    The Woods Community Fund Board is created for the purpose of promoting charitable contributions to the city for the purchase and maintenance of public amenities and facilitating disbursement of such contributions. Among other activities, the board shall: 
(1)  Develop and maintain a list of community needs that are not funded by the city's annual budget, including the development of gift booklets. 
(2)  Maintain a system for the collection of funds for the acquisition and maintenance of public amenities for the city. 
(3)  Assist the city in providing receipts and appropriate public recognition for contributions, including materials. 
(4)  Develop grant procedures to facilitate requests for funding of public amenities not comprehended by the city's annual budget. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided by the city commission, review any conditions, limitations or requirements associated with any contribution to the city and develop a recommendation for the city commission with respect to whether or not the contribution should be accepted subject to such condition, limitation or requirement. Whenever such a contribution is accepted subject to a condition, limitation or requirement, the board shall assist the city in ensuring compliance with such condition, limitation or requirement. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(1.251), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 2-504. - Membership, terms and bylaws. 
(a)  The Woods Community Fund Board shall elect from its members a chair and such other officers as the board may determine in its bylaws, each of whom shall serve for terms of one year. One or more of the officers shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Preside over the meetings of the board; 
(2)  Promote the Woods Community Fund at city functions and through city publications; and 
(3)  Act as liaison to the city and to the various clubs of the city, including without limitation the parks and recreation advisory board, the beautification committee and the tree board; supervise the recognition efforts of the board, and assist in the maintenance of books and records of the activities of the board, including without limitation meeting minutes and financial records. 
(b)  The respective officers shall perform such of these and other duties as the board may from time to time determine. 
(c)  The board shall adopt appropriate bylaws. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(1.252), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 2-505. - Meetings. 
(a)  Meetings of the board shall be posted and conducted in accordance with the State Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.) and city policy. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(b)  The board shall meet at least six times a year. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(1.253), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 2-506. - Financial and records management. 
    The city, with the assistance of the board, shall keep complete financial records of accounts as well as records and minutes of all proceedings of the board. The board shall follow reasonable auditing, recordkeeping, reporting policies and other procedures as are consistent with city financial regulations, state and federal law and approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(1.254), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 2-507. - Funds collected. 
    Funds collected by, as a result of the efforts of, or for the benefit of the Woods Community Fund Board shall be promptly surrendered to and managed by the city. The city shall maintain a separate account for such funds, to be known as the Woods Community Fund, and shall provide a statement of activities in such fund to the board in advance of each meeting of the board. At least annually, a detailed accounting of all funds received by the city for deposit in such fund and all disbursements made from such fund shall be provided to the board. The board shall not manage or maintain any funds. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(1.255), 10-25-2005) 
Secs. 2-508-2-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SENIOR ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-521. - Creation and members. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Huntington Woods Senior Advisory Committee, which shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  The seven members of the senior advisory committee shall be residents of the city and be appointed by the city commission. 
(c)  Members shall be appointed to the committee for terms of three years each, beginning January 1; provided, however, that in the first year, two members shall be appointed for three-year terms, two members shall be appointed for two-year terms, and one member shall be appointed for a one-year term. The two members appointed to expand the committee from five members to seven members shall be appointed to initial terms such as will equalize the number of terms expiring each year as much as possible. 
(d)  Within ten days after appointment to the senior advisory committee and before entering upon the appointee's duties as a member of the committee, each appointee shall file written acceptance with the city clerk and subscribe and file with the clerk an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state and to faithfully perform the duties of the office of senior advisory committee member to the best of the member's ability. 
(e)  All members of the senior advisory committee shall serve without compensation. Each member shall serve until the member's successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(f)  All other issues related to appointments of members to the committee shall be governed by the city's procedures for appointment and operation of citizen advisory boards, commissions and committees. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 1, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 557, § 1, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 2-522. - Powers and duties. 
    The senior advisory committee shall have the general duty of considering senior related issues and advising the recreation department and the city commission concerning such issues. Duties of the committee shall specifically include: 
(1)  Providing a forum for seniors to present issues of concern to them for consideration by the city. 
(2)  Studying the need for and feasibility of senior housing options in the city. 
(3)  Making recommendations regarding senior services. 
(4)  Encouraging senior involvement in senior related activities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 1, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 2-523. - Board organization and meetings. 
(a)  The senior advisory committee shall organize by electing annually from its members at its first regular meeting a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary. 
(b)  The senior advisory committee shall meet four times a year. At the last meeting of each calendar year, the committee shall approve a schedule of meeting dates for the following year. 
(c)  Four members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Four votes shall be necessary for the committee to pass a resolution. 
(d)  The senior advisory committee shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and keep records of it resolutions and recommendations, which records shall be a public record. 
(e)  The senior advisory committee shall conduct its business at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of each meeting shall be given in a manner as required by the Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 1, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 557, § 2, 1-15-2013) 
Secs. 2-524-2-537. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-538-2-570. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Contracts, ch. VIII. 

Sec. 2-571. - Purchasing agent. 
    The city manager or his/her designee shall act as purchasing agent and have the authority to write purchase orders on behalf of the city. Any such designation shall be filed in writing with the clerk. All purchase orders in excess of $2,000.00 shall require prior approval by the city manager or his/her designee before being issued. 
(Code 1988, § 1.121; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 6-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-571A. - Local preference. 
(a)  [Definition.] As used in this article, "local source" means a business, service provider or contractor with either its headquarters or primary place of business in Oakland, Macomb or Wayne County. 
(b)  Purchases under $5,000.00. Whenever reasonably possible, the purchasing agent shall obtain at least one quote from a local source. The person or business submitting the lowest bid, and determined to be responsive and responsible, shall be deemed the lowest bidder; however, if the lowest bidder is not a local source, but a local source is within the applicable percentage of the lowest bid, that local source shall be deemed the lowest bidder. In the event that two or more local source bidders are within the applicable percentage of the lowest bid, the lowest local source bidder shall be deemed the lowest bidder. The applicable percentage shall be as set forth in subsection (f), below. 
(c)  Purchases or contracts over $5,000.00. When sealed bids are received under section 2-573 for purchases or contracts over $5,000.00, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The person or business submitting the lowest bid, and determined to be responsive and responsible, shall be deemed the lowest bidder. If the lowest bidder is not a local source, the lowest bidding local source bidder whose bid is within the applicable percentage of the lowest bid and who has been deemed responsive and responsible under the purchasing ordinance shall be deemed the lowest bidder and awarded the contract if it agrees to reduce its bid to match the bid of the lowest bidder. The applicable percentage shall be as set forth in subsection (f), below. 
(2)  If the lowest bidding local source bidder declines to reduce its bid to match the lowest bid, then the next lowest responsive and responsible local source bidder with a bid within the applicable percentage, if any, shall be given the opportunity to reduce its bid to match the bid of the lowest bidder. If the local source bidder agrees to reduce its bid to match the bid of the lowest bidder, it will be deemed the lowest bidder and awarded the contract. This process may be repeated, as necessary, with respect to local source bidders whose bids are within the applicable percentage. 
(3)  If no responsive and responsible local source within the applicable percentage of the lowest bid agrees to reduce its bid to that of the lowest bidder, then the contract shall be awarded to the lowest bidder. 
(4)  Except for construction contracts, no contract awarded pursuant to this section shall be sublet in any manner that permits 50 percent or more of the dollar value of the contract to be performed by a subcontractor or subcontractors who do not meet the definition of local source. 
(d)  Any local source awarded a contract pursuant to this section shall provide an appropriate affidavit of eligibility to the city, together with all records necessary to establish its eligibility and compliance with all city, state and local laws. 
(e)  Exceptions from the provisions of this local preference policy: 
(1)  Purchases resulting from exigent emergency conditions where any delay in completion or preference would jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of Huntington Woods, or where, in the judgment of the city manager or his/her designee, the operational effectiveness of a city department would be seriously threatened if a purchase was not made expeditiously as provided for in section 2-577 Emergency purchases, Huntington Woods Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Purchases from any sole source supplier of supplies, materials, or other equipment in accordance with section 2-576, Sole source procurement, Huntington Woods Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Purchases made through the state's extended purchasing program, or other cooperative purchasing contractual agreements utilized by the purchasing department in accordance with section 2-580, Emergency purchases, Huntington Woods Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Where the commission believes it is in the best interest of the city to waive local source purchasing policy recommendations, the commission retains the discretion to choose among bids. 
(5)  Bid solicitations for projects or purchases which utilize federal funding or bond proceeds subject to legal restrictions that prohibit awards based on local preference criteria. 
(6)  The city may not award a contract to a nonlocal source lowest bidder and subsequently deny that bidder the contract in favor of a local source business. 
(f)  Local source applicable percentages. 
Contract Amount Applicable 
Percentage (1) $500.01-$4,999.99 4% (2) $5,000.00-$99,999.99 3% (3) $100,000.00-$499,999.99 2% (4) $500,000.00-up 1.50%  
(Ord. No. 540, § 2, 6-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-572. - Purchases or contracts under $5,000.00. 
    Purchases of materials, supplies or public improvements, the apparent cost of which is less than $5,000.00, may be made in the open market but such purchases shall, where practicable, be based on at least three comparative prices and, subject to the local source provisions of subsection 2-517a(b), shall be awarded to the qualified supplier quoting the lowest price meeting specifications, and capable of satisfactory performance. The purchasing agent may solicit quotations verbally or by telephone, or may contact prospective suppliers by written communication. Where quotations are solicited by written communication, a request for such quotations shall also be posted. A record shall be kept of all open market orders and the prices submitted thereon, which records shall be available for public inspection. Any or all quotations may be rejected. 
(Code 1988, § 1.122; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 430, § 1, 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 540, § 3, 6-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-573. - Purchases or contracts $5,000.00 or over. 
(a)  Any purchases of materials, or expenditures for supplies, or public improvements and any agreement obligating the city therefor, where the amount of the city's obligation is $5,000.00 or over shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Such purchase or expenditure shall be evidenced by a written contract. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract in cases where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the city's affairs, but in no case shall it be sufficient for the construction of public works or improvements or the contracting for nonstandard supplies or services over any supplies and services to be furnished over a period of time shall be reviewed annually to ensure continuing quality and cost-effectiveness. 
(2)  All contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in this division. 
a.  Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications, local preference policy language if applicable, contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
b.  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given in a reasonable time, not less than five calendar days prior to the final date set forth therein for submittal of bids. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or appropriate trade publication, or other method deemed appropriate and in the city's best interest. The public notice shall include a brief description of the item or service to be purchased and shall state where bid forms and specifications may be obtained and the place, date, and time of bid opening. 
c.  Solicitation for bids. The purchasing agent may also solicit bids from a reasonable number of such qualified prospective bidders as are known by sending each a copy of the notice requesting bids and notice thereof shall be posted in the city hall. 
d.  Bid bond. The city manager shall prescribe the amount of security, if any, to be deposited with any bid, which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check, or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The amount of such security shall be expressed either in a specific monetary amount or in terms of percentage of the bid submitted. Unless fixed by the commission or by law, the city manager shall fix the amount of the performance bond and in the case of construction contracts, the amount of the labor and material bond to be required of the successful bidders. Such security requirements shall be included in the invitation for bids. When the invitation for bids requires security, noncompliance requires that the bid be rejected unless it is determined that the bid fails to comply only in a nonsubstantial manner with the security requirements. 
e.  Bid opening and tabulation. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of the city clerk or a designee thereof, and at least one other city official, preferably the head of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract. The amount of such bid, and such other relevant information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection. The bids will be carefully examined and tabulated and reported to the city commission with the recommendation of the purchasing agent (as approved by the city manager if the city manager is not acting as purchasing agent) at a subsequent commission meeting. 
f.  Bid evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, suitability for a particular purpose, and local source preference. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall, whenever possible, be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
g.  Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening, may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid opening. Said notice of bid correction or withdrawal shall be clearly designated as such on the sealed envelope in which said notice is contained and will not be opened until the time established for regular bid opening in the invitation for bids. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only if the bidder can clearly and convincingly demonstrate that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if not prejudicial to the city's interest and if: 
1.  The mistake appears on the face of the bid document and is clearly discernible but the intended correct bid cannot similarly be determined. 
2.  The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made which could not have been discovered with ordinary care. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent, and approved by the city manager if the city manager is not acting as purchasing agent. 
h.  Bonds. An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when the city commission determines it is in the best interests of the city. The reasons therefor shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part when in the best interests of the city as determined by the city commission. Notice of cancellation shall be set to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation, and, where appropriate, may explain the reason for cancellation and may further provide that an opportunity will be given to compete on any re-solicitation or any further procurement of similar items. Reasons for rejection may be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors. 
(3)  Contract performance and payment bonds. 
a.  When a construction or public improvement contract is awarded, the following bonds or security, as required by law, shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract: 
1.  A performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
2.  A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
3.  After notice to the city commission, the city manager is authorized to reduce the amount of performance and payment bonds to 25 percent of the contract price for each bond when a written determination is made that it is in the best interests of the city to do so. 
4.  When a construction or public improvement contract is awarded in an amount less than $50,000.00, upon approval by the city commission, the city manager may accept an irrevocable letter of credit from a state or national bank or federally-chartered savings and loan association in an amount equal to 100 percent of the contract price in lieu of the performance and payment bonds specified in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section. 
5.  Nothing in this subsection (a)(3) shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds, or in circumstances other than specified herein. 
b.  Performance bonds or other security may be requested for contracts for the procurement of materials, supplies and services, other than for construction and public improvements, in an amount the purchasing agent deems advisable to protect the city's interests as approved by the city manager if the city manager is not acting as purchasing agent. Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. Performance bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder or offeror's responsibility. 
(4)  Insurance. The contractor on a construction or public improvement contract or offeror on contracts for procurement of equipment and supplies shall obtain insurance coverage of type and amount specified in the invitation to bid, indemnifying, defending and holding the city harmless from all claims for losses or damage arising out of the performance of the contract. The contractor shall furnish certificates of insurance to the city setting forth the type and amounts of coverage specified prior to execution of the contract. 
(5)  The city commission shall award the contract to the lowest competent bidder unless the commission shall determine that the public interest will be better served by accepting a higher bid, and shall authorize execution of the contract upon the following conditions: 
a.  Execution of the contract by the successful bidder; 
b.  The filing of any required bonds and certificates of insurance, which documents shall first be approved by the city attorney as to form and content; and 
c.  Approval of the contract by the city attorney as to form and legality if made with form or terms other than the standard city purchase order, a copy of which contract shall be filed in the office of the city clerk together with a copy of the approval. Such award may be by resolution or ordinance. The commission shall have the right to reject any or all bids and to waive irregularities in bidding and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding requirements, if determined to be in the city's best interest. 
(b)  All bids, deposits of cash or certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded or signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract within ten days after the same has been awarded, or provide any bond or certificate of insurance required within that time, the deposit accompanying the bid shall be forfeited to the city, and the commission may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lower competent bidder unless the commission shall determine that the public interest will be better served by accepting a higher bid, or said contract may be re-advertised. This section shall not apply to a specific fee charged for furnishing bid documents; said fee, where charged, is nonrefundable. 
(Code 1988, § 1.123; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 430, § 2, 6-15-1999); Ord. No. 540, § 4, 6-14-2011 
Sec. 2-574. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
(a)  Where the commission shall determine by majority vote of the members-elect that the public interest will be best served by joint purchase with, or purchase from, another unit of government, the commission may authorize the execution of a contract without competitive bidding. 
(b)  When the city manager certifies in writing to the commission that the materials, supplies or public improvements needed to best serve the interests of the city are available from only a single vendor, supplier or contractor, the commission may authorize the execution of a contract without competitive bidding. 
(c)  When the contract or agreement is for the employment of professional or personal services, the commission may authorize the execution of a contract without competitive bidding. 
(Code 1988, § 1.124; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 2-575. - Contracting for professional/personal services. 
(a)  Authority. For the purposes of procuring professional or personal services of other than employees, the city manager may procure such services in accordance with the selection procedures specified in this section. This section shall not apply to the city attorney who shall be appointed by the city commission pursuant to the Charter. Professional or personal service wherein the expenditure exceeds $5,000.00, or as otherwise required by the Charter, may not be secured without the approval of the city commission. Competitive bids are not required in the procurement of professional or personal services. Contracts for professional or personal services, where required, shall be in writing. 
(b)  Selection procedure. 
(1)  Conditions for use. Except as provided under section 2-576 (sole source procurement) or section 2-577 (emergency purchases) the professional or personal services designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be procured in accordance with this subsection. 
(2)  Statement of qualifications. Persons engaged in providing the designated types of services may submit statements of qualifications and expressions of interest in providing such professional or personal services. The city department using such services may specify a uniform format for statements of qualifications. Department heads may amend these statements at any time by filing a new statement. 
(3)  Advertising. The city manager or the city manager's designee may advertise for or otherwise solicit candidates. Such advertisement or solicitation shall describe the services required, list the types of information and data required of each candidate, and state the relative importance or particular qualifications. 
(4)  Nondisclosure. The city manager or the city manager's designee may conduct discussions with any candidate to determine such person's qualifications for further consideration. Discussions shall not disclose any information derived from information or material submitted by other candidates. 
(5)  Selection. The city manager, or the designee thereof, shall select and notify, in writing, the candidate determined to be best qualified based on the evaluation factors established by the city, and negotiation of compensation determined to be fair and reasonable. If compensation cannot be agreed upon with the best candidate, negotiations will be formally terminated. Negotiations may then be conducted with other candidates in the order of their respective qualification ranking. Following compensation negotiations, the best qualified candidate may be retained for an amount of compensation determined to be fair and reasonable upon approval by the city commission where required. 
(Code 1988, § 1.125; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 430, § 3, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 2-576. - Sole source procurement. 
(a)  A contract may be awarded for a supply, service or construction item without competition when the city manager determines, in writing, that there is only one source for the required supply, service or construction item. 
(b)  The city manager may determine, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required material, supply, service or public improvement. The city manager shall conduct negotiations, when appropriate, as to price, delivery and terms. The necessity for sole source procurement must be certified in writing to the commission by the city manager before award of a contract otherwise requiring competitive bidding. A record of sole source procurements shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a list of the items procured under each contract and the identification of each contract file. 
(Code 1988, § 1.126; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 2-577. - Emergency purchases. 
    In the case of an emergency, any department head, with the approval of the city manager, may purchase directly any supplies, materials or equipment, the immediate procurement of which is necessary to the continuation of the work of the department. Such purchases and the emergency causing them shall be reported in detail to the purchasing agent, if the city manager is not acting as purchasing agent, within a week from the time when made and such reports shall be filed by the purchasing agent as permanent public records. 
(Code 1988, § 1.127; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 2-578. - Inspection of materials. 
    The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials, supplies and equipment shall rest with the ordering department. 
(Code 1988, § 1.128; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 2-579. - Authority to debar or suspend. 
    After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the city manager may debar a person from consideration for award of contracts, if that person has defaulted in a substantial manner on a contract with the city. 
(1)  The city manager is authorized to debar or suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts after reasonable notice to the person and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard. A person may be suspended if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in activity which might lead to debarment. Causes for debarment or suspension are: 
a.  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract, or probable cause to believe the person has engaged in conduct which might lead to such conviction. 
b.  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor, or probable cause to believe the person has engaged in conduct which might lead to such conviction. 
c.  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals, or probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in conduct leading to such conviction. 
d.  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the city manager to be so serious as to justify debarment or suspension: 
1.  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
2.  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment or suspension. 
e.  Any other cause the city manager determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including debarment or suspension by another governmental entity for any cause listed in this section. 
(2)  The city manager shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended person of the person's right to review by the city commission. 
(3)  A copy of the city manager's decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished to the debarred or suspended person. 
(Code 1988, § 1.129; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 2-580. - Cooperative purchasing and trade-in allowances. 
(a)  Cooperative purchasing. The city may participate in cooperative purchasing agreements with other units of government for the purchases of supplies, services or construction work. 
(b)  Trade-in allowances. Where the city solicits or receives bids or quotations relating to the procurement of new vehicles or equipment by the city and said bids or quotations contain trade-in allowances for vehicles or equipment owned by the city, which are to be replaced by the procurement of such trade-in allowances, will be deemed bids or comparative quotations required under section 2-581 for the sale or disposal of the vehicles or equipment to be replaced. 
(Code 1988, § 1.130; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 2-581. - Sale of personal property. 
(a)  Whenever any city personal property is no longer required for corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale. Personal property with a value not exceeding $5,000.00 may be sold for cash by the purchasing agent upon approval by the city manager, if the city manager is not acting as purchasing agent, after receiving quotations or comparative offers therefor to secure the best price obtainable. 
(b)  Personal property of a value in excess of $5,000.00 may be sold after advertising and receiving sealed competitive bids, as provided in section 2-573 and after approval of the sale has been given by the commission. 
(c)  Personal property of a value in excess of $5,000.00 may be sold at an auction at the direction of the city manager and with the approval of the city commission without compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 1.131; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 12-1-1987; Ord. No. 309, § 1, 1-5-1988; Ord. No. 430, § 4, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 2-582. - Sale or lease of real property. 
(a)  Whenever real property owned by the city is no longer required for corporate or public purposes, it may be sold or leased upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the commission-elect. This section shall not apply to the sale by the city of improved park land, or any part thereof. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, improved park land shall mean any park land included in the city's official master plan in accordance with section 5(e) of Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.5e), as amended by of Public Act No. 81 of 1981 (MCL 117.5), effective July 1, 1981. Improved park land or any part thereof may only be sold upon approval by the electors voting thereon in accordance with the city Charter. 
(c)  Real property, other than improved park land, not required for corporate or public purposes, with a value of $5,000.00 or less may be sold without sealed competitive bids upon written certification to the commission by the city manager that comparative quotations and/or offers were solicited and received to secure the best price obtainable. The property may be sold for that price, upon approval of the commission as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, without sealed competitive bids. 
(d)  Real property, other than improved park land, not required for corporate or public purposes, and with an apparent value in excess of $5,000.00 may only be sold after advertising and receiving sealed competitive bids as provided in section 2-573. The notice inviting bids shall contain a brief description of the property in addition to the information specified in section 2-573. 
(Code 1988, § 1.132; Ord. No. 430, § 5, 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 430, § 5, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 2-583. - Bids on real or personal property. 
    The city commission shall accept, if it decides to accept any bid on real or personal property, the bid which, in its opinion, is the most advantageous to the city and the commission shall have the right to reject the highest bid if, in its opinion, the public interest would best be served by accepting a lower or different bid. 
(Code 1988, § 1.133; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 12-1-1987) 
Sec. 2-584. - Purchase of real estate. 
    The city may purchase real estate either by condemnation or direct negotiation. The city shall not require sealed bids submitted to it in connection with the purchase by the city of real property, regardless of the dollar value thereof; provided that, except in the case of real property purchased by condemnation, the written appraisal of the value of such property by a competent appraiser shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 1.134; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 12-1-1987) 
Secs. 2-585-2-620. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-621. - Creation; members. 
(a)  There is hereby created the city budget advisory committee, which shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  The seven members of the budget advisory committee shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the city commission. Prior to January 1 in each year, two members or three members, as the case may be, of the budget advisory committee shall be appointed for a term of three years, except in the first year when three members will be selected for three-year terms, two members for two-year terms and two members for a one-year term. 
(c)  Any member of the budget advisory committee may be appointed for a second three-year term. 
(d)  Within ten days after appointment to the budget advisory committee and before entering upon the appointee's duties as a member of the budget advisory committee, each appointee shall file written acceptance with the city clerk and subscribe and file with the clerk an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state and to faithfully perform the duties of the office of budget advisory committee member to the best of the member's ability. 
(e)  All budget advisory committee members shall serve without compensation. Each member of the budget advisory committee shall serve until the member's successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(Code 1988, § 1.201; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 2-622. - Powers and duties. 
    The budget advisory committee shall be an advisory committee having the general duty of considering and advising the city commission concerning all budgetary issues. The duties of the budget advisory committee shall more specifically include: 
(1)  Annually reviewing the city's budget documents and to review conformance to the April 2003 recommendations of the ad hoc operational and financial analysis committee; 
(2)  Annually reviewing capital needs and priorities of the city; 
(3)  Annually reviewing operations of the city and possible modifications; 
(4)  Review of annual audit and financial statements; and 
(5)  Making such recommendations concerning budget issues to the city manager or the city commission as may be expedient and not inconsistent with this division, the Charter of the city and the general laws of the state. 
(Code 1988, § 1.202; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 2-623. - Board organization and meetings. 
(a)  The budget advisory committee shall organize by electing annually at its first regular meeting a chair, vice-chair, secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the duties of the committee. Officers shall retain office until election of their successors. 
(b)  The committee shall approve a schedule of regular meetings for the next year. The chair may call additional special meetings of the committee. 
(c)  The budget advisory committee shall adopt rules for transaction of business and keep records of its resolutions and recommendations, which records shall be a public record. 
(d)  Four members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Four votes shall be necessary for the committee to pass a resolution. 
(e)  The budget advisory committee shall conduct its business at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of each meeting shall be given in a manner as required by the Open Meetings Act. 
(Code 1988, § 2.203; Ord. No. 484, § 1, 11-18-2003) 
Secs. 2-624-2-660. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COST RECOVERY FOR EXPENSES OF EMERGENCY REPONSE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 549, § 1, adopted July 17, 2012, amended div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 4, §§ 2-661-2-666, was entitled "Cost Recovery for Emergency Hazardous Material Cleanup", and derived from: Code 1988, §§ 9.301-9.306; and Ord. No. 372, § 1, adopted May 3, 1994. 

Sec. 2-661. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accident, including natural disaster, means an unforeseen or unexpected happening or occurrence which of itself causes great harm or damage, or which creates the potential for great harm or damage to individuals and/or property, and which requires immediate and prudent securing and monitoring by the city and/or agents of the city, to reduce the potential for such damage, but not including an extraordinary response. 
    Assessable costs means those costs for services (including police, fire, rescue, emergency medical services, emergency or municipal personnel, public works, and any other health and safety services) at the scene of an extraordinary response, incurred by the city or a private person, corporation, or other assisting governmental agency operating at the request or direction of the city. The term assessable costs includes, but is not limited to the costs of providing: 
(1)  Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed and expended specifically for the purpose of the extraordinary response; 
(2)  All salaries, wages and compensation of responding, supervising, investigating, reporting, and testifying city personnel where such services are required by an extraordinary response, the investigation of an extraordinary response incident, or any prosecution or civil action brought in connection with such an incident. This shall include, but not be limited to the actual labor costs of the city (including without limitation: employee wages including overtime, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead, whether or not the services are provided by the city or by a third party at the request of the city including, but not limited to any mutual aid association or party to an interlocal agreement); 
(3)  All salaries, wages including overtime, and compensation of responding, supervising, investigating, reporting and testifying personnel of any assisting governmental agency, including, but not limited to, any mutual aid association or party to an interlocal agreement, or consultant or contractor acting at the request or direction of the city where such services are required by an extraordinary response, the investigation of any extraordinary response situation, or any prosecution and/or civil action brought in connection with such an incident; 
(4)  Costs for the use of city-owned vehicles and/or equipment, but only if the use of the vehicle and/or equipment would not have been necessary but for the extraordinary response situation; 
(5)  Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the extraordinary response (such as, but not limited to: protective equipment or clothing, scientific and technical equipment); 
(6)  The actual replacement costs for equipment that is contaminated beyond reuse or repair during an extraordinary response; 
(7)  Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the extraordinary response; 
(8)  Special technical services specifically required for the extraordinary response (such as costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts or specialists); 
(9)  Other special services specifically required for the extraordinary response; 
(10)  Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the extraordinary response; 
(11)  Costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of hazardous materials; 
(12)  Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment procured for a specific education; 
(13)  Medical expenses incurred as a result of extraordinary response activities, including ambulance conveyance to a hospital; 
(14)  Service charges and interests; 
(15)  The cost of any type of chemical testing for blood alcohol content or for the presence of controlled substances and for videotaping of the driver, if applicable; 
(16)  Related administrative costs, which shall be 15 percent of the actual cost charged by the city, accruing after the occurrence of an extraordinary response; 
(17)  Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the extraordinary response situation, including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this division, attorney fees, expert witness fees, litigation costs, court costs, charges, fines, or penalties to the city imposed by any court or other municipal, state or federal governmental entities; and 
(18)  Costs incurred in accounting for the extraordinary response expenditure, including billing and collection costs. 
    Bomb threats means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive device, which if discharged as threatened would violate a federal, state or local law. 
    Emergency personnel means police protection services, fire protection services, emergency medical services, public works services, other emergency health and safety services, and any other city personnel, consultant, or contractor provided by the city or by a private entity, corporation, expert, consultant, or other assisting governmental agency operating at the request or direction of the city or the State of Michigan at the request of the city, including but not limited to any mutual aid associations or party to an interlocal agreement. 
    Extraordinary response means the providing, sending, and/or utilizing of emergency or municipal personnel to or at an incident of a serious and/or urgent threat to human life, public safety and welfare, or to real or personal property. 
    Extraordinary response situations means occurrences requiring the intervention of municipal personnel, rendered in response to: 
(1)  A bomb threat; 
(2)  A dangerous or hazardous materials incident, emergency, or release; 
(3)  An illegal fire; 
(4)  A threat of harm to oneself or others; 
(5)  A structure demolition; 
(6)  Any building fire or other building matter that requires extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel; 
(7)  Any motor vehicle accident that requires extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel; 
(8)  Any motor vehicle fire that requires an extraordinary response by emergency municipal personnel; 
(9)  Any confined space, trench rescue, or similar incident requiring extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel; 
(10)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing emergency or municipal personnel by the city to an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcohol liquor and any controlled substance, or the making of a traffic stop and arrest by a public safety officer when the driver was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both; 
(11)  Any investigation by emergency or municipal personnel that results in the issuance of a complaint and arrest warrant for "filing a false police report" or "hindering and obstructing a police officer by providing false identification"; 
(12)  Abatement of any nuisance as included in the City Code of Ordinances or abatement of any other matter required to protect and maintain the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents; 
(13)  Excessive and/or repeated requests for response to incidents which are determined by the director of public safety or his or her designee to be nonhazardous or not dangerous to an individual or the public; and 
(14)  Any other extraordinary situation whereby extraordinary response was taken by the city which is above and beyond normal or routine emergency standards. 
    Extraordinary use of municipal personnel means the use of emergency or municipal personnel at special events such as athletic events, religious-sponsored events, school functions, charitable events, or any private sector gatherings or events when the holders and/or sponsors of an event have not made pre-arrangements in writing with the city for use of emergency or municipal personnel. This term does not include those special events which are pre-arranged, and there is a separate agreement covering the costs of municipal personnel. 
    Hazardous or dangerous material means any material classified as hazardous material by any federal legislation or regulation, by any state legislation or regulation, MCL 286.452. This means those elements, substances, wastes or by-products, including but not limited to, combustible liquid, flammable gas, explosive flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable or reactive matter, water-reactive matter, petroleum products, anti-freeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, or materials similar to those listed, which are or could be potentially harmful to human or animal life or the environment, or which pose an unreasonable or imminent risk of life, health, or safety of persons or property, or damage the environment to an extent as determined by the director of public safety or his or her designee or the senior official of the city in charge at the scene. 
    Hazardous or dangerous materials incident of emergency means any occurrence, incident, activity, accident, or emergency where a release of hazardous materials has occurred, or is reasonably imminent to occur, and where the director of public safety or his or her designee has declared such activity, accident, or emergency a hazardous or dangerous material incident of emergency. 
    Illegal fire means a fire set, or determined to have been set, in violation of any federal, state or local law, and shall include, but not be limited to: an arson fire, a fire set in violation of a "no burning" ban or order, or a fire proximately caused by illegal fireworks. An illegal fire does not include an unintentional or a fire caused by an act of God (for example, a lightning storm). 
    Municipal personnel means police protection services, fire protection services, emergency medical services, public works services, other emergency health and safety services, and other city personnel, consultants, or contractors provided by the city or by a private entity, corporation, expert, consultant, or other assisting governmental agency operating at the request or direction of the city, including but not limited to a mutual aid association and any parties to an interlocal agreement. 
    Operating under the influence means the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or controlled substance or while visibly impaired by intoxicating liquor and/or a controlled substance, or with unlawful alcohol content by weight of alcohol, regardless of whether such person is charged or convicted of any crime relating to the incident causing the extraordinary response. 
(1)  It shall be presumed that a person who was less than 21 years of age was operating a motor vehicle under the influence if chemical analysis of the driver's blood, breathe, or urine, indicates an alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. The term "any bodily alcohol content" means the presence of any alcohol within the driver's body which is due to consumption of intoxicating liquor other than consumption which was part of a recognized religious ceremony. 
(2)  It shall be presumed that a person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle was under the influence if chemical analysis of the driver's blood, urine or breath indicates the presence of any amount of a controlled substance or that the alcohol content in the driver's blood, breath, or urine contained 0.04 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine. 
(3)  Other than in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle under the influence if chemical analysis of the driver's blood, breath, or urine indicates the presence of any amount of a controlled substance or that the alcohol content in the driver's blood, breath, or urine was in excess of 0.08 grams or more per 100 milliliters, per 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine. 
    Release means any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or dispensing of hazardous materials into the environment (including but not limited to: the air, soil, surface waters or groundwater, which causes danger or harm to the public health or environment), or the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles containing hazardous material. 
    Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, governmental entity or any other legal entity responsible for an extraordinary response situation. Any owner, tenant, occupant or party, including the estate, heirs, successors and assigns of that responsible party who is in control of real or personal property from which, onto which, or related to a hazardous materials release. Responsible party will also include the individual or entity which requests an extraordinary use of municipal personnel. 
    Specialized response resources means equipment, supplies, vehicles, and specially-trained personnel that may be utilized to provide extraordinary response services or mitigation in connection with a specialized response. 
    Structure demolition means the tearing down of a structure damaged by fire, explosion, or by other means which must be properly demolished in order to protect public safety, in the opinion of the fire chief and/or the director of building and zoning, or their designees. 
    Threat of harm to oneself or others means the verbal or written threat of harm to oneself, to another or to another's property, which, if carried out, would be in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-662. - Cost recovery authorization and procedure. 
    Except as provided in section 2-663, the city may recover all assessable costs in connection with extraordinary response situations from any or all responsible parties, jointly or severally. The city may recover all assessable costs in connection with extraordinary use of municipal personnel from the person, entity, or organization necessitating the extraordinary services. For all other extraordinary response situations, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall determine the total assessable costs and shall, in consultation with other city personnel involved in responding to an extraordinary response situation, determine whether to assess all or part of such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such a determination, the following will be considered: 
(1)  The total assessable costs; 
(2)  The risk that the extraordinary response situation imposed on the city residents and their property; 
(3)  Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property; 
(4)  Whether the extraordinary response situation required evacuation; 
(5)  The extent the extraordinary response situation required an unusual or extraordinary use of municipal personnel and equipment; and 
(6)  Whether there was any damage to the environment. 
    After consideration of the above-listed factors, the city manager may allocate assessable costs among responsible parties, including allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally against all parties, rather than one responsible party, regardless of whether a responsible party has legal liability therefore or is legally at fault. If the city manager determines not to assess all or part of assessable costs against a responsible party, such determination shall not in any way limit or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to other parties. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-663. - Hazardous materials release. 
(a)  Duty to remove. It shall be the duty of the responsible party who causes or controls leakage, spillage, or any other dissemination of dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to immediately remove such hazardous substances or materials and complete a cleanup of the area of the release to insure that the hazardous substances or materials are fully removed and the area is fully restored to pre-release condition. 
(b)  Charges imposed upon responsible party. Where there is a hazardous materials release which is not otherwise permitted by applicable federal, state, or local law, the city may recover all assessable costs from the responsible party in a civil action under the Natural Resource Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.20135(1)(b). 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-664. - Verification and supervision. 
    In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the director of public safety or other city official, to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or material unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon or onto any property or facility within the city, the director of public safety may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The persons described in section 2-662 shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-665. - Billing and collection of assessable costs and late payment fees. 
(a)  Upon a determination to assess costs incurred under this section, the city will submit an itemized invoice, by first class mail or personal service, to each responsible party. Such invoice shall be due and payable within 30 days after the date of mailing, and any amounts unpaid, including any previously imposed, shall pay a late payment fee equal to 11/2 percent per month. 
(b)  A determination not to assess costs under this section shall in no way limit, extinguish or constitute a defense to the liability of any responsible party to any third party. 
(c)  If the responsible party appeals assessable costs pursuant to section 2-666 below, such costs, if upheld in whole or in part, shall be due and payable 30 days from the date of determination of the appeal and late payment fees shall apply thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-666. - Procedure for appealing assessable costs. 
(a)  Any responsible party who receives an invoice for assessable costs shall have the opportunity to meet with the city manager, or his/her designee, to request modification of the assessable costs. The responsible party shall request such a meeting in writing within seven calendar days of the date of the invoice assessing the costs. 
(b)  If after the meeting with the city manager or his/her designee, the responsible party contests the assessed charges; he or she may request an opportunity to appear before the city commission to further request a modification of the assessable costs. A responsible party who desires to appear before the city commission must first meet with the city manager or his/her designee, as provided above, and shall file a written request to appear before the city commission with the city clerk within seven calendar days of the meeting with the city manager. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a request to appear before the city commission, the city clerk will place the challenge to the assessed cost on the agenda of the next regularly-scheduled city commission meeting, as long as there are at least 14 calendar days after the date on which the responsible party files the request to appear. 
(d)  The filed request to appear before the city commission shall specifically identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the assessed costs should be modified. The responsible party has the burden of proving by a preponderance of relevant facts that the determination is erroneous in whole or in part. Any reasoning, basis or argument for modification of assessable costs not set forth in the request to appear before the city commission shall be deemed waived by the responsible party. 
(e)  Once the responsible party has been given the opportunity to appear before it, the city commission shall, within a reasonable time, affirm, reverse, or modify all or a portion of the payment of the assessable costs invoiced. Failure of the responsible party to appear before the city commission on the appeal shall constitute a waiver of that party's objections to the assessable costs. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-667. - Assessable costs constitute a lien upon property. 
    Any assessable costs which have been assessed but not paid when due, including any late payment fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible party in the city, from which, upon which or related to which an extraordinary situation occurred. Such a lien shall be of the character and effect as the lien created by state statute for general tax law for city real property and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The city treasurer shall verify on March 1 of each year and certify to the city assessor the fact that such assessable costs are delinquent and unpaid. The city assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-668. - Other remedies. 
    In addition to the remedy set forth in section 2-667 above, the city shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate court action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-669. - No limitation of liability. 
    The recovery of assessable costs pursuant to this division does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 2-670. - Preemption by federal or state statute. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent a federal or state statute from preempting the ordinance from which this division derives if the federal or state statute provides an absolute defense to liability of a responsible party due to the acts of a third party and that statute expressly or impliedly provides the federal or state government with the authority to regulate a specific area of the law, or the pervasiveness of federal or state regulation or the nature of the regulation demonstrates the need for exclusive regulation by the federal or state government, including, but not limited to NREPA, MCL 323.101 et seq., and CERCLA 42 USC 9601 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 7-17-2012) 
Secs. 2-671-2-703. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 549, § 2, adopted July 17, 2012, repealed div. 5, §§ 2-704-2-708, entitled "Cost Recovery for Expenses of Emergency Response", which derived from: Code 1988, §§ 10.60-10.64; Ord. No. 358, § 1, adopted Mar. 24, 1992; and Ord. No. 448, §§ 1-3, adopted Aug. 15, 2000. See art. V, div. 4 of this chapter for similar provisions. 

Secs. 2-704-2-729. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq. 

Sec. 2-730. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
    Authorized city official means a public safety officer, the building official, the electrical inspector or other personnel authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by this article. 
    Municipal civil infraction means an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under the Code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.). A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)). 
(Code 1988, § 9.1; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 2-731. - Authorized city official. 
    The building official, electrical inspector, plumbing and mechanical inspectors, code enforcement officer and public safety officers are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations directing alleged violators to appear in court, or municipal civil infraction violation notices directing alleged violators to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau, as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.2; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 2-732. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of: 
(1)  A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or 
(2)  A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau, as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.3; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 2-733. - Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(3)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the Act (MCL 600.8705). 
(4)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(5)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.  Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Code 1988, § 9.4; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 2-734. - Municipal civil infraction citations; contents. 
(a)  A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that the violator may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with explanation by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in person, or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility with explanation in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 9.5; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 2-735. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau as authorized under section 8396 of the Act (MCL 600.8396) to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at the department of public safety, and shall be under the supervision and control of the director of public safety. The director of public safety, subject to the approval of the city manager and commission, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice as compared with a citation has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this section shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in subsections (f) and (g) of this section. In addition to any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirement for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Code 1988, § 9.6; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 2-736. - Schedule of civil fines. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is hereby established. For a violation of a provision of this Code that is declared to be a municipal civil infraction, the fines shall be as follows: 
(1)  The first offense, $150.00. 
(2)  The first repeat offense, $250.00. 
(3)  The second or any subsequent repeat offenses, $500.00. 
(b)  The following shall be exceptions to the civil fine schedule: 
(1)  A violation of any provision of chapter 30, article II (collection and disposal of solid waste) shall be as follows: 
a.  The first offense, $50.00. 
b.  The first repeat offense, $100.00. 
c.  The second or any subsequent repeat offenses, $500.00. 
(2)  A violation of sections 4-28, 4-33 or 4-38 (dogs) shall be as follows: 
a.  The first offense, $50.00. 
b.  The first repeat offense, $100.00. 
c.  The second or any subsequent repeat offenses, $500.00. 
(3)  A violation of section 26-24 (prohibition of smoking) shall be as follows: 
a.  The first offense, $50.00. 
b.  The first repeat offense, $100.00. 
c.  The second or any subsequent repeat offenses, not to exceed $500.00. 
(4)  A person who violates section 26-26 (skateboarding and rollerblading prohibited) and section 26-27 (Val Jones Park) is subject to a civil fine of not more than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(5)  A violation of chapter 24, article VIII, division 3 (open house parties) shall be as follows: 
a.  The first offense, $25.00. 
b.  The first repeat offense, $50.00. 
c.  The second or any subsequent repeat offenses, $100.00. 
(6)  A violation of chapter 14, article V (weed control) shall be as follows: 
a.  The first offense, $100.00. 
b.  The first repeat offense, $150.00. 
c.  The second or any subsequent repeat offenses, $200.00. 
(7)  A violation of chapter 34, article III (wireless communication facilities) shall be as follows: 
a.  The first offense, $500.00. 
b.  The first repeat offense, $1,000.00. 
c.  The second or any subsequent repeat offenses, $2,000.00. 
(c)  A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Code 1988, § 9.7; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 5-19-1998; Ord. No. 436, § 1, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 11-20-2012) 
Chapter 3 - RESERVED 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq.; endangered species protection, MCL 324.36501 et seq.; crimes related to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; local authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird, or engage in any act which causes or inflicts unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to any animal or bird, including but not limited to failing to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe environment, veterinary care or nutritious food for any animal or bird owned, possessed, or harbored by such person. 
(Code 1988, § 9.35; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, MCL 750.50. 
Sec. 4-2. - Poisoning animals. 
    No person, except a licensed veterinarian for humanitarian purposes, shall administer poison to any animal or bird, or knowingly leave or expose any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in a public or private place where it endangers, is likely to endanger, or injure any animal or bird. 
(Code 1988, § 9.36; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.437. 
Sec. 4-3. - Birds and birds' nests. 
    No person, except a police officer acting in the officer's official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.37; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-4. - Domestic animals and fowl. 
    No person shall keep or house any animals other than domestic dogs, domestic cats, canaries or animals commonly classified as pets, which are customarily kept or housed inside dwellings as household pets. The term "pet" or "household pet," as used in this section, does not include exotic, wild, vicious or dangerous animals including, but not limited to, any of the following: domestic fowl, live monkeys, alligator, crocodile, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, constrictor snake longer than six feet in length, member of the feline species other than the domestic cat, member of the canine species other than the domestic dog, or any other animal which would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops. This section shall not apply to any lawfully operated zoo. 
(Code 1988, § 9.38; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Secs. 4-5-4-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq. 

Sec. 4-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means when applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps or harbors such dog or has it in care the care of such person, and every person who permits such dog to remain in or about any premises occupied by that person. 
    Proper care and control of a dog means keeping a dog on a suitable leash under the control of the owner, custodian or some other person with the permission of the owner or custodian, except when the dog is on the owner's premises or confined in a closed motor vehicle or shipping receptacle. 
(Code 1988, § 9.43; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-28. - License required. 
(a)  A person who owns, possesses or harbors any dog six months of age or over in the city shall: 
(1)  Obtain a license for the dog as hereinafter provided; and 
(2)  Ensure that such licensed dog wears a collar or harness with a metal tag attached as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 9.44; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
State Law reference- Dog licensing, MCL 287.266 et seq. 
Sec. 4-29. - License application. 
    Individual dog licenses to own or harbor a dog shall be issued by the city clerk, or a representative of the city clerk, upon application and payment of a license fee provided in this article. The application for a dog license shall be accompanied by an county health department approved certificate stating that said dog has been properly immunized against rabies for a period of time at least coextensive with the licensing period. It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog on or before March 15 of each year, or on or before any dog becomes six months of age, or within 30 days after a person becomes the owner of a dog six months of age or more, to apply for a license; provided that no person shall keep more than three dogs of the age of six months or over without first obtaining a kennel license from the state. Further provided, that any person who runs a dog kennel that is properly licensed by the state and licensed and/or permitted by this Code need not apply for individual dog licenses under this article. The applicant for a dog license shall give the full name and address of that applicant and the age and description of the dog. If the applicant has become a resident within 30 days or the owner of a dog within 30 days, the applicant shall give the date of becoming a resident or acquiring a dog, as the case may be. All dog licenses hereafter issued shall expire March 15 in the year following their issuance. 
(Code 1988, § 9.45; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-30. - License fee. 
    License fees for dogs shall be in the amounts prescribed by the city commission by resolution, and be paid at the time of making the application. 
(Code 1988, § 9.46; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-31. - License tags. 
    Upon the issuance of an individual dog license, the city clerk shall deliver to the applicant a metal tag of not less than one inch in length or diameter, which shall be dated and bear a serial number, together with the words "Licensed and Immunized, Huntington Woods, Michigan" and such serial number shall be inscribed upon the license so issued. Such metal tag shall be attached to the dog for which it is issued by means of a substantial collar or harness and no person shall remove any license tag from any dog without the consent of the owner or of the person to whom the license is issued. No tag shall be used on the collar or harness of any other dog than that for which the tag was issued. 
(Code 1988, § 9.47; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-32. - Loss of license tag. 
    If the metal license tag is lost, the city clerk may issue a duplicate if the owner of the dog for whom the tag was issued presents the certificate showing the dog was immunized against rabies and a certificate of the dog license, and pays the cost of furnishing a replacement tag. 
(Code 1988, § 9.48; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-33. - Barking or dangerous dogs. 
(a)  No person who owns, possesses, or harbors a dog shall fail to exercise proper care and control of the dog to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, trespassing upon school or park grounds, trespassing upon private property in such a manner as to damage property or straying beyond the premises of the owner unless under proper care and control of some person, shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance. Any person who violates this subsection shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Yards and/or exercise dog runs shall be kept free of dog droppings, uneaten food, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as not to be a nuisance because of odor or attraction for flies and vermin. Any person who violates this subsection shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  No person shall own or harbor a vicious dog, defined as a dog which has bitten a person or domestic animal without molestation, or which, by its actions, gives indication that it is liable to bite any person or domestic animal. Whenever a dog is brought to the pound for having bitten a person, the animal control officer or other duly authorized officer may, if deemed necessary and advisable, and after holding such dog a sufficient length of time to meet the requirements of the health department for investigation, cause such dog to be destroyed as a vicious dog. Any person who violates this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  No person shall own or harbor a dog that has been bitten by any animal known to be afflicted with rabies. Any person who shall have in their possession a dog which has contracted, or is suspected of having contracted rabies or which has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies, shall, upon demand of the health officer, or any public safety officer of the city, produce and surrender said dog to the public safety department to be held for observation and/or treatment; provided that with the approval of the public safety department, any such dog may be surrendered to a registered veterinarian, or to any approved nonprofit corporation organized for the purpose of sheltering dogs. It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or animal showing the symptoms of rabies to immediately notify the public safety department that such person has such dog in the person's possession. Any person who violates this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 9.49; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
State Law reference- Dogs attacking or biting persons, MCL 287.279, 287.286a; dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq. 
Sec. 4-34. - Housing for stray and unwanted animals. 
    The city shall provide a pound strategically located and it shall be the duty of the animal control officer and/or any other person employed by the city manager for that purpose to properly seize, take up and place in said pound, dogs running at large or being kept or harbored in any place of the city contrary to the provisions in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 9.50; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-35. - Dogs released from the dog pound. 
(a)  No dog shall be released from the pound unless the owner or person entitled to claim the dog shall first pay fees for daily boarding of the dog, plus the reasonable cost for necessary care and treatment of the dog including rabies vaccination if required, plus license fee if required, plus impounding fees. The city commission shall establish such fees by resolution from time to time. 
(b)  All dogs released from the pound to owners or purchasers thereof shall receive rabies immunization if the dog has not been vaccinated within the previous 12 months. 
(c)  Adequate records will be kept to report this disposition of all dogs brought to the pound. 
(Code 1988, § 9.51; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-36. - Duties of the animal control officer. 
    The animal control officer shall fulfill the following duties: 
(1)  Promptly seize, take up and place in the dog pound, all dogs found running at large or being kept or harbored any place within the city contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Make diligent inquiry as to the dogs owned, harbored or kept, or kennels operated in the city, and whether such dogs and kennels are licensed. 
(3)  The animal control officer shall be properly deputized as a police officer for the limited purposes of this chapter, and shall be legally authorized and empowered to issue and serve appearance tickets upon a person where reasonable cause exists to believe that the person owns or harbors a dog contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to not sell or otherwise dispose of an impounded dog that does not have a collar, license or other evidence of ownership, within four days after its acquisition. If the impounded dog has a collar, license or other evidence of ownership, it shall be the duty of the animal control office to notify the owner by telephone or certified mail, and disposition of the dog shall not be made within seven days from the date of either mailing the notice or contacting the owner by telephone. The owner shall be advised that failure to claim the animal within seven days of the date of the notice may result in disposition of the animal. The animal control office shall be required to maintain a record of each identifiable dog acquired, indicating a basic description of the dog, the date it was acquired, under what circumstances it was acquired, the date notice was given to the owner and any subsequent disposition of the dog. 
(5)  Any dog that does not have a license or other evidence of ownership that is not claimed within four days after its acquisition, or any dog that does have a license or other evidence of ownership that is not claimed within seven days of either mailing the notice or contacting the owner by telephone, shall become the property of the city and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or euthanized in a manner prescribed by the local Humane Society. Any such dog which is adopted shall either be removed from the city or kept and harbored within the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The bodies of all dogs euthanized at the pound or elsewhere in the city shall be disposed of by the animal control office, or other designated authority, in a manner approved by the health department. 
(Code 1988, § 9.52; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 4-37. - Personal and property damage. 
    Every owner of a dog shall be liable for damages for any and all injuries to person or property that may be caused by such dog on any public highway or other public place, to be determined and collected in appropriate legal proceedings, in which proceedings any failure or refusal by such owner to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall constitute prima facie evidence of negligence. 
(Code 1988, § 9.54; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
State Law reference- Common law liability for dogs, MCL 287.288. 
Sec. 4-38. - Sanitation. 
(a)  No person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any dog shall cause, suffer, or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate or to commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area, park, or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission of the owner of said property unless: 
(1)  The person who so owns, harbors, keeps or is in charge of such dog shall immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the local health authority. The person shall possess a container of sufficient size to collect and remove the above-mentioned dog feces and exhibit the container, if requested by any official empowered to enforce this section. 
(2)  The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any dog in accordance with the provisions of this section in a sanitary manner. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  The use of leader, guide, hearing and service dogs shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 9.55; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Chapter 5 - RESERVED 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 6-19. - Assumption of responsibility for enforcement and administration. 
    Pursuant to sections 8a and 8b of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, being Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508a, 125.1508b), the city hereby elects to assume responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the state construction code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.1; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 459, § 1, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-20. - Designation of enforcing agency. 
    The building official is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under the state construction code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.2; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-21. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  Permits shall be required and issued in accordance with the state construction code. 
(b)  The permit fees for all work required hereunder shall be established by and may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  All fees shall be paid at the time of application to the city treasurer or in such other manner as the city manager shall direct. 
(Code 1988, § 8.3; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-12-1988; Ord. No. 459, § 2, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-22. - Building bond. 
    Upon application for any permit under the state construction code, the applicant shall deposit with such application a building bond, being a sum in cash in an amount to be specified by resolution of the city commission. This deposit is to reimburse the city for the cost, as determined by the city, of any expense which the city may incur as a result of the work covered by the permit including, but not limited to, the cost of further permits, removal of debris, restoration of ground levels, use of unmetered water, repair of damaged sidewalks, and other property and charges in connection with establishing and discontinuing water connections. 
(Code 1988, § 8.4; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988) 
Sec. 6-23. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  A person who erects, uses, moves, demolishes, occupies, or maintains any building or structure in violation of the state construction code, or causes, permits or suffers any such violation to be committed, or who knowingly constructs or builds a structure or building in violation of a condition of a permit, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Any building or structure erected, used, moved, demolished, occupied or maintained in violation of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Upon application of any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation or threatened violation restrained and enjoined. 
(Code 1988, § 8.5; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 411, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 6-24. - Unlawful continuance. 
    Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.6; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 411, § 2, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 6-25. - Designation of board of appeals. 
    The city construction and property maintenance board of appeals is hereby designated as the board of appeals required by section 14 of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1514), and shall have the powers and duties required by that act to hear appeals under the state construction code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.7; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 496, § 1, 6-21-2005) 
Sec. 6-26. - Creation and composition of construction and property maintenance board of appeals. 
    There is hereby created in and for the city, a construction and property maintenance board of appeals. The board shall consist of three members qualified by experience or training to pass on matters pertaining to construction and maintenance. Members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city commission, to two year terms. Terms of the first members appointed shall be staggered to the extent possible. An alternate board member may be appointed to serve in the absence of a regular board member or in the event a regular board member determines the board member cannot hear an appeal due to a conflict of interest. 
(Code 1988, § 8.8; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 341, § 1, 7-25-1989; Ord. No. 496, § 2, 6-21-2005) 
Sec. 6-27. - Operation of construction and property maintenance board of appeals; rules of procedure. 
(a)  The construction and property maintenance board of appeals may adopt rules of procedure, not inconsistent with the single construction code act (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), and shall keep records of appeals to it and decisions rendered. Appeals to the construction and property maintenance board of appeals under any section of the state construction code act shall be taken as prescribed by that act, and pursuant to rules of procedure adopted by the construction and property maintenance board of appeals not inconsistent with that act. 
(b)  The construction and property maintenance board of appeals shall meet as required to hear appeals on building permit denials or any other decision pursuant to or related to the single construction code act or the state construction code. Within ten days after receiving written notice of denial, an applicant may file a petition, in writing, for review of said action with the city manager. Upon payment to the city clerk of the fee prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution, the board shall hear the appeal and render and file its decision with a statement of reasons for the decision with the building official not more than 30 days after submission of the appeal. Failure by the board of appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision within the time limit is a denial of the appeal for purposes of authorizing the institution of an appeal to the state construction commission. A copy of the decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed, before filing, to the party taking the appeal. 
(Code 1988, § 8.9; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 496, § 3, 6-21-2005) 
Secs. 6-28-6-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING GRADE AND DRAINAGE 

Sec. 6-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building line grade means the grade at which the building walls meet the ground. 
    Grade means the height to which the ground is elevated above sea level. 
    Sidewalk grade means the grade at which the front sidewalk is located, except that in the case of corner lots, the sidewalk grade shall be deemed to be the grade at which the front or side sidewalk is located. 
(Code 1988, § 8.10; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-21-2005) 
Sec. 6-59. - Grading required. 
(a)  When the existing grade of any property or building is to be changed or modified, or when a building is to be constructed, erected or altered on any property, or when site or landscaping improvements alter any part of the existing grade, the new grade shall be established so that it shall be not more than 18 inches above sidewalk grade. The grade shall not exceed the grade of adjoining properties at the lot line nor shall the flow of surface water be directed toward or permitted to flow, or project unnecessarily or unfairly upon adjacent properties. 
(b)  When the existing grade of any property is to be changed or modified as a result of construction, erection or alteration of a building, proposed grades must be based upon a current topographic survey. Such survey shall be submitted as part of the building permit application. 
(c)  If the grade of a property prior to construction or landscaping is higher than 18 inches above the sidewalk grade, it may be retained, provided it does not cause surface water to drain onto adjacent property. 
(d)  In case the enforcement of this section shall appear to be inequitable or unfair or will cause surface drainage to be projected unnecessarily or unfairly upon adjacent property, or in case the public welfare, health or safety otherwise calls for a modification of the foregoing provisions, then in any of those events, the building official may permit or require such modification or change in the foregoing requirements as may be fair to affected property owners or necessary as a public measure. 
(e)  No person shall change, modify, create or establish the grade of any property within the city other than in conformity with this section. 
(Code 1988, § 8.11; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-21-2005) 
Sec. 6-60. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who changes, modifies, creates or establishes the grade of any property within the city other than in conformity with this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.12; Ord. No. 411, § 3, 5-19-1998; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 6-21-2005) 
Secs. 6-61-6-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SECURITY BARS 

Sec. 6-79. - Definitions; purpose. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Security bar means a rigid framework of patterned bars which inhibits access through a window or door. 
(b)  Security bars are used by residents who are afraid of being victims of crime but these bars have the deadly side effect of trapping people inside during emergencies. Accordingly, the purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of residents by prohibiting the installation and use of security bars on doors and windows. 
(Code 1988, § 8.16; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 6-80. - Installation and use of security bars prohibited. 
(a)  A person shall not install or use security bars on a window or door of a residential dwelling. 
(b)  A person shall not occupy a residential dwelling which is equipped with security bars on any window or door. 
(Code 1988, § 8.17; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 6-81. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.18; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 7-11-2000) 
Secs. 6-82-6-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL WORK 

Sec. 6-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apprentice electrician means an individual other than an electrical contractor, master electrician, or electrical journeyman, who is engaged in learning about and assisting in the installation or alteration of electrical wiring and equipment under the direct personal supervision of an electrical journeyman or master electrician. 
    Electric sign means fixed, stationary, or portable self-contained, electrically illuminated equipment that has words or symbols designed to convey information or attract attention. The term includes outline lighting. The term "electric sign" does not include those signs that are indoor or outdoor portable applications or recognized holiday residential signs listed with a recognized testing and approval agency and that use a cord cap-110 volt plug as the electrical energizing attachment method. 
    Electrical administrative act means Public Act No. 217 of 1956 (MCL 338.881 et seq.). 
    Electrical contractor means a person engaged in the business of erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing, or maintaining electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment. 
    Electrical equipment means all electrical devices, in connection with the generation, distribution, communication, and utilization of electrical energy, within or on a building, residence, structure, or properties including fire alarm and sign devices. 
    Electrical inspector means any person who has the necessary qualifications, training, experience, and technical knowledge to inspect all electrical apparatus for compliance with the codes and who shall be the agent or employee of the city designated by the building official as an electrical inspector. Inspectors shall be registered pursuant to Public Act No. 54 of 1986, (MCL 338.2301 et seq.), as amended, and known as the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act. 
    Electrical journeyman means a person other than an electrical contractor who, as their principal occupation, is engaged in the practical installation or alteration of electrical wiring. An electrical contractor or master electrician may also be an electrical journeyman. 
    Electrical wiring means all wiring, generating equipment, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection with the generation, distribution, communication, and utilization of electrical energy, within or on a building, residence, structure, or properties, and including service entrance wiring as defined by the code. 
    Fire alarm contractor means a person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing, or maintaining wiring, devices, appliances or equipment of a fire alarm system. 
    Fire alarm specialty apprentice technician means an individual other than a fire alarm contractor or a fire alarm specialty technician who is engaged in learning about and assisting in the installation or alteration of fire alarm system wiring and equipment under the direct personal supervision of a fire alarm specialty technician. 
    Fire alarm specialty licensure means licensure as a fire alarm contractor or a fire alarm specialty or apprentice technician. 
    Fire alarm specialty technician means a person other than a fire alarm contractor who, as their principal occupation, is engaged in the practical installation or alteration of fire alarm system wiring. A fire alarm contractor may also be a fire alarm specialty technician. 
    Fire alarm system means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire, or by-products of fire, installed within a building or structure. The term "fire alarm system" does not include a single station smoke detector. 
    Jobsite means the immediate work area within the property lines of a single construction project, alteration project or maintenance project where electrical construction or alteration of electrical wiring is in progress. 
    Master electrician means a person having the necessary qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to supervise the installation of electrical wiring and equipment in accordance with the standard rules and regulations governing that work. 
    Minor repair work means electrical work such as repairing or replacing flush and snap switches, fuses, lamp sockets or receptacles; replacement of fixtures; repairing or taping bare connections; replacing lamps or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles, provided the total value does not exceed $100.00. 
    Outline lighting means an arrangement of incandescent lamps or electric discharge tubing which is an integral part of an electrical sign that outlines certain features, such as the shape of a building or the decoration of a window. 
    Owner means any natural person, and their legal successors. In all proceedings, actions or prosecutions hereunder, in which a corporation is the owner of any building, structure or part thereof, or of premises, any of its officers, directors or persons in control or management thereof, as well as the corporation, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Related sign wiring means: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this section, that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at the load-side terminals of a disconnecting means located in the vicinity of the electric sign involved but does not include the installation of the disconnecting means, complete with line-side connections. 
(2)  In the case of electric sign installations having sign transformers installed physically apart from the electric sign, that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at the load-side terminals of a disconnecting means located in the vicinity of the electric sign involved but does not include the installation of the disconnecting means, complete with line-side connections. 
(3)  In the case of the freestanding electric sign installations supplied through underground circuit conductors, that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at a wiring termination point adjacent to, within or immediately above the permanent base for the electric sign but does not include, if the base of the sign structure is suitable for use as a raceway, the installation of bushing, complete with free-length circuit conductors extending through to accommodate the connection of the related wiring within the sign structure raceway. 
(4)  In the case of electric signs specifically designated to be connected directly to the building wiring raceway or cable supply, that portion of the electric sign wiring that originates at the point where the free-length circuit conductors extend through the building wiring raceway or cable at the specifically designed supply location for the electric sign involved but does not include the installation of the building wiring raceway or cable system to the specifically designated point of supply for the electric sign involved, complete with free-length circuit conductors extending through the building wiring raceway or cable to accommodate the connection of the related wiring. 
    Sign specialist means a person who, as their principal occupation, is engaged in the installation, alteration or repair of electric signs. 
    Sign specialty contractor means a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, installing, maintaining, connecting, or repairing electric sign wiring or devices, including wiring that is directly related to electric signs and is electrically dedicated as a sign circuit. 
    Sign specialty licensure means licensure as a sign specialist or sign specialty contractor. 
(Code 1988, § 8.40; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-107. - Licensing reciprocity. 
    Licenses or registrations issued by the state electrical administrative board and licenses issued by a municipality having standards for licensing not less than those established by the state electrical administrative board shall be recognized by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 8.50; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 3, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-108. - Contractor's license. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor, fire alarm contractor, or sign specialty contractor and install, alter or repair electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat, power or fire alarm systems in or about buildings and/or structures located within the city without first having procured the appropriate contractor's license. No person other than a master electrician, except a person duly licensed and employed by and working under the direction of a holder of an electrical contractor's license, fire alarm contractor's license, or sign contractor's license, shall in any manner undertake to execute any electrical wiring. A violation of this provision shall be a civil infraction. 
(b)  No license shall be required by the board to perform the following: 
(1)  Any of the following work: 
a.  Minor repair work, as defined in section 6-106. 
b.  The installation, alteration, repairing, rebuilding, or remodeling of elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, or man lifts performed under a permit issued by an elevator inspection agency of the state or political subdivision of the state. 
c.  The installation, alteration, or repair of electrical equipment and its associated wiring installed on the premises of consumers or subscribers by or for electrical energy supply or communication agencies for use by such agencies in the generation, transmission, distribution, or metering of electrical energy or for the operation of signals or transmission of intelligence. 
d.  The installation, alteration, or repair of electric wiring for the generation and primary distribution of electric current, or the secondary distribution system up to and including the meters, where such work is an integral part of the system owned and operated by an electric light and power utility in rendering its duly authorized service. 
e.  Any work involved in the manufacture of electric equipment, including the testing and repairing of such manufactured equipment. 
f.  The installation, alteration, or repair of equipment and its associated wiring for the generation or distribution of electric energy for the operation of signals or transmission of intelligence where such work is in connection with a communication system owned or operated by a telephone or telegraph company in rendering its duly authorized service as a telephone or telegraph company. 
g.  Any work involved in the use, maintenance, operation, dismantling, or reassembling of motion picture and theatrical equipment used in any building with approved facilities for entertainment or educational use and which has the necessary permanent wiring and floor and wall receptacle outlets designed for the proper and safe use of such theatrical equipment, but not including any permanent wiring. 
(2)  Any installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment by a homeowner in a single-family home and accompanying outbuildings owned and occupied or to be occupied by the person performing the installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment. 
(3)  Work performed by mechanical contractors licensed in classifications listed in section 6(3)(a), (b), (d), (e), and (f) of the Forbes Mechanical Contractor Act, Public Act No. 192 of 1984 (MCL 338.976), plumbing contractors licensed under Public Act No. 733 of 2002 (MCL 338.3511 et seq.), and employees of persons licensed under Public Act No. 192 of 1984 (MCL 338.971 et seq.) and Public Act No. 733 of 2002 (MCL 338.3511 et seq.)while performing maintenance, service, repair, replacement, alteration, modification, reconstruction or upgrading of control wiring circuits and electrical component parts within existing mechanical systems defined in the mechanical and plumbing codes provided for in the State Construction Code Act of 1972, including, but not limited to, energy management systems, relays and controls on boilers, water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning compressors and condensers, fan controls, thermostats and sensors, and all interconnected wiring associated with the mechanical systems in buildings which are on the load side of the unit disconnect, which is located on or immediately adjacent to the equipment, except for life safety systems wiring. 
(4)  Electrical wiring associated with the installation, removal, alteration, or repair of a water well pump on a single-family dwelling to the first point of attachment in the house from the well, by a registered pump installer under part 127 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12701 et seq.). 
(5)  The installation, maintenance or servicing of burglar alarm systems within a building or structure. 
(6)  The installation, maintenance or servicing of residential lawn sprinkling equipment. 
(7)  The installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electric signs and related wiring by an unlicensed individual under the direct supervision of a licensed sign specialist, except that the ratio of unlicensed individuals engaged in this activity shall not exceed two unlicensed individuals to one licensed sign specialist. An enforcing agency shall enforce this ratio on a jobsite basis. 
(8)  The construction, installation, maintenance, repair and renovation of telecommunications equipment and related systems by a person primarily engaged in the telecommunications and related information systems industry. This exemption does not include the construction, installation, maintenance, repair and renovation of a fire alarm system. 
(Code 1988, § 8.51; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 4, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-109. - Master and journeyman license; apprentice electrician registration. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the occupation or trade of master, journeyman or apprentice electrician in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical wiring equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat, power or medical purposes in or about buildings and/or structures within the city without having first obtained a license or apprentice registration as herein provided. A violation of this provision by a person acting as a master or journeyman electrician shall be a civil infraction. A violation of this provision by a person acting as an apprentice electrician shall be a minor violation. 
(b)  All electrical work done by apprentice electricians shall be performed under the direct personal supervision of a journeyman or master electrician who shall be on the premises at all times when such apprentice electricians are performing such work. Failure to provide such supervision shall be a civil infraction committed by the electrical contractor supervising the jobsite. 
(Code 1988, § 8.53; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 5, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-110. - Fire alarm specialty technician's license. 
    No person shall engage in the occupation or trade of fire alarm specialty technician in or about buildings and/or structures within the city without having first obtained a license. A violation of this provision shall be a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.54; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 6, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-111. - Fire alarm apprentice registration. 
(a)  An individual employed as a fire alarm specialty apprentice technician shall register with the state electrical administrative board within 30 days after employment. A violation of this provision shall be a minor violation. 
(b)  The ratio of fire alarm specialty technicians to registered fire alarm specialty apprentice technicians shall be on the basis of one fire alarm specialty technician to two registered fire alarm specialty apprentice technicians. The building official shall enforce the ratio on a job site basis. Failure to maintain this ratio shall be a civil infraction committed by the electrical contractor supervising the jobsite. 
(Code 1988, § 8.55; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 7, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-112. - Sign specialty technician licenses. 
    No person shall engage in the occupation or trade of sign specialty technician in or about buildings and/or structures within the city without having first obtained a license. A violation of this section shall be a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.56; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 8, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-113. - Requirement to carry identification card and picture identification. 
    An individual licensed or registered under this article shall carry an identification card issued by the state department of labor and economic growth at all times while engaged in activity that is subject to licensure or registration under this article and shall also carry not less than one piece of identification containing the individual's picture. The individual, upon request of the building official, an inspector or other authorized representative, shall produce the identification card as well as the picture identification. An individual who fails to produce the identification card is not considered in violation of this section if such individual produces the card within 24 hours after being requested by the building official, an inspector or other authorized representative, and presents it to the enforcing agency. Failure to produce any identification shall be considered a minor violation of this article by the individual as well as the electrical contractor supervising the jobsite. 
(Code 1988, § 8.58; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 10, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-114. - Minor violations and fines. 
    All of the following violations are minor violations and carry the following prescribed fines: 
(1)  Failure of an apprentice to register with the state electrical administrative board as required by this article, the fine is $5.00. An additional fine of $50.00 shall be assessed if the apprentice fails to register within 15 business days notification. 
(2)  Failure to produce pictured identification and a license or apprentice registration within one business day after requested by the building official, an inspector or other authorized representative of the enforcing agency, the fine is $25.00. If the identification and the license or apprentice registration is not produced, an additional fine of $75.00 shall be assessed after three business days. 
(3)  Employment by an electrical contractor of a person who is in violation of subsection (2) of this section, the fine is $25.00. If the employed person does not produce pictured identification and a license or apprentice registration pursuant to this article, then the employing electrical contractor shall be fined an additional $75.00. This fine will be imposed three days after the time provided in subsection (2) of this section has expired. 
(Code 1988, § 8.59; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 464, § 11, 9-25-2001) 
Sec. 6-115. - Civil infractions and fines. 
    A person licensed or registered under this article who commits a violation of this article that is designated as a civil infraction or a person not licensed or registered under this article who is performing any activity regulated by this article and is not exempt from licensure or registration under this article, is guilty of a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 per day for each day the violation occurs, except that a fine shall not exceed $5,000.00 in total per violation. A second or subsequent violation is punishable by a fine of not less than $2,000.00 per day for each day a violation occurs, except that a fine shall not exceed $10,000.00 in total per violation. 
(Code 1988, § 8.60; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995) 
Sec. 6-116. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person who violates this article by committing an act that is not designated as a civil infraction or a minor violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as prescribed in section 1-15. Section 1-15 provides for punishment by a fine of not more than $500.00 and costs of the prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1988, § 8.61; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 1-17-1995) 
Secs. 6-117-6-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 6-146. - Adoption and purpose. 
    There is hereby adopted that certain code known as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, as the property maintenance code of the city for the purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of building and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 6-147 of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.161; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 3-3-1998; Ord. No. 495, § 1, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 10-16-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 6-147. - Additions, insertions, deletions and amendments. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code adopted by the provisions of this article as the property maintenance code of the city is hereby amended, changed and altered as set forth in this article. 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan, hereafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 103.1 Code official. References to the "code official" shall be deemed to refer to the city code enforcement officer. 
Section 103.2 Deleted. 
Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the building official in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be determined by resolution of the city commission from time to time adopted. 
Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with section 107 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
Section 106.4 Violation; penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any other requirements thereof, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
Sections 110.1 through 110.4 Deleted. The provisions contained in section 110, Demolition, of the property maintenance code, shall be and hereby are deleted. 
Section 111.2 Board of appeals. The city construction and property maintenance board of appeals, created by section 6-26 of the City Code, shall serve as the board of appeals required by this property maintenance code. All references herein to the "board of appeals" or the "board," shall be deemed to refer to the construction and property maintenance board of appeals. 
Section 111.2.1 Deleted. 
Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
Section 302.4 Deleted. 
Section 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 through October 15, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception. Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operation of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories or guestrooms on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall supply heat during the period from October 1 through May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68° Fahrenheit (20° Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required; provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in appendix D of the plumbing code. 
2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° Fahrenheit (-1° Celsius) a minimum temperature of 65° Fahrenheit (18° Celsius) shall be maintained. 
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 through May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° Fahrenheit (18° Celsius), during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Code 1988, § 8.162; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 3-3-1998; Ord. No. 495, § 2, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 554, § 2, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 6-148. - Copy of code. 
    A complete copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, adopted by reference herein together with all amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 554, § 3, 10-16-2012) 
Secs. 6-149-6-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 556, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2012, amended art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VII, §§ 6-183-6-191, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1988, §§ 8.130-8.138. 
State Law reference- Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.538 et seq. 

Sec. 6-183. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means construction and property maintenance board of appeals. 
    Dangerous building means any building or structure that has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city, it shall be considered that such dwelling does not meet the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Whenever any portion of the building or structure has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the damage and does not meet the minimum requirements of this article or any state construction code, for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location; 
(3)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
(4)  Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required in the case of new construction by this article or the state construction code; 
(5)  Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give away; 
(6)  Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used; 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts; 
(8)  Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the health officer, or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within; 
(9)  Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at a door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers or 
(10)  Whenever any building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 of the occupational code, 1980 PA 299, MCL 339.2401 to 339.2518. For purposes of this subdivision, "building or structure" includes, but is not limited to, a commercial building or structure. This subdivision does not apply to either of the following: 
a.  A building or structure if the owner or agent does both of the following: 
1.  Notifies a local law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the building or structure is located that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given to the local law enforcement agency by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied. 
2.  Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with applicable building and property maintenance codes. 
b.  A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies a local law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the dwelling is located that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the notice prescribed by this subsection shall notify the law enforcement agency not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subsection, "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling, including, but not limited to, a vacation home, hunting cabin, or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or a member of the owner's family during part of a year. 
    Enforcing agency means the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 6-184. - Prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building as defined in section 6-183. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 6-185. - Notice and order. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice and order of the dangerous and unsafe condition. 
(b)  Such notice shall be directed to the owner, agent or lessee. If no owner, agent or lessee is known, then the notice shall be directed to each owner of or party in interest in the building in whose name the property is listed on the last tax assessment records. 
(c)  The notice shall be in writing and include a description of the property sufficient for identification and may require the owner of the building or premises, within 48 hours, to commence either the required alterations, repairs, or improvements, or the demolition and removal of the building and structure or portions thereof. All such work shall be completed within such period of time as the enforcing agency shall determine to be reasonable to accomplish the work, not to exceed 30 days, which period shall be stated in the notice. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof, to be vacated forthwith and not to be reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcing agency. 
(d)  All notices and orders shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom they are directed personally, or in lieu of personal service, may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice and order is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice and order, a copy thereof shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(e)  The enforcing agency shall file a copy of the notice and order of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the board. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 6-186. - Failure to comply; order to show cause; notice lis pendens. 
    If, at the expiration of any time limit in the notice provided for in section 6-185, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice and order to show cause to the owner of the building. The notice and order to show cause shall specify the conditions making the building or structure dangerous, the action necessary to alleviate the dangerous condition, and shall inform the owner that the city will do the work necessary to alleviate the dangerous condition and assess the costs thereof against the premises if the work is not completed by the owner within a specified time period. The notice shall further inform the owner of the time and place at which he may have an opportunity for a hearing before the board to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe. Notice shall be given to the owner in the same manner as provided in section 6-185 and service of the notice shall be accomplished at least ten days prior to hearing. A copy of the notice and order to show cause shall be served on the occupant of the premises, if any, and a copy shall be filed by the enforcing agency with the county register of deeds. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 6-187. - Hearing; decision by board. 
(a)  The board shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. The board shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(b)  If it is determined by the board that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, the board shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply herewith. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 6-188. - Failure to comply with order of board. 
    If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order under section 6-187, the enforcing agency shall cause such building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 6-189. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-190. - Assessment of costs. 
(a)  The cost to the city of the demolition or of making a building safe shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer, who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. The costs referred to in this subsection shall include, but are not limited to, attorney fees, title search costs, recording and termination fees related to lis pendens and administrative fees. 
(b)  The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the same within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next tax roll and the same shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes by the city. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 6-191. - Judicial review. 
    An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the board under section 6-187 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Secs. 6-192-6-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan historical commission, MCL 399.1 et seq.; municipal historical commissions, MCL 399.171 et seq.; Local Historic Districts Act, MCL 399.201 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-221-6-248. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC DISTRICT STUDY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 6-249. - Creation. 
(a)  The city commission may create from time to time an Historic District Study Committee, which shall consist of not less than five or more than nine members, as established by resolution of the city commission. Each member shall be a resident of the city or a representative of a duly organized local historic preservation organization. Members shall be appointed by the city commission and serve without compensation. 
(b)  The committee shall be established pursuant to the local historic districts act, Public Act No. 169 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 8.301; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-250. - Appointment of committee. 
    Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating an historic district, the city commission shall appoint a Historic District Study Committee. Insofar as possible, members should have experience in conducting basic research, library studies, or archival information studies. At least one member shall be from a duly organized local historic preservation organization. 
(Code 1988, § 8.302; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-251. - Terms of members. 
    The city commission shall appoint the members of the Historic District Study Committee for the duration of a particular task or for a specific term, but in no case shall such term exceed a period of three years. Members of the committee can be removed by majority vote of the city commission. Vacancies occurring, other than through the expiration of a term, shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 8.303; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-252. - Organization. 
    The Historic District Study Committee shall elect a chairman from its membership. The committee shall also appoint a secretary who shall keep a record of all its proceedings. 
(Code 1988, § 8.304; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-253. - Meetings. 
    The Historic District Study Committee shall establish a schedule of regular meetings of the committee. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by any two members of the committee on at least 18 hour's notice. The committee shall adopt rules of conduct. 
(Code 1988, § 8.305; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-254. - Duties. 
(a)  The Historic District Study Committee shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved by the state department of history, arts and libraries. 
(2)  Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic resources located within that district. 
(3)  Determine the total number and relative percentages of historic and nonhistoric resources within a proposed historic district. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60, and criteria established or approved by the bureau, if any. 
(4)  Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that addresses, at a minimum, all of the following: 
a.  The charge of the committee. 
b.  The composition of the committee membership. 
c.  The historic district or districts studied. 
d.  The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on maps. 
e.  The history of each proposed historic district. 
f.  The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
(5)  Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendation to the planning commission, the bureau, the state historical commission, and the state Historic Preservation Review Board. 
(6)  Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by such Act. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the city. 
(c)  After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the city commission shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the city commission, to take the following actions: 
(1)  The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the planning commission of the city commission. If the recommendation of the city commission is to establish historic districts, the final report shall include a draft of proposed ordinances. 
(2)  After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of historic districts, the city commission may, at its discretion, introduce and pass or reject ordinances. If the city commission passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one or more historic districts, the city commission shall file a copy of those ordinances, including a legal description of the properties located within the historic districts, with the register of deeds. 
(d)  A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a committee in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 8.306; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-255. - Reports. 
    The Historic District Study Committee shall prepare and submit to the city commission an annual report of the activities of the committee and tentative outline of its program for the ensuing year for a committee whose term exceeds one year. 
(Code 1988, § 8.307; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-256. - Procedures for establishing, modifying, or eliminating historic district resolutions. 
(a)  The city commission may, at any time, establish by ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, the city commission shall, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, comply with the procedures set forth in section 6-254, and shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action. To conduct these activities, the city commission may retain the initial committee or establish a committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. 
(b)  If considering elimination of a historic district, the committee shall follow the procedures set forth in section 6-254 for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(1)  The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled establishment of the district. 
(2)  The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined. 
(3)  The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(c)  Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the city commission may, at its discretion, establish a historic commission and require that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to such commission as prescribed by MCL 399.205 and 399.209. The historic commission shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as the city commission approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  If the city commission determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district, the commission may, by resolution, declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The commission may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied. 
(Code 1988, § 8.308; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 5-6-2003) 
Secs. 6-257-6-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Historic district commission, MCL 399.204. 

Sec. 6-276. - Creation; composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created the city historic district commission that shall consist of nine members. Each member shall be a resident of the city. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  The historic district commission is established under the LHDA, Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 8.321; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 486, § 1, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-277. - Selection of members. 
    At least one member of the historic district commission shall be appointed from a list of citizens submitted by one or more duly organized and existing local historic preservation organizations, and at least one member shall be an architect duly registered in this state if such person is available for appointment. Members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. 
(Code 1988, § 8.322; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003) 
Sec. 6-278. - Terms of members. 
    The members of the historic district commission shall serve for terms of office of three years; except that three members of the first historic district commission shall be appointed to serve for a term of one year, three for terms of two years and three for terms of three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1988, § 8.323; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 483, § 2, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 486, § 2, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-279. - Removal of members; vacancies. 
(a)  Members of the historic district commission may, after a public hearing, be removed for cause. 
(b)  A vacancy occurring in the membership of the historic district commission for any reason shall be filled within 60 calendar days by a person appointed by the mayor for the duration of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1988, § 8.324; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003) 
Sec. 6-280. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  The historic district commission shall, from its appointed members, elect a chairman and a vice-chairman. The chairman shall preside over the historic district commission. The vice-chairman shall, in the case of absence or disability of the chairman, perform the duties of the chairman. The historic district commission shall also elect a secretary, who shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the historic district commission. 
(b)  Five members of the historic district commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. The historic district commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, which shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings. The historic district commission shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the chairman or by at least two members of the historic district commission. The historic district commission shall keep a full and complete record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be available to the city commission and to the public upon request. 
(c)  The business that the historic district commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the open meetings act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of the meetings shall be given in a manner required by the open meetings act. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the historic district commission. 
(d)  The concurring affirmative vote of five members of the historic district commission shall be required for approval of plans before it for review or for the adoption of any resolution, motion or other action. 
(e)  The historic district commission shall adopt design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties under the Local Historic Districts Act. 
(Code 1988, § 8.325; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 483, § 3, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 486, § 3, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-281. - Assistance. 
    The historic district commission may call upon the city manager for such services and data from the various departments as it may require. The historic district commission may recommend to the city commission the securing of such professional and consulting services as it may require; however, no expenditures of funds shall be made, or contracts entered into for providing such professional or consulting services, unless the same shall first be approved and authorized by the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 8.326; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003) 
Sec. 6-282. - Permit required. 
    A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district or, if required under section 6-283(c), work affecting the interior arrangements of a resource is performed within a historic district. The person proposing to do that work shall file an application for a permit with the city clerk. The application shall be immediately referred, together with all required supporting materials that make the application complete, to the historic district commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the historic district commission has acted on the application by issuing a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Notice to Proceed as prescribed in LHDA, Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). The city commission may establish a reasonable fee to process a permit application by resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 8.327; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003) 
Sec. 6-283. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the historic district commission to review all applications and supporting materials for permits for the construction, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of resources in a historic district and to determine whether or not a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed shall be issued. 
(b)  In reviewing plans submitted to it, the historic district commission shall follow the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR 67. The local historic commission shall also give consideration to the following: 
(1)  The historical or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area; 
(2)  The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area; 
(3)  The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; and 
(4)  Any other factor, including aesthetic value, which it deems relevant, including design review standards and guidelines which the historic district commission may adopt and maintain. 
(c)  The historic district commission shall act only on exterior features of a resource and shall not consider interior arrangements unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The historic district commission shall only use the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section as a basis for its decisions. 
(d)  If the historic district commission approves of the plans submitted to it for its review, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. The city building official shall not issue a building permit unless and until such certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the historic district commission. 
(e)  If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the historic district commission considers valuable to the local unit, state, or nation, and the historic district commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the local unit, state, or nation, the historic district commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(f)  Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the historic district commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the historic district commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the resource's occupants. 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances. 
(3)  Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner. 
(4)  Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(g)  The historic district commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to the building official or to another delegated official. The historic district commission shall provide to the delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this subsection. On at least a quarterly basis, the historic district commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, so issued for work to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(h)  Upon a finding by the historic district commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the historic district commission may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect. 
(2)  If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time as established by the building official, the historic district commission or its agents may enter the property upon obtaining an order from the Circuit Court and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be collected as a special assessment against the property in accordance with chapter XII, section 8 of the city Charter. 
(i)  When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the historic district commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the historic district commission may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the historic district commission may request the city commission to seek an order from the Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the historic district commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied as a special assessment against the property in accordance with chapter XII, section 8 of the city Charter. When acting pursuant to an order of the Circuit Court, the historic district commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 8.328; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 486, § 4, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-284. - Historic district commission; filings with delegated authority; duties of local public officials, employees, and department. 
    The historic district commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed, and denials of applications for permits with the inspector of buildings or other delegated authority. A permit shall not be issued until the historic district commission has acted as prescribed by this division. If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the inspector or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied with a written explanation by the historic district commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for historic district commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include notification of the applicant's rights of appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board and to the Circuit Court. The failure of the historic district commission to act within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the historic district commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the historic district commission shall be considered to constitute approval. No certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed shall be valid for a period exceeding one year from the date of approval. Thirty days prior to the expiration date, the applicant may make application for a six month extension with no fee. The applicant shall explain in writing why the work has not proceeded, what the current time frame is and why an extension should be granted. 
(Code 1988, § 8.329; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 486, § 5, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 6-285. - Appeal of decisions. 
    An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the state Historic Preservation Review Board of the state historical commission within 60 days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.330; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003) 
Sec. 6-286. - Ordinary maintenance. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district, or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the inspector of buildings or other duly delegated authority before the division was enacted. 
(Code 1988, § 8.331; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003) 
Sec. 6-287. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person that violates this division is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to payment of a civil fine in the amount of $500.00 plus costs. Nothing contained in this section shall limit the availability of injunctive relief to the city in appropriate circumstances or otherwise limit, in any way, such police and remedial actions as are available to the city under law. 
(Code 1988, § 8.332; Ord. No. 479, § 1, 8-19-2003) 
Secs. 6-288-6-307. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HISTORICAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6-308. - Hill Historic District. 
    The Hill Historic District is hereby established and is bounded and described as follows: Property in the Huntington Woods Subdivision, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 16, p. 34 of Plats, Oakland County Records, consisting of lots 104 through 139, lots 226 through 265, lots 487 through 499, and lots 648 through 675 of the Huntington Woods Subdivision along with two parks, the city park bounded by York, Borgman and Huntington (also known as Sidwell #25-21-104-011) and the city park bounded by Nadine, Pembroke and Salem (also known as Sidwell #25-21-155-001). 
(Ord. No. 490, § 1(8.341), 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 6-309. - Rackham Historic District 
    The Rackham Historic District is hereby established and is bounded and described as follows: Land in the City of Huntington Woods, County of Oakland, State of Michigan, more particularly described as follows: 
    Commencing at the south quarter corner of section 20, T.1N., R.11E.; thence N 02°33'21"W along the north-south quarter section line, 221.65 feet to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Interstate 696, (Walter P. Reuther Freeway); thence S 89°07'21"E. along said line, 43.08 feet to a point on the easterly line of Scotia Road, as widened to 86 feet by the Village of Huntington Woods in 1928, adopted by the City of Detroit and recorded on September 25, 1928 in J.C.C. Pages 2577-2578, said point being the point of beginning of the above described parcel; thence N.02°33'21"W along the easterly line of Scotia Rd., 1,932.36 feet to a line which is 50.0 feet south of the north line of Ludlow Ave., thence N 87°39'07"E. along said line, 2,661.39 feet; thence S 01°47'44"E along the easterly line of section 20, 2,126.68 feet; thence along the northerly right-of-way line of Interstate 696 for the remaining six courses, beginning with a curve, concave to the north, having an arc length of 285.02 feet, a radius of 1,882.96 feet and a long chord of 284.75 feet which bears N 84°19'15"W to a point of tangency; thence N 79°59'04"W, 198.86 feet to a point of curvature; thence 835.05 feet along the arc of a curve, concave to the south having a radius of 3,941.72 feet and a long chord of 833.49 feet which bears N 86°03'12"W to a point of tangency; thence S 87°52'39"W, 888.65 feet to a point of curvature; thence 298.59 feet along the arc of a curve, concave to the north, having a radius of 5,702.58 feet and a long chord of 298.55 feet which bears S 89°22'39"W to a point of tangency; thence N 89°07'21"W, 142.36 feet to the point of beginning, containing 120.7092 acres more or less. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1(8.342), 11-21-2006) 
Secs. 6-310-6-336. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES 

Sec. 6-337. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Fence: A structure serving to enclose or divide all or part of a lot, or to function as a boundary or barrier between two or more lots. 
    Hedge: A row of shrubs or trees used as a fence. 
    Wall: A fence built of solid material such as stone, brick, concrete or timbers (as used in a retaining wall). 
(Code 1988, § 8.20; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 9-19-1995; Ord. No. 441, § 1, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 559, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 6-338. - Application and permit required. 
    No person shall erect or rebuild any fence or wall unless such person shall first have applied for and received a permit therefor from the city manager or the city manager's designee. Information required on the application for a permit to build or rebuild a fence or wall shall include the name, address, and signature of the applying landowner and the proposed location, height, type, style, and materials of the proposed fence or wall. The city manager or the city manager's designee shall examine all applications and, if the application appears to comply with all provisions of this Code and does not appear to violate any law, and if all applicable fees have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 8.21; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 371, § 1, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 441, § 2, 3-14-2000) 
Sec. 6-339. - Fees. 
    The fees for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall be as determined by the city commission by resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 8.22; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 371, § 2, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 441, § 3, 3-14-2000) 
Sec. 6-340. - Structural requirements. 
(a)  Fences. Fences shall be constructed of an open pattern metal, woven wire, wood or vinyl, in such a manner so that there shall be either horizontal or vertical openings or both, of at least three inches in width provided for the full length or height of the fence, and provided further that said fence shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 50 percent of the total area. 
(b)  Walls. Walls on nonresidential property shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations of section 40-220. Walls on residential property shall be constructed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A wall shall not be constructed in a dedicated easement or within four feet of the location of an underground utility; and 
(2)  A wall that exceeds 30 inches in height shall be a minimum of eight inches in width with a reinforced trench foundation 42 inches below grade and a minimum of four inches wider than the wall to be constructed. 
(c)  Openings. The openings in a fence may be reduced or eliminated, or a solid wall may be constructed if: 
(1)  The fence or wall will be located in a required side or rear yard, and the property owner adjacent to the proposed fence or wall approves, in writing, such variations or deviations of the restrictions contained in this article, and such written consent accompanies the application for a fence or wall permit; 
(2)  The fence or wall will be located in the rear yard adjacent to a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  The fence or wall will enclose a pool or hot tub if part of the enclosure is in a required side or rear yard. Subsection (c)(1) of this section shall also apply. 
(Code 1988, § 8.23; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 441, § 4, 3-14-2000) 
Sec. 6-341. - Height and location requirements. 
(a)  Maximum height limit. No fence or wall shall exceed four feet in height, and no hedge shall exceed six feet in height as measured from the surface of the ground, except as follows: 
(1)  Where there is a change in grade between adjacent properties, a fence or wall which runs along the change in grade and defines or outlines the lot line may exceed four feet in height, as measured from the downhill property, so long as it does not exceed four feet as measured from the uphill property. 
(2)  A fence or wall may be constructed up to six feet in height, provided that the property owner adjacent to the proposed fence or wall shall approve, in writing, of the additional height and such written consent shall accompany the application for a fence or wall permit, and provided further that the fence or wall meets all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  On a corner lot, a fence or wall may be constructed up to six feet in height, provided it is constructed in the rear yard and adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
(4)  To protect adjacent residential uses, fences or walls up to six feet in height are permissible in the side or rear yards of nonresidential properties which are adjacent to residential property. 
(5)  To protect adjacent residential uses, fences or screening walls up to eight feet in height are permissible upon nonresidential property used to store dump trucks, cars or heavy equipment, or upon which salt, sand or other raw materials are stockpiled. 
(6)  To protect adjacent property and passers-by, fences up to 20 feet in height are permissible upon public property used for parks, playgrounds, ballfields and golf courses. 
(7)  The columns or support posts of a fence or wall may exceed the height limit of the fence or wall by no more than eight inches. 
(b)  In side yard. No fence, wall or hedge shall be erected, constructed, planted or rebuilt in the side yard (as defined in section 40-1), except as follows: 
(1)  A house having a side door entrance may have a fence or wall up to four feet in height extending toward the front of the house for distance not to exceed three feet in front of the side door. 
(2)  A fence or wall up to six feet in height may be located forward of the rearmost portion of a house; provided that, the fence or wall shall be no further forward than the rear corner of the house that is adjacent to the side yard where the fence or wall will be located; and provided further, that the side yard area to be enclosed contains a side or rear door access. 
(3)  A hedge, not to exceed four feet in height, may be located in the required side yard on either side of the house; however, if the proposed hedge is adjacent to a neighbor's driveway, the property owner adjacent to the proposed hedge shall approve of the hedge, in writing, and such written consent shall be filed with the city manager, or the city manager's designee, prior to the planting of the hedge. 
(4)  Where the side yard is adjacent to Coolidge Highway, a fence, wall or hedge is permitted up to six feet in height. 
(5)  On corner lots, the side yard adjacent to the street shall be treated as an additional front yard and subject to the requirements in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  In front yard. No fence, wall or hedge shall be erected, constructed, planted, maintained or rebuilt in the front yard (as defined in section 40-1), except a hedge which is less than 30 inches in height may be located in the front yard, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The total length, regardless of location, shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot width as measured along the front lot line. 
(2)  The outer growth of the hedge shall not project over the lot line. 
(d)  Maximum height for driveway clearance. No fence, wall or hedge which obstructs the visibility of sidewalks or streets from any driveway on the property, or any pre-existing driveway on an adjacent property, may exceed 30 inches in height if located within ten feet of the intersection of the driveway edges and the sidewalk. 
(e)  Grandfathering of existing fences and walls. Fences and walls already erected as of the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective may be maintained at their current height so long as such is in compliance with the law existing at the time of erection. However, the height of any such fence or wall must be made to comply with this section if any structural alteration is made, or if any structural alteration is necessary to safely or properly maintain the fence or wall. All hedges must be maintained at or below the height limits specified herein whether planted before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1988, § 8.24; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 380, § 3, 9-19-1995; Ord. No. 392, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 441, § 5, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 559, § 2, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 6-342. - Clearance from city property. 
(a)  City sidewalk. A fence, wall or outer growth of a hedge shall be a minimum of one foot from any city sidewalk. 
(b)  City right-of-way. No fence, wall or hedge may be located in the city's right-of-way, including but not limited to, that area between the street and the sidewalk. For any fence or wall equipped with a gate, such gate shall not swing over the city's right-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 8.25; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 380, § 4, 9-19-1995; Ord. No. 441, § 6, 3-14-2000) 
Sec. 6-343. - Other restrictions. 
(a)  Vacant lots. On a vacant lot, no fence or wall may be erected nearer to the front lot line than 50 feet. 
(b)  One fence per lot line. Only one fence or wall may be erected along a common lot line in the combined required side and rear yards. 
(c)  Dog runs prohibited. No fence or wall shall be used for the exclusive containment of a dog. 
(Code 1988, § 8.26; Ord. No. 349, § 2, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 371, § 4, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 380, § 5, 9-19-1995; Ord. No. 441, § 7, 3-14-2000) 
Sec. 6-344. - Finished face of partition fences and walls. 
    The finished face of any fence or wall shall face outside the permit holder's property, with the visible posts or supports being located on the inside of the fence or wall, unless: 
(1)  The fence is so constructed that both sides of the fence are the same (such as a board-on-board or shadow box fence); or 
(2)  The adjoining property owner consents in writing to allow the visible posts or supports to be located on the outside of the fence, and such written consent accompanies the application for a fence permit. If a neighbor chooses to add a second finished face to a fence: 
a.  A written consent from the owner of the fence shall accompany the application for a fence permit for the second finished face; and 
b.  The height of the second finished face shall not exceed the height of the original fence. 
(Code 1988, § 8.27; Ord. No. 349, § 2, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 371, § 5, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 380, § 6, 9-19-1995; Ord. No. 441, § 8, 3-14-2000) 
Sec. 6-345. - Dilapidated or dangerous fences and walls; blight. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner upon whose property the fences or wall are located to ensure that all fences or walls are installed and maintained plumb, with adequate support and footings, and in a safe and sightly manner. If the fences or walls are deemed to be on the lot line and the ownership is not known, it shall be the duty of both adjoining property owners to maintain the fences or walls in a safe and sightly manner. 
(b)  The building official of the city is hereby authorized to order the removal or repair of fences and walls that are dangerous, damaged, paint peeled, dilapidated, or otherwise in violation of this Code or state or federal law. 
(Code 1988, § 8.28; Ord. No. 349, § 2, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 371, § 6, 4-19-1994) 
Sec. 6-346. - Prohibited materials. 
(a)  No fence or wall shall be constructed, in whole or in part, of barbed wire or in such a manner as to attach any spike, nail, or other sharp point, instrument or material. 
(b)  No fence or wall shall be electrically charged or connected to an electrical current, except for a fence installed below ground as an element of an animal control system. 
(c)  No fence or wall shall be constructed of corrugated plastic or contain woven plastic materials. 
(Code 1988, § 8.29; Ord. No. 349, § 2, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 380, § 8, 9-19-1995; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 6-347. - Violations; remedies. 
(a)  A person who erects, installs or maintains any fence, wall or hedge in violation of any provision of this article, or who builds or constructs a fence, wall or hedge without a required permit, or in violation of the provisions of a permit, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Any fence, wall, or hedge erected, installed, or maintained in violation of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive process. Each day of maintenance contrary to this article after notice of violation shall be deemed an additional and distinct violation thereof. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, in any way, the police and remedial actions available to the city under the law. 
(Code 1988, § 8.30; Ord. No. 349, § 2, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 412, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 6-348. - Relief available. 
    An application for relief from sections 6-340 through 6-345, 6-347 and/or 6-349 may be filed with and granted in whole or in part by the zoning board of appeals. An application for relief from section 6-340 may be filed with and granted in whole or in part by the construction board of appeals. Relief may be granted by above-named boards only if it is shown that compliance with the applicable ordinance provision will result in undue hardship to the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 8.31; Ord. No. 349, § 2, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 441, § 9, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 5-24-2016) 
Sec. 6-349. - Zoo fencing and screening adjacent to Huntington Road. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to any zoo fencing or screening along the frontage of Huntington Road that is located within 120 feet of the Huntington Road centerline. 
(b)  Fence and screening requirements: 
(1)  Perimeter fence. 
a.  Definition: Fence directly abutting and parallel to Huntington Road. 
b.  Perimeter fence shall be a black chain link fence. Barbwire is permitted only at the top of the fence. Razor wire is prohibited. The planning commission may approve the use of another material. 
c.  No tarp shall be affixed or located within 15 feet of the perimeter fence. 
d.  The maximum permitted perimeter fence height is ten feet, including barbwire portion. 
(2)  Operation, service area, or indoor animal habitat. 
a.  Definition: An exterior area to the rear of a building that is used for zoo operations, services, or indoor animal habitat including, but not limited to, trash enclosure areas, outdoor storage, concession stands, utility areas, and building for animal habitat. 
b.  Operations, service area, or indoor animal habitat areas shall be screened either with a landscape screen located along the existing Huntington Road perimeter fence that provides a minimum of 80 percent opacity; or a fence of a natural material such as wood or bamboo. 
c.  The maximum permitted fence height for operation, service area, or indoor animal habitat areas is six feet. 
(3)  Outside animal habitat. 
a.  Definition: An exterior area in which animals are confined within enclosures, to be displayed, bred, cared for, or rehabilitated. 
b.  Outside animal habitat areas may be screened either by a fence of natural material such as wood or bamboo; or a tarp screening if said tarp is supplemented with landscape screening along the existing Huntington Road perimeter fence that provides a minimum 80 percent opacity. No tarp shall be located within 15 feet of the perimeter fence. 
c.  The maximum permitted fence height for an outside animal habitat area is ten feet. 
(4)  Construction area. 
a.  Definition: An exterior area where construction work is being undertaken. 
b.  Screening for a construction area shall only be valid for six months in length. Any period longer than six months in length shall require an extension from the zoning administrator. 
c.  The maximum permitted fence height for a construction area is eight feet. 
(5)  Other area. 
a.  Definition: Portion of zoo adjacent to Huntington Road that does not meet the definition of operations or service area, animal habitat, or construction area. 
b.  Only landscaping shall be permitted in these areas. 
(6)  For any portion of the zoo adjacent to Huntington Road that meets two or more of the fence type area definitions as set forth in subsections (b)(1)-(b)(5) of this section, the greater fencing or screening requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 2, 5-24-2016) 
Secs. 6-350-6-369. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 6-370. - Purpose. 
(a)  The installation and use of all central air conditioning equipment hereafter installed in the city, for the purpose of reducing the dry bulb temperature or decreasing the absolute humidity of air, whether for physical comfort air conditioning, refrigeration, processing or whatever other purposes, shall conform to this article. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all new refrigerating and air conditioning systems, to the reinstallation of used equipment, to alterations or additions to existing systems, and to existing systems regarding regulation of noise. 
(Code 1988, § 2.100) 
Sec. 6-371. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air conditioning system means an installation for maintenance, by heat removal, of temperatures which are not less than 60° Fahrenheit as applied to space within the buildings. 
    Air conditioning system and refrigeration system means any combination of equipment, whether compressor or other type, by which heat is removed from the air and from which the accumulated or effluent heat is wholly or partially removed by the use of water or air-cooled refrigerants. 
    Inspector means the chief inspector or the chief inspector's agent. 
    Manager means the city manager or such officer or agent as the city manager shall duly authorize to act in enforcement of these regulations. 
    Refrigeration system means an installation for maintenance, by heat removal, of temperatures which are less than 60° Fahrenheit. 
    System means any combination of apparatus, individual unit, group or collection of units supplied with water through any single customer service pipe connected to the public water system or using air-cooled refrigerants. 
(Code 1988, § 2.101) 
Sec. 6-372. - Permit required. 
    No person shall install, alter or make major replacements in any part of a central refrigerating or air conditioning system until such person has filed with the city and received an approval permit for the work specifically intended on each individual system. 
(1)  Blueprints required. Blueprints or suitable sketches shall be submitted for all central refrigeration or air conditioning systems installed showing the location of major units. 
(2)  Installation. An air conditioner may be installed outside the main building provided such air conditioner is in conformance with regulations of section 40-355 and section 14-56. For the purposes of this section, open patios shall not be considered a portion of the structure. 
(3)  Nuisance. No equipment used for central air conditioning and installed outside shall be operated in such a manner as to create a noise nuisance. 
(4)  Appeals. A person shall have the right to appeal the rulings of the inspector and manager to the city commission in those instances where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships stand in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the installation provisions. The person shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission and shall have the right to present evidence. In the case of every such variance appeal the city commission shall make specific findings of fact concerning the reason for allowing or disallowing the variance. 
(Code 1988, § 2.102; Ord. No. 307, § 1, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 489, § 1(2.102), 8-17-2004) 
Sec. 6-373. - Application for permit. 
    Application for permit shall be made to the inspector and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Location of the premises where installation is proposed. 
(3)  Name and address of the owners of the premises. 
(4)  Names of manufacturers of the units requiring water. 
(5)  Manufacturer's identification and classification of the refrigeration units. 
(6)  Manufacturer's rating of maximum refrigeration capacity of the unit or units under the conditions of the planned installation. Rating may be stated in tons per 24 hours or in BTU per hour. 
(7)  Horsepower of compressor prime mover, if unit is of compressor type. 
(8)  Where water conservation devices are required, to comply with section 6-378, the manufacturer's name, identification, classification and size of the conservation equipment. 
(9)  Elevation and plan showing general piping arrangement and details of all points of connection to building supply water piping. Piping directly attached to condenser units makeup supply into the tower pan and so forth. 
(10)  Size of water service connection required. 
(11)  Such additional information as shall be required by the inspector. 
(12)  Applications shall be filed in the name of the owner of the equipment, and signed by the owner or the owner's agent. Applications for installation shall designate a master plumber and electrical contractor duly qualified to receive permits under this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 2.103) 
Sec. 6-374. - Rated capacities. 
(a)  For the purposes of these regulations, in no event shall the rated capacity in tons be considered less than the following: 
(1)  Total maximum BTU per hour of capacity of the installation divided by 12,000; 
(2)  The nameplate horsepower of any compressor prime mover unit, for any air conditioning installation; or 
(3)  Two-thirds the nameplate horsepower of subsection (a)(2) of this section, for any refrigeration installation. 
(b)  In the absence of the required manufacturer's maximum rating according to section 6-373(6), the inspector may specify the tonnage of the installation at the ratings indicated by subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section; or, if these appear inadequate, then by whatever other measure of capacity appears to the inspector to be proper. 
(Code 1988, § 2.104) 
Sec. 6-375. - Inspection fees. 
    Inspection fees as fixed by resolution of the city commission shall be paid by applicants to the city treasurer at the time of the issuance of permits. Such fees shall be in addition to the required plumbing and electrical fees. 
(Code 1988, § 2.105) 
Sec. 6-376. - Permit to install plumbing and electrical wiring. 
(a)  Permits to install plumbing and electrical wiring will be issued by the inspector, but only in the names of licensed plumbers and electrical contractors who are duly registered to do work within the area of the premises involved, or to those in the employ of the municipal, state, or federal governments for premises in their respective charge. 
(b)  Within 48 hours following the completion of any work authorized by permit, notice of completion and request for inspection shall be returned in writing by the applicant receiving the air conditioning permit, to the office from which the permit was obtained. 
(Code 1988, § 2.106) 
Sec. 6-377. - Permit to operate. 
    After the final inspection and approval of the installation, a permit to operate or use the equipment will be issued by the inspector in the name of the owner of the equipment. A record of such inspection, approval and issuance shall be kept on file in the office of the inspector. 
(Code 1988, § 2.107) 
Sec. 6-378. - Water use and conservation. 
(a)  All water-cooled air conditioning equipment shall be of the approved water conserving type. 
(b)  Rated capacity. The capacity of a unit in tons shall be the greatest of the following: 
(1)  The manufacturer's rating in tons per 24 hours of equivalent ice making capacity. 
(2)  The 24-hour BTU rating of heat removal capacity divided by 288,000. 
(3)  The horsepower rating of the motor driving the refrigerant compressor. 
(4)  Nine-tenths of the horsepower rating of a motor driving both compressor and fan. 
(5)  Where none of the above ratings is available, or where question arises as to the accuracy of any rating, the rating shall be determined by measurement of power input to the compressor motor, the rate of fuel consumption, or other suitable means. 
(Code 1988, § 2.108) 
Sec. 6-379. - Approved water conserving type. 
    An approved water conserving type shall be one: 
(1)  Which is equipped with cooling tower, atmospheric condenser, spray pond, or other equipment which shall directly or indirectly cool refrigerant; 
(2)  Which can use water from the city water system only for makeup water to replace water lost by evaporation or by flushing of the equipment; 
(3)  Which uses an average of less than 12 gallons of water from the city water system per hour per ton of cooling capacity when the unit is operating; and 
(4)  Which has no piping connection to allow operation of the air conditioning unit by direct use of water from the city water system either in conjunction with or in place of such cooling tower, atmospheric condenser, spray pond, or other recirculating and heat-exchanging equipment. 
(Code 1988, § 2.109) 
Sec. 6-380. - Sanitary protection. 
(a)  On installations which operate with the use of water directly from the public supply system, every direct connection shall be equipped with a suitable brass-body, brass-fitted check valve installed in the branch supply line to each unit. 
(b)  Discharge connections for the disposal of wastewaters shall be in strict accordance with applicable rules and regulations of state and local health and regulatory bodies. 
(c)  Cooling waters which are to be reused for other purposes shall be provided with free, above the rim discharge before entering other equipment; otherwise, permission shall be obtained in writing from the inspector approving the proposed connections and use. 
(d)  On installations other than those described in this section, there shall be a physical break between the public water supply piping and the piping of the installation, so arranged as to make impossible back siphonage to the public water supply system. 
(Code 1988, § 2.110) 
Sec. 6-381. - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
(a)  Any permit which has been issued under this article to operate or use equipment may be suspended by the chief inspector for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of the holder of the permit to discontinue using water for the purposes covered by the permit, immediately upon notice to do so issued by the inspector during an emergency or to forestall an impending emergency. 
(2)  Alterations, changes of equipment or piping, improper operation or lack of maintenance which results in conditions that: 
a.  Are hazardous to the potable water supply either within the premises or in supply mains; or 
b.  Cause unnecessary waste of water. 
(3)  Failure to comply with the noise limiting provisions of this article. 
(b)  In case of failure of the holder of the suspended permit to rectify or correct the conditions which caused the suspension, the permit may be revoked by the city manager. The city manager shall give the holder written notice of the revocation of said permit and such holder may at any time within ten days of receipt of said notice ask for a hearing before the city manager. At such hearing, the holder of the revoked permit may produce witnesses and show cause, if the holder has any, why the holder's permit should be reinstated. After such hearing, the city manager shall have authority to either reinstate the permit or confirm the rescinding thereof and the city manager's decision thereon shall be final. 
(c)  In case of suspension or revocation of any license, the city manager shall have authority to disconnect the water supply from such refrigeration or water-cooled equipment. 
(Code 1988, § 2.111) 
Secs. 6-382-6-405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PRIVATE OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 6-406. - Legislative determination. 
    It is hereby determined that outdoor swimming pools may endanger the public safety unless carefully regulated and supervised. 
(Code 1988, § 6.61) 
Sec. 6-407. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Swimming pool means a structure either above or below grade, which has a normal water depth at any point of 24 inches or greater. 
(Code 1988, § 6.62; Ord. No. 327, § 1, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 6-408. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain an outdoor swimming pool without first making application to the city manager and obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 6.63) 
Sec. 6-409. - Application. 
    Such application shall show the name of the owner, the location of the proposed pool, the manner in which its use shall be supervised, the safety precautions to be made to protect those making use thereof, or who might be endangered thereby, and shall be accompanied by such other information necessary for the protection of the public health and safety as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 6.64) 
Sec. 6-410. - Fence. 
    No swimming pool shall be constructed, operated or conducted out-of-doors unless it is located within a fenced enclosure, which is to be locked at all times when unattended, so as to prevent trespassing children or adults from entering upon the premises and being injured. 
(Code 1988, § 6.65) 
Sec. 6-411. - Supervision. 
    No person shall maintain an outdoor swimming pool on their premises without providing adequate supervision at all times when the pool is in use so that no person may be injured or drowned therein. 
(Code 1988, § 6.66) 
Sec. 6-412. - Health standards. 
    Any outdoor swimming pool shall not be used unless adequate public health measures are periodically taken to ensure that the use thereof will not cause the spread of disease. The water of all pools shall be sterilized by chlorinated water. The current standards set by the state department of environmental quality and the county department of public health to protect public health in the use of such swimming pools are hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6.67) 
Secs. 6-413-6-437. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency telephone service enabling act, MCL 484.1201 et seq. 

Sec. 6-438. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to regulate emergency alarms and to prevent the disruption and interference with the telephone communication system of the public safety department by allowing alarm systems which, when activated, connect with the communications facility of the public safety department by means of the department's telephone system. 
(1)  No person engaged in the business of providing such services and facilities shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate the intrastate calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public telephone company, without the prior written consent of such subscriber. 
(2)  The term "telephone number," as used in this section, includes any additional numbers assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect with the subscriber to such primary number when the primary telephone number is in use. 
(Code 1988, § 8.201) 
Sec. 6-439. - Permit. 
    No person shall have or maintain an alarm system, as defined in section 6-441, in any dwelling or commercial building without first obtaining an alarm user permit from the department of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 8.202) 
Sec. 6-440. - Fees for permit. 
    The annual fee for residents registering screen system alarms or alarms which do not have direct dialing into the police telephone lines shall be such amount as may be prescribed by the city commission by resolution. Residents owning direct dial alarms will pay an annual fee of such amount as may be prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 8.203; Ord. No. 345, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 6-441. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means a device or assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police officers are expected to respond. In this article, the term alarm system shall include the terms automatic hold-up alarm system, burglar alarm system, intrusion alarm system, hold-up alarm system, and manual hold up alarm system. 
    Alarm user means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person using such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this article are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which that alarm system is located, of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or hold-up attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject to this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.204) 
Sec. 6-442. - Local alarms. 
    Alarm systems employing audible signals commonly referred to as local alarms shall be equipped with shutoff devices that automatically silence the audible signal after 15 minutes. 
(Code 1988, § 8.205) 
Sec. 6-443. - False alarms. 
    The term "false alarm" means any alarm condition which is registered at the public safety department or elsewhere not resulting from criminal activity for which the alarm was intended shall be considered a false alarm. 
(Code 1988, § 8.206) 
Sec. 6-444. - False alarm fee. 
(a)  The alarm user shall be required to pay to the city the sum as designated by resolution of the city commission for each additional false alarm in any given calendar year. No alarm user shall be required to pay said fee on the first occasion of a false alarm during any one calendar year, but shall be advised in writing of said false alarm and of the existence of this article. 
(b)  Alarm conditions caused by the following extenuating circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fee shall be charged by the city: 
(1)  Storm conditions. 
(2)  Alarm conditions being activated by persons working on the alarm system with prior notification to the public safety department. 
(3)  Alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of Michigan Bell Telephone Company facilities, or motor vehicle-utility pole accidents. 
(c)  Upon the response of a public safety officer to a false alarm call, a representative of the director of public safety shall notify the alarm user about this article. 
(d)  Within ten days of the date of receipt of this notification, the alarm user shall return to the public safety department with all monies due the city. Failure by the alarm user to pay shall cause a special assessment procedure to be initiated against the premises in question, as provided in sections 8, 9, and 10, chapter XII of the Charter of the city. 
(e)  If, upon receiving a false alarm fee notice, the alarm user wishes to request a waiver of the assessment of the fee due to extenuating circumstances, the alarm user may do so in writing within ten days of the assessment date. The notice to the public safety department shall contain documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within ten days of the receipt of the waiver request by the public safety department, the director of public safety shall make a determination on the waiver request and shall notify the alarm user of the decision. 
(Code 1988, § 8.207) 
Sec. 6-445. - Fire alarms. 
    No person shall have a fire alarm device that upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by any other means, initiates the automatic calling or dialing of, or makes a connection directly to a telephone of the public safety department. 
(Code 1988, § 8.208) 
Sec. 6-446. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.209) 
Secs. 6-447-6-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 6-476. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to regulate the use of outdoor lighting in all zone districts to ensure that light does not: 
(1)  Fall where it is not needed or wanted; 
(2)  Cause glare; 
(3)  Waste energy; and/or 
(4)  Change the character and ambiance of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(Code 1988, § 8.194; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 6-477. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Floodlight or spotlight means any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam. 
    Glare means light emitting from a fixture with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, cause annoyance or discomfort, and in extreme cases, cause momentary blindness. Glare is most often caused by the fixture itself rather than what the fixture is meant to illuminate. 
    Light trespass means light which is produced on one property and causes direct light on an adjacent or nearby property. 
    Shield means an opaque cover over the light source. 
(Code 1988, § 8.195; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 504, § 1, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 6-478. - Lighting regulations. 
(a)  On all residential property, high intensity discharge lighting including but not limited to high pressure sodium, mercury vapor and metal halide shall be prohibited. 
(b)  On all nonresidential property, high intensity discharge lighting shall be: 
(1)  Directed away from adjacent residences; 
(2)  Shielded to eliminate light trespass; and 
(3)  Shielded so all of the light emitted therefrom is directed toward and confined to the ground areas of lawns and parking lots. 
(c)  Light fixtures and supporting standards shall not exceed a height of 18 feet. 
(d)  Floodlights or spotlights shall be directed or shielded to eliminate light trespass. 
(e)  All light sources shall be stationary and constant in intensity and color, except that light sources operated by a motion sensor shall be permitted. Illuminated signs and other outdoor features shall not be a flashing, moving or intermittent type. 
(f)  No light shall be located, nor be of a type, to cause any obstruction, diversion, glare, confusion or hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 8.196; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 504, § 2, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 6-479. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to traffic control devices, streetlights, municipal lights, and temporary emergency lights. 
(Code 1988, § 8.197; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 504, § 3, 5-9-2006) 
Sec. 6-480. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.198; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 6-15-1999) 
Secs. 6-481-6-498. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TEMPORARY PORTABLE TOILETS, DUMPSTERS, STORAGE UNITS AND CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS 

Sec. 6-499. - Portable toilets. 
(a)  Temporary placement. A portable toilet may be temporarily placed upon a lot for which a valid building permit has been issued. Not more than one portable toilet may be located on a lot. The portable toilet must be removed prior to final inspection of the job. 
(b)  Location. The portable toilet may be located in the side or rear yard of the job site and at least five feet inside the side and rear property lines. If the building official determines that the portable toilet cannot be serviced in the side or rear yard, it may be located in the back half of the front yard, provided that it is not closer to the side lot lines than five feet. A portable toilet on a corner lot must be at least ten feet from the corner side lot line. The portable toilet shall not be located in the city right-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 8.180; Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-16-2000; Ord. No. 503, § 1(8.180), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 6-500. - Dumpsters. 
    A dumpster may be temporarily placed upon a lot for the purpose of removing construction materials or other debris. Not more than one dumpster may be located on a lot. It shall not contain any sign other than identification of the owner of the unit. The dumpster shall be emptied at least once in each 30 day-period and at no time shall the debris be visible over the top of the dumpster. 
(1)  Definition. For purposes of this section, a dumpster is defined as any container made of any material, hard or soft, intended for the purpose of holding or containing construction materials or other debris. Any such container of a size or configuration exceeding that which is approved for collection of contract waste by SOCRRA shall be considered a dumpster. 
(2)  Permit required. Prior to the placement of a dumpster, a permit must be obtained from the building official. A permit fee, established by resolution of the city commission, shall be paid at the time of application for the permit. The permit shall include the name and contact information of the contractor and/or entity responsible for servicing the dumpster. A dumpster placed on a property for which a valid building permit has been issued shall be removed prior to final inspection of the job. Any other dumpster shall be removed within 60 days from the date of issuance of the permit. 
(3)  Location. The dumpster may be located in the side or rear yard of the lot. If the building official determines that the dumpster cannot be serviced in the side or rear yard, it may be located in the back half of the front yard, closest to the building or home. The dumpster shall not be located in the city right-of-way or lawn extension. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and the permittee to assure compliance with this section. 
(Code 1988, § 8.181; Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-16-2000; Ord. No. 503, § 1(8.181), 10-25-2005; Ord. No. 558, § 1, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 6-501. - Portable storage units. 
    A portable storage unit, with or without wheels, may be temporarily placed upon a lot for the purpose of storing tools, construction materials or household items. Not more than one portable storage unit may be located on a lot. The portable storage unit shall not contain any sign other than identification of the owner of the unit. 
(1)  Permit required. Prior to the placement of a portable storage unit, a permit must be obtained from the building official. A permit fee, established by resolution of the city commission, shall be paid at the time of application for the permit. A portable storage unit placed on a property for which a valid building permit has been issued shall be removed prior to final inspection of the job. All other portable storage units shall be removed within 60 days from the date of issuance of the permit. 
(2)  Location. The portable storage unit may be located in the side or rear yard of the lot. If the building official determines that the unit cannot be stored in the side or rear yard, it may be located in the back half of the front yard. The portable storage unit shall not be located in the city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 1(8.182), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 6-502. - Construction trailers. 
    A construction trailer may be temporarily placed upon a lot in Zone 2A or Zone 3 for use as a temporary office to manage an on-site construction project for which a valid building permit has been issued. Not more than one construction trailer may be located on a lot. The construction trailer must be removed prior to final inspection of the job. 
(1)  Permit required. Prior to the placement of a construction trailer, a permit must be obtained from the building official. A permit fee, established by resolution of the city commission, shall be paid at the time of application of the permit. 
(2)  Use restrictions; location. The construction trailer shall at no time, be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. It must be in good repair and carry a current year's license plate as required by law. It shall not contain any sign other than identification of the owner of the trailer. The construction trailer shall not be located in the city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 1(8.183), 10-25-2005) 
Sec. 6-503. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who places a portable toilet, dumpster, portable storage unit or construction trailer upon a lot within the city in violation of the provisions of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.182; Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-16-2000; Ord. No. 503, § 1(8.184), 10-25-2005) 
Chapter 7 - RESERVED 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    License means any license, permit, certificate or any other type of approval required by this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 7.1) 
Secs. 8-2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 8-21. - License required. 
    No person, as owner, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise, shall operate, conduct, maintain, or otherwise be engaged in the carrying on of any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity, or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided for herein. 
(Code 1988, § 7.2) 
Sec. 8-22. - Multiple licenses required. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting, maintaining, or otherwise carrying on or engaging in any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement or privilege required by this Code to be licensed shall not relieve the person so licensed from the necessity of securing such other licenses or permits as may be required by this Code, except as specifically provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.3) 
Sec. 8-23. - State licensed business. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation of, conduct or carrying on of, any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such a license or permit is required by this Code. No license required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from state until such person shall submit evidence of having obtained the required state license or permit. 
(Code 1988, § 7.4) 
Sec. 8-24. - Application. 
    Unless otherwise provided for by law or ordinance or in this Code, every person required to obtain a license as provided for in this Code shall make application to the city clerk for such license on forms provided or prescribed by the city clerk. The application shall require such information to be provided as will enable the clerk to determine whether the applicant, if licensed, will serve the public in a fair, honest, safe and competent manner and in compliance with the requirements of this Code and all other applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The person making application for any license shall state under oath or affirmation that the information provided on such application is true and shall provide, under oath or affirmation, such other information relative to the granting of the license or to the applicant's qualifications as the clerk may require. No person shall make a false statement or false representation on any license application or in connection with the application for any license provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.5) 
Sec. 8-25. - License term. 
(a)  Except as the city commission may otherwise prescribe by ordinance or resolution, the license year applicable to all annual licenses for which a different license year is not specifically provided in this Code shall begin on July 1 of each year and shall end on June 30 of the following year. 
(b)  Any license not issued prior to the beginning of a license year shall be issued for the balance of the license year. 
(c)  Where provision is made in this Code for the issuance of a license for a period of less than one year, the effective date of such a license shall be provided on the face of the license by the city clerk and such license shall be in effect only for the period provided on the face of the license by the clerk. In the absence of a provision by the clerk on the face of a license, the license shall be valid only on the date upon which it is issued. 
(d)  Any person duly licensed on the effective date of this Code shall be deemed licensed hereunder for the balance of the current license year. 
(Code 1988, § 7.6; Ord. No. 336, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 8-26. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code and all provisions of the laws of the state applicable to the trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege for which the license is sought have been complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 7.7) 
Sec. 8-27. - Agreement by applicant. 
(a)  All licenses are issued subject to the following conditions, which shall be noted on the application form: 
(1)  The applicant agrees to permit inspection of the licensed premises and/or activity at reasonable times by any properly identified officer or employee of the city. 
(2)  The applicant agrees to the temporary suspension of the license without prior notice or hearing when, in the judgment of the appropriate officials, such a suspension is necessary to preserve the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(3)  The applicant agrees that the applicant will keep aware of and comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations during the term of the license. 
(4)  The applicant agrees that the applicant will not engage in the licensed trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege at any time after the license has expired, without having been reissued, or at any time when the license is suspended or revoked. 
(5)  No license shall be issued unless and until the applicant has paid all personal property taxes assessed the applicant and unless the applicant has paid all other debts due and owing to the city. 
(b)  Each applicant shall sign a statement indicating that the applicant has read the foregoing and agrees with its provisions prior to the issuance of any license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.8) 
Sec. 8-28. - Certification required. 
(a)  In each case where the certification by any of the following officials or employees is required, such certification shall be based upon such inspection or investigation as may, consistent with law, be deemed appropriate by the official or employee and shall indicate that the requirements following the official's or employee's title have been complied with. 
(1)  Public safety director's certificate. In all cases where the certification of the director of public safety is required, such certification shall be based upon a finding that the criminal history of the applicant, if any, has been checked and that there is no indication that the applicant cannot serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner; and, if the applicant for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege to be licensed within any building in the city that such premises comply with all the fire regulations of the state and of the city. 
(2)  Health officer. That all applicable health and sanitary requirements of the city, county and state have been complied with. 
(3)  Building official. That the building requirements of this Code and of the state have been complied with and that the zoning and other land use provisions of this Code will permit the licensed activity at its proposed location. 
(b)  Whenever the certification of any official or employee of the city is required, no license may be granted or become effective until such certification is made. 
(Code 1988, § 7.9; Ord. No. 336, § 2, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 8-29. - Bonds. 
    Where a provision of this Code requires that an applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the amount thereof is specified by the city commission, in the amount so required. The form of such bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Code 1988, § 7.10; Ord. No. 336, § 3, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 8-30. - Exemption from fee. 
    No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such person shall comply with all other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.11) 
Sec. 8-31. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk for cause as herein defined. Any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing officer or authority for cause as herein defined. In either case, a hearing shall be scheduled to be held by the city manager or the city manager's designee or the issuing authority. Depending upon the necessity for prompt action, the hearing shall be held in accordance with one of the following provisions: 
(1)  If there is no immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the hearing shall be held to determine whether the license or permit should be suspended or revoked. The holder of the license or permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation. The license or permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross examine testifying witnesses, and to make arguments concerning the factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(2)  If there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the license or permit may be suspended prior to the hearing. If a license or permit is suspended prior to the hearing, the hearing shall be commenced as soon as is practical, but in no case more than ten days after the suspension. The hearing shall be held to determine whether to terminate or extend the suspension or whether the suspension should be converted into a revocation of the license or permit. The holder of the license or permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the already-imposed suspension and for any contemplated future action. The license or permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross examine testifying witnesses, and to make arguments on factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body shall render a decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(b)  In any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this article, the rules of evidence shall be followed as far as practicable, but a hearing officer or body may admit and give probative effect to evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent people in the conduct of their affairs. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. Notice may be taken of facts within the general knowledge of the community. 
(c)  Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager or other appropriate hearing officer or body may appeal to the city commission; provided that a written request for such an appeal shall be filed within seven days of the date of the decision to be appealed. 
(d)  The city commission shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 15 days of the receipt of the request for appeal by the city clerk. The hearing shall be scheduled and held before the city commission. The factual record made in the hearing below shall constitute the basic record for the appeal. 
(e)  The city commission may, but need not, allow the presentation of additional evidence by a majority vote. Argument as to relevant factual and legal issues shall be permitted. The decision of the city commission shall be by majority vote. The city commission may affirm, reverse or modify any action taken relative to a license. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 1988, § 7.12; Ord. No. 336, § 4, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 8-32. - Issuance of license. 
    Where proper application is made for a license or permit and the conditions, requirements and prerequisites for the issuance of the license or permit have been met, the license or permit applied for shall be issued by the city clerk, provided that no cause, as that term is defined herein, exists for denial of the license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.13) 
Sec. 8-33. - Denial of a license. 
    Where proper application is made for a license or permit and such a license or permit is denied by the city clerk or other issuing person or body, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such a denial as elsewhere provided for by law or in this Code. If no such provision is made for an appeal of a denial, the applicant may appeal as set out herein. For purposes of this section, denial of a license shall include refusal to issue an original license or refusal to renew or reissue an existing license. Denial shall be made only for cause as herein defined. Within ten days of notification of denial of a license from the city clerk, an applicant shall file with the city clerk a written notice of appeal. The clerk shall refer a copy of this notice to the city manager. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the city clerk shall confer with the city manager or the city manager's designee to set a hearing time as soon as is practical, but not later than ten days after the filing of the notice of appeal with the city clerk. The hearing provided for may be conducted by the city manager or the city manager's designee and it shall be conducted as provided for in section 8-31, except that the issue to be determined is whether the denial of the license was proper. The person conducting the hearing shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(Code 1988, § 7.14) 
Sec. 8-34. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees required by this article for license applications shall be paid to the city clerk prior to submission of the application. Fees required by this article for the issuance of a license shall be paid to the city clerk prior to the issuance of the license. No fees shall be refunded. 
(b)  The amount of every fee required to be paid to obtain any license to engage in the operation, conduct, or carrying-on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by this article shall be determined by the city commission by resolution. No license shall be issued or become effective until the applicant has paid such fees, if any. 
(Code 1988, § 7.15; Ord. No. 336, § 5, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 8-35. - License reissuance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of all persons engaging in any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege required to be licensed to obtain all licenses required by this article prior to engaging in or continuing in the licensed trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege. To assist in the reissuance of licenses to license holders, the city clerk may send a license renewal application and invoice for the license fee to license holders prior to the end of a license year. Upon receipt of the completed application and the appropriate fee, and after such investigation as the clerk deems necessary, the clerk may issue a license for the following year. If a licensee fails to file an application for renewal and/or fails to pay the license renewal fee prior to the expiration of a license year, that application shall be considered to be an application for a new license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.16) 
Sec. 8-36. - Exhibition of a license. 
    Where certain premises are licensed or where a licensed trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege is carried on at a fixed place or establishment, all licenses shall be conspicuously displayed upon the premises, or at the fixed place or establishment. All licenses shall be displayed in an area of the premises, fixed place or establishment that is open to the public. Where there is no premises, fixed place or establishment, the licensee shall have the license or licenses issued in the possession of the licensee at all times when conducting, carrying on, or otherwise engaging in the licensed trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege. The license shall be promptly displayed upon the request of any police officer or any properly identified officer. 
(Code 1988, § 7.17) 
Sec. 8-37. - Exhibition on vehicle and machine. 
(a)  Each license granted for the operation of a vehicle as required under this Code shall include the issuance of a tag, insignia, license plate or number. This tag, insignia, license plate or number shall be prominently displayed on the vehicle in a place where it can readily be seen and read at all times when the vehicle is being used in the licensed activity. 
(b)  Every person who owns or operates any vending machine, amusement device or other coin-operated device which is required to be licensed under this Code shall conspicuously display on each such machine or device their name, address and city license number, in a form approved by the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 7.18) 
Sec. 8-38. - Displaying invalid license and surrender of invalid license. 
    No person shall display any expired license, any license for which a duplicate has been issued, or any license which has been suspended or revoked, nor shall any person display any license which has not been duly and regularly issued to or on behalf of the person displaying it for the trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege in, at, or for which the license is displayed. It shall be the duty of every licensee or any employee, agent or representative of the licensee, to surrender to any properly identified representative of the city, upon demand, any license which is expired, suspended, revoked, altered, amended, modified, changed or damaged or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1988, § 7.19) 
Sec. 8-39. - Transfer, alteration or misuse of a license. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable or assignable unless specifically and explicitly authorized by this Code. No person shall transfer or assign or attempt to transfer or assign any license and no person shall receive or attempt to receive a transferred or assigned license. No person shall, except as authorized by this Code or by the city clerk, write upon, alter, amend, modify, change or damage any license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.20) 
Sec. 8-40. - Revocation. 
    In addition to any other penalties or actions permitted or authorized by this Code, any transfer or assignment of a license or any attempted transfer or assignment shall be void and shall result in the automatic revocation of the license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.21) 
Sec. 8-41. - Curb stands prohibited. 
    No person, whether licensed pursuant to this article or not, shall park at the curb for the purpose of conducting business, nor shall any person establish a stand, booth or other place of business on any street, curb, sidewalk, public right-of-way or thoroughfare without having obtained permission to do so from the city manager. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit parking for the purpose of making deliveries or for the purpose of consummating sales to persons waiting at the curb, provided that the seller leaves the curb immediately after such deliveries or sales are completed. 
(Code 1988, § 7.22) 
Sec. 8-42. - Curb service prohibited. 
    No person shall engage in the giving of curb service. For purposes of this section, the term "curb service" means the use of a public street, highway, thoroughfare or right-of-way by a person operating from a store or other fixed location for the sale, solicitation for sale, or delivery of any goods, services or property. 
(Code 1988, § 7.23) 
Sec. 8-43. - Responsibility. 
    Any person who aids, abets, counsels, procures, commands or assists in the commission of any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a principal. 
(Code 1988, § 7.24) 
Sec. 8-44. - Cause defined. 
    As used throughout this article, the term "cause" means the doing or omitting of any act, the permitting of any condition to exist in any trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege for which a license is provided under the provisions of this article, or upon the premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1)  A violation of this article. 
(2)  A violation of any other applicable federal, state or local law, ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(3)  Unlawful or fraudulent in nature. 
(4)  Beyond the scope of the license granted. 
(5)  Abandonment of the licensed trade, business, profession, occupation, amusement, activity or privilege. 
(6)  An unfair or deceptive act or practice as defined in section 3 of the Michigan consumer protection act, Public Act No. 331 of 1976 (MCL 445.903). 
(Code 1988, § 7.25) 
Secs. 8-45-8-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MERCHANTS AND COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES 

Sec. 8-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial business means any business for the sale of any goods, wares, or merchandise, whether at wholesale or to the public at retail, as well as the manufacture or assembly of goods, or the furnishing of any service to the public for a fee or charge, or providing public amusement or recreational facilities for a fee or charge. 
    Merchant means any person engaged in any commercial business within the city not otherwise licensed under the provisions of this Code, who occupies in whole or in part, any room, building, land, public or private, or premises for the carrying on of such business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.31; Ord. No. 456, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-63. - Activities excluded. 
    The activities of peddlers, solicitors, commercial travelers, persons conducting enterprises or making sales on behalf of any recognized charitable, religious or public purpose shall not be deemed conducting a commercial business regulated pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.32; Ord. No. 456, § 1, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 8-64. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in any commercial business in the city without first having obtained a general merchant's license therefor, unless such business is licensed by the city pursuant to other specific regulatory ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 7.33; Ord. No. 456, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 8-65. - Separate locations. 
    Any person conducting a commercial business at more than one separate location in the city shall obtain a general merchant's license for each such location. 
(Code 1988, § 7.34; Ord. No. 456, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 8-66-8-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUCTIONEERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- UCC sales at public auction, MCL 440.2328; duties upon sales at auctions, MCL 446.26 et seq.; sales at public auction, new merchandise, MCL 446.51. 

Sec. 8-89. - License. 
    No person shall engage in the trade or business of auctioneer without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 7.51) 
Sec. 8-90. - Bond. 
    Before any such license is issued, the applicant shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the penal sum of such amount as may be prescribed by the city commission by resolution, which bond shall be conditioned for the due observance during the time of the license of all laws of the state and all provisions of this article. Any person aggrieved by the action of any such license shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 90 days after the expiration or conclusion of any action on said bond commenced while it was in force. 
(Code 1988, § 7.52; Ord. No. 338, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 8-91. - Prohibited activity. 
    No auctioneer shall knowingly misrepresent the quality of any goods sold by the auctioneer. No auctioneer shall accept any goods from any minor for sale at auction. 
(Code 1988, § 7.53) 
Sec. 8-92. - Auction accounts. 
    Every auctioneer shall keep a full and accurate account of all goods sold by the auctioneer, indicating the prior owner, the price at which sold, and to whom sold. Such account shall be open for inspection by any public safety officer at any reasonable time. No auctioneer shall fail to make such account accessible to any public safety officer upon demand. 
(Code 1988, § 7.54) 
Secs. 8-93-8-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq. 

Sec. 8-113. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in a temporary business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at retail within the city from any lot, premises, building, room or structure, including railroad cars, without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety and city treasurer. Persons having regularly established places of business in the city, who are not otherwise subject to this article, shall not become subject thereto because of making incidental sales or deliveries direct from railroad cars. 
(Code 1988, § 7.71) 
Sec. 8-114. - Temporary business. 
    Every person engaged in the retail sale and delivery of goods, wares or merchandise, shall be deemed to be engaged in carrying on a temporary business unless their goods, wares or merchandise shall have been assessed for taxation in the city during the current year. 
(Code 1988, § 7.72) 
Sec. 8-115. - Indebtedness to the city. 
    No license shall be granted to any person owing any personal property taxes or other indebtedness to the city, or who contemplates using any personal property on which personal property taxes are owing, in the operation of such business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.73) 
Sec. 8-116. - Benefit sales. 
    Any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise on behalf of and solely for the benefit of any recognized charitable or religious purpose shall, after meeting all other requirements, be granted a license without payment of a business license fee. 
(Code 1988, § 7.74; Ord. No. 339, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Secs. 8-117-8-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GARAGES, USED CAR SALES AND FILLING STATIONS 

Sec. 8-146. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Filling station means any building or lot having pumps and storage tanks where petroleum products, or accessories for motor vehicles, are sold or offered for sale at retail. 
    Garage means any building or lot where the business of repairing or storing motor vehicles is carried on and shall be deemed to include any building or lot where hammering, pounding, body bumping, welding or other noisy function in connection with the repairs of motor vehicles is carried on, whether or not the operator engages in a business of motor vehicle repair available to the public. 
    Used car sales means the business of keeping used motor vehicles within any building or on any lot for display or sale. 
(Code 1988, § 7.91) 
Sec. 8-147. - License required. 
    No person shall operate any garage or filling station or engage in the business of used car sales without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety and the building official. 
(Code 1988, § 7.92) 
Sec. 8-148. - Hours. 
    No garage or used car sales licensee shall, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning, permit on the licensed premises any bumping of car bodies, operation of welding machinery, hammering, pounding or other excessively noisy function, but may conduct office work, vehicle storage, receiving and discharging vehicles or emergency service not involving excessive noise or nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 7.93) 
Sec. 8-149. - General regulations. 
    Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No automobile or vehicle shall be driven across any sidewalk except upon a driveway where the sidewalk has been reinforced to a thickness of six inches, and with an approaching apron of cement. The location of such driveway shall first be approved by the director of public safety and shall not be so located as to unnecessarily endanger the public safety. 
(2)  No licensee shall permit the storage of vehicles upon premises not owned or leased by the licensee. 
(3)  The repair of motor vehicles shall be conducted exclusively within a completely enclosed building. 
(4)  Every licensee shall, at all times, keep a full and complete written record of the ownership, date of receipt, type of work to be done, or storage to be had, as to every motor vehicle and motor vehicle part on the premises. 
(5)  No motor vehicle shall be parked or stored, except in a completely enclosed building, for a period of time longer than 12 hours, nor between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following morning. The parking or storing of any motor vehicle by any licensee in violation of this section shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.95) 
Sec. 8-150. - Gasoline pumps. 
    The location of gasoline filling pumps and tanks on any licensed premises, shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  Every pump or gasoline filling device must be equipped with protective fire insulation so that a fire near said pump or device will not cause the gasoline within the pump or storage tank leading to the pump to burn or explode. 
(2)  Gasoline filling pumps shall be located at least 14 feet from any sidewalk. 
(3)  Tanks to contain gasoline shall be buried below ground at least three feet and the lead line from such tank to the filling pumps shall be equipped with adequate protective devices to ensure against fire or explosion. 
(Code 1988, § 7.96) 
Sec. 8-151. - Junk and dismantling. 
    No person licensed under the provisions of this article shall permit the licensed premises to be used as a junkyard for the storage or dismantling of automobiles or parts thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 7.97) 
Secs. 8-152-8-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 8-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mechanical amusement device means any machine containing no automatic pay-off device which may, on insertion of a coin or slug, operate or be operated or used as a game, contest or amusement of any sort or description, and which is so constructed that it may not be converted into an automatic pay-off device for the return or discharge of money or tokens, checks or merchandise or which provides no such pay-off by any means whatsoever, including, but not limited to, pinball machines and electronic video games which consist solely of electronic play appearing on a video screen. 
(Code 1988, § 7.141) 
Sec. 8-172. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, control, operate or keep any mechanical amusement device, as defined in section 8-171, in a commercial establishment within the city, without having procured a license therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 7.142) 
Sec. 8-173. - License fee. 
    The fee for such license shall be as prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city commission. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety and building official and unless a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant therefor are on file in a noncriminal identification file at the department of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 7.143) 
Sec. 8-174. - Age of licensee. 
    No person shall be granted a license to establish, operate, control, maintain, or keep any mechanical amusement device as defined in section 8-171 unless the person is over the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1988, § 7.144) 
Sec. 8-175. - Size of building. 
    No license shall be granted for a location having a building area of less than 1,000 square feet. 
(Code 1988, § 7.145) 
Sec. 8-176. - Limit of number of machines per location. 
    Each such license shall designate the address of the premises where there is established, operated, controlled, maintained, or kept the mechanical amusement device to which said license pertains and no licensee shall establish, operate, control, maintain or keep more than one such mechanical amusement device at any single building, location or address within the city, nor shall said license be transferable to any address other than the original address designated thereon. 
(Code 1988, § 7.146) 
Sec. 8-177. - Attendance by juveniles. 
(a)  No minor child under the age of 17 years shall be permitted in a place where a mechanical amusement device is located, or shall be permitted to play any such device before 3:00 p.m. on days during which school is in session. 
(b)  No minor child under the age of 17 years shall be permitted to remain in a place where a mechanical amusement device is located between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of any place where a mechanical amusement device is located to prohibit minor children from the premises under the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Failure to do so shall be considered in violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.147) 
Sec. 8-178. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to directly, indirectly, or otherwise offer or give any prize, award, merchandise or anything of value to any player or to any operator of a mechanical amusement device or to offer any inducement whatsoever tending to induce persons to make use thereof. This section shall not apply to a mechanical amusement device which may through the application of an element of skill reward the player with the right to replay the mechanical amusement device at no additional cost if the mechanical amusement device is not allowed to accumulate more than 15 replays at one time; devices designed so that accumulated free replays may only be discharged by reactivating the device for one additional play per each accumulated free replay; the device makes no permanent record directly or indirectly of the free replays awarded. 
(Code 1988, § 7.148) 
State Law reference- Gambling generally, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 8-179. - Pay-off devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mechanical amusement device, as defined in section 8-171, containing any automatic or semi-automatic pay-off device or which shall be so constructed that the same may be converted into an automatic pay-off device for the return or discharge of coins, tokens, slugs, merchandise or checks to operators thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 7.149) 
Secs. 8-180-8-196. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DAY CARE HOMES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Child care organizations, MCL 722.111 et seq. 

Sec. 8-197. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the operation of a family day care home or group day care home, as defined in section 40-123 without first obtaining a license therefor from the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 7.161) 
Sec. 8-198. - Application. 
    The city clerk shall issue a license for the operation of a family day care home or a group day care home after receipt of the following: 
(1)  Proof that the proposed licensee is certified by the state department of social services for the operation of such business. 
(2)  Certification within the last 90 days from the city building official or the city building official's agent and the city fire inspector or the city fire inspectors agent that the premises to be used meet all fire and state construction codes and regulations applicable to the dwelling. 
(3)  Certification by the city building official of the number of square feet contained in the entire dwelling. 
(4)  For new licensees, certification that an existing family day care home or group day care home is not in operation within 750 feet of the proposed day care home or that the proposed group or family day care home has been approved for operation by the zoning board of appeals notwithstanding the fact that said proposed home is located within 750 feet of an existing group or family day care home. 
(5)  Certification by the proposed licensee that the dropping off or picking up of children shall not be allowed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(6)  Certification that the operator will hold the city harmless in the event of litigation against the city involving the operator's day care operation, and proof that the operator has a policy of liability insurance covering the day care activity in an amount not less than established by resolution of the city commission, and proof that the insurance carrier will notify the city if the policy is cancelled, suspended, revoked or lapses, and upon such notice, the city manager, may at the city manager's discretion, suspend the license pursuant to this chapter until such time as the insurance policy is renewed. 
(Code 1988, § 7.162) 
Sec. 8-199. - Form of license. 
    Each license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of licensee; 
(2)  Address of group or family day care home; 
(3)  Expiration date of license; 
(4)  Number of minor children other than children related to the licensee by blood, marriage or adoption, for whom the licensee may give care and supervision to pursuant to the license. For purposes of this section, the licensee may be authorized to care for one child for each 175 square feet of space in the home as measured by the city building official pursuant to section 8-198; provided that an operator of a family day care home may not be authorized to care for more than six children and the operator of a group day care home may not be authorized to care for more than 12 children. For purposes of this subsection, the building official, in computing the number of square feet in the dwelling, shall exclude all bathrooms and storage areas in the dwelling, but shall include all other floor space in the dwelling, including main floor and second floor space. Basement floor space shall also be included in the computation if the basement floor space will be used by and is accessible to the children; 
(5)  That the license is nontransferable from one person to another; and 
(6)  That the license is nontransferable to a new location within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7.163) 
Secs. 8-200-8-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASSAGE FACILITIES 

Sec. 8-222. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage means the treating of external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
    Massage facility means any place where a massage, and/or an alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, physiotherapy, manipulation of the body of similar treatment is given on occasion or incidental to its principal operation. 
    Massage school means a school which is licensed by the state department of education or is a public institution in the state, which requires for admission, students with a tenth grade education or its equivalent, which employs one or more competent certified massagists as instructors, and which has minimum requirements of a continuous course of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics and practical massage. For the purposes of this article, a correspondence school shall not be construed to be a recognized school. 
    Massagist means any person who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, or manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
(Code 1988, § 7.171; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-223. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate a massage facility within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 7.12; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-224. - License procedure. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license shall present a fully completed application and a business license fee to the city clerk pursuant to this chapter. In addition, any application to obtain a license shall be accompanied by an investigation fee, the amount to be determined by the city commission by resolution. No part of the application investigation fee shall be refundable. The applicant shall provide certification that the city will be held harmless in the event of litigation against the city involving the massage facility, and proof that the applicant has a policy of liability insurance issued by a company satisfactory to the city clerk, covering the massage facility in an amount as established by resolution of the city commission, and proof that the insurance carrier will notify the city if the policy is cancelled, suspended, revoked or lapses, and upon such notice, the city clerk may, at the discretion of the city clerk, suspend the license pursuant to this chapter until such time as the insurance policy is renewed. 
(b)  The application shall be referred to the public safety and building officials and the county health officer for certification pursuant to section 8-28 and for recommendations as to the approval or denial of the license. Their recommendations will be forwarded to the city clerk. 
(1)  The public safety director shall recommend denial of an application for a license if the character, reputation, integrity, or physical or mental condition of the applicant or the applicant's employees is found to be inimical to the health, safety, moral or general welfare of the public. In making such determination hereunder, the director of public safety shall consider: 
a.  Criminal history. All applicant's convictions, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to the applicant's release. A conviction of a felony or crime of moral turpitude shall be sufficient grounds to recommend denial. 
b.  License and permit history. The license and permit history of the applicant; whether such person has previously operated in this city or state or in another city or state under a license or permit; whether such person has had such license or permit revoked or suspended; the reasons therefor; and the demeanor of the application subsequent to such action. 
c.  Any information set forth in the application. 
(2)  The building official, the public safety department and the county health officer shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the massage facility and shall make within a reasonable time separate recommendations to the city manager concerning compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  The city clerk, or the city clerk's designee, shall grant a license to the applicant after receiving the aforementioned certifications, affirmative recommendations and upon determination that all conditions, requirements and prerequisites for the issuance of the license have been met; provided that no cause as defined in section 8-44 exists for denial of the license. 
(d)  Any person denied a license by the city clerk or the city clerk's designee pursuant to these provisions may appeal to the city commission in writing, stating reasons why the license should be granted. The city commission may grant or deny the license after a public hearing, and such decision shall be final. The city commission may elect on its own motion to review any determination of the city clerk granting or denying a license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.173; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-225. - Required facilities and maintenance. 
(a)  No license to conduct a massage facility shall be issued until an inspection of the premises by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  A recognizable and readable sign is posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. All such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(2)  All provisions of the city building, plumbing, fire and electrical codes have been fulfilled. 
(3)  Hot and cold running water are provided. 
(4)  Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities are available including a minimum of one dressing room for each patron to be served, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin. If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities are provided for male and female patrons. 
(5)  All walls, ceiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment are in good repair. 
(6)  A minimum of one separate wash basin is to be provided for the use of employees and it is to be located as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performance of massage services. 
(7)  There shall be no entrance or exit way which provides a direct passageway to another type of business, residence or living quarters. 
(8)  During business hours, the premises shall remain open and no exits, entrances or secondary doorways shall be locked or obstructed in any way to prevent the immediate free ingress and egress of persons. 
(9)  The premises shall not be made available for accommodating any person as sleeping quarters. 
(10)  No massage shall be performed in a massage facility in a private room which is capable of being locked or barred. 
(11)  No beds, water mattresses, cots, or other equipment designed for sleeping shall be permitted at the premises. 
(b)  Every massage facility, licensed under this article shall, during the period of its license, comply with the following: 
(1)  All facilities required by subsection (a) of this section shall continue in existence. 
(2)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and other facilities shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. If available, bathtubs and showers shall be cleaned after each use. 
(3)  Clean and sanitary towels shall be provided for each patron. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(4)  Soap or detergent shall be provided at all wash basins. Sanitary towels placed in a permanently installed dispenser shall be provided at all wash basins utilized by employees. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of an owner, operator, manager or licensee to cooperate with all requests of the city in the performance of any duties and obligations required by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.174; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-226. - License fee. 
    The annual license fee for a massage facility shall be in the amount prescribed by the city commission by resolution. The license year shall be the period from the date of license issuance to June 30 next, inclusive, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1988, § 7.175; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-227. - License renewal. 
    Application to renew a license to operate a massage facility shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the date of expiration. The application to renew a license shall be accompanied by a sworn affidavit by the applicants that the matters contained in the original application have not changed. The application shall be referred to the director of public safety, who shall investigate the criminal history of the applicant and any employees since the grant of the original license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.176; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-228. - Unlawful activities. 
    No person shall massage another person, or give or administer any bath to any person, with contact to the breast, genital area or buttocks, in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desires. Any such massage or bath given for monetary gain or profit will be considered illegal. 
(Code 1988, § 7.177; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-229. - Employees. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the license for the massage facility, or the employer of any persons purporting to act as massagist to ensure that each person employed as a massagist meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Proof of graduation from a school of massage as defined in section 8-222; 
(2)  Official transcripts verifying completion of at least 300 hours of massage training from an American community college or university; plus three references from massage therapists who are professional members of a massage association referred to in this section; or 
(3)  Certificate of professional membership in the American Massage Therapy Association, International Myomassethics Federation, or any other recognized massage association with equivalent professional membership standards. 
(b)  A medical certificate shall be provided to the city on an annual basis stating that the employee, or anyone purporting to act as a massagist, has been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease. 
(Code 1988, § 7.178; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-230. - Wearing apparel. 
    Uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massagists or employees attending patrons. Such uniforms or garments shall be nontransparent and of washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. The sleeves of said uniform or garment shall not reach below the elbow. Such clothing shall cover the person's pubic area, perineum, buttocks, natal cleft and entire chest to four inches below the collarbone and legs not exposed more than two inches above the knees. 
(Code 1988, § 7.179; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-231. - Patronage of massage business by minors. 
    No person licensed as a massagist shall massage or treat any person under the age of 18 upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. If the person under the age of 18 is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this provision shall not apply. 
(Code 1988, § 7.180; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-232. - Name of business. 
    No person licensed to do business as provided in this article shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the license of such person. 
(Code 1988, § 7.181; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-233. - Hours of operation. 
    No massage facility shall be open to the public for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. During all hours of operation, entry doors and doors to the massage area shall remain unlocked. 
(Code 1988, § 7.182; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-234. - List of employees, employee information. 
    The massage facility shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all employees, both on duty and off duty, and such list shall be shown to the director of public safety or the director of public safety's duly authorized representative upon request. 
(Code 1988, § 7.183; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-235. - Keeping of records. 
    Every person who operates a massage facility shall maintain an accurate record in a well-bound book of all patrons accommodated. Such record shall include the patron's name, age and current address together with the time, date and place of service, the nature of the service provided, and the name of the massagist who provided the service. Such record book shall be available at all times at the massage facility for inspection by the director of public safety or the director of public safety's duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1988, § 7.184; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-236. - Inspections. 
(a)  A licensee or any employee, servant or agent shall make the licensed premises available for inspection by the director of public safety or the director of public safety's designees during regular business hours or when the licensed premises are occupied by the licensee or a servant, agent or employee of the licensee for the purpose of enforcing this article or other ordinances, or regulations of the city relating to the public health, safety and welfare. No duly authorized representative of the city shall be denied or refused entry to the premises for the purpose of making lawful inspections as authorized herein. 
(b)  The person conducting any inspection shall have immediate access to the following information and shall have the right to inspect and copy the same: 
(1)  The list of all names and addresses of current employees including any other names for which that employee is known or may have used. 
(2)  Social Security numbers of all current employees. 
(3)  List of all patrons or customers, including their name, address, date and time of service, type of service provided, amount of fee received, name of employee providing service. 
(4)  List of current telephone bills containing the numbers of all calls made throughout the Detroit metropolitan area, or long distance calls made, or billed to the premises. 
(5)  All financial records showing current receipts and expenditures, specifically indicating daily and weekly receipts, type of expenditure made, bank account numbers in which all deposits are made, check register statements, bank statements and any other financial information kept and maintained in the normal and ordinary course of business. 
(c)  Copies of any information obtained hereunder and any information received by the city shall be kept confidential and is assumed to be privileged and not subject to public disclosure except however, as evidence in the commencement of any civil or criminal judicial proceeding or administrative hearing against the licensee or any agent, operator or manager. 
(d)  Copies of any inspection report kept and maintained by the city arising from any inspection authorized hereunder, shall be provided to the licensee or any owner, operator or manager. 
(Code 1988, § 7.185; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-237. - Sale or transfer. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage facility, or the sale or transfer of any stock ownership of more than ten percent in such establishment, the license shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage facility. 
(Code 1988, § 7.187; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-238. - Change of location. 
    A change of location of any licensed premises shall be approved by the city clerk provided the requirements set forth herein as well as all other provisions of this article and state law are complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 7.188; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-239. - Extension or expansion. 
    Any extension or expansion of the licensed premises shall require inspection and shall require compliance with section 8-225. 
(Code 1988, § 7.189; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-240. - Applicability of regulations to existing facilities. 
    The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and facilities described herein, whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and including any person whose application is presently under consideration or investigation by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7.190; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Sec. 8-241. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following described persons practicing their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, and family counselors who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties. 
(3)  A trainer of any athletic team who administers a massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(4)  Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their duties. 
(Code 1988, § 7.191; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 10-19-1989) 
Secs. 8-242-8-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - LANDLORDS 

Sec. 8-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner, in addition to the legal owner of property, means the landlord, lessor, sublessor, mortgage company, bank, financial institution or any other entity or person having the legal authority to rent, lease or offer as available for lease or rent, a rental unit or the property of which it is a part and, in addition, means a person authorized to exercise any aspect of the management of the premises, including a person who, directly or indirectly, acts as a rental agent, receives rent or any part thereof, other than as a bona fide purchaser, and who has no obligation to deliver the whole of such receipts to another person. 
    Rental agreement means all agreements that establish or modify the terms, conditions, rules, regulations, or any other provisions concerning the use and occupancy of a rental unit. 
    Rental unit means a structure or part thereof used as a home, residence, or sleeping unit by a single person or household unit, or any grounds, or other facilities or area promised for the use of a residential tenant and includes, without limitation, apartment units, boardinghouses, roominghouses, mobile home spaces, and single- and two-family dwellings. 
(Code 1988, § 8.171; Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 544, § 1, 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 8-262. - Procedure, duration and license fee. 
(a)  No owner shall enter into an agreement or contract, either written or oral, to lease or rent any house or rental unit rent without first making application for and receiving a current landlord license from the city clerk. The application shall be accompanied by an annual license fee, in such amount as may hereafter be prescribed by the city commission by resolution, for each unit rented by such owner. An owner who fails to secure a license as provided herein, prior to entering into an agreement to rent or lease a house or rental unit shall be charged a fee for such license in the amount of two times the annual license fee. Said applicant shall state the applicant's name, address and telephone number, and specifically identify the number of units that are to be rented or leased as well as the addresses or all address(s) of all such rental houses or units. The city clerk shall issue the license if: 
(1)  The applicant's property is determined, after inspection by the building official, not to be in violation of this article; and 
(2)  The applicant provides a full legal description of all parcels of property for which a license is requested. 
(b)  No owner of any rental unit governed by this article shall hereafter offer to let or hire any rental unit, or permit the reoccupancy of any such unit pursuant to any rental or lease agreement, unless such unit has been reinspected and a certificate of compliance has been issued by the building official. The building official shall cause such inspection to be had within a reasonable time after application therefor and payment of any inspection fee. A certificate of compliance shall be issued if the dwelling unit complies with all applicable provisions of state and city building and housing codes. 
(c)  A certificate of compliance shall be issued on the condition that the premises remain in safe, healthful and fit condition for occupancy. If upon reinspection the building official determines that conditions exist which constitute a hazard to health or safety, the certificate shall be immediately suspended as to the affected areas and the areas may be vacated as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  When the building official has not issued a certificate of compliance or when such certificate, once issued, has expired or been suspended, or when such certificate has been withheld pending compliance, no rental unit shall be rented or occupied until reinspection and proof of compliance, in the discretion of the building official. 
(e)  The city manager is hereby empowered to revoke a landlord's license if it is discovered that the applicant has either: 
(1)  Misrepresented self or the state of the property; 
(2)  Refused access to premises for inspection as required hereinafter; or 
(3)  The property is or becomes violative of any of the ordinances of the city and/or the statutes of the state. 
(f)  Every license shall expire annually on December 31. 
(Code 1988, § 8.172; Ord. No. 344, § 1, 7-25-1989; Ord. No. 382, § 2, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 544, § 2, 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 8-263. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall cause the building official, or such other appropriate public official as the city manager may designate, to make an annual inspection of rental units, and inspections upon reoccupancy of rental units, to which an applicant for a landlord license or licenses shall be deemed to consent, to determine the health and safety conditions of the rental units. For the purpose of making such inspections, the building official or the appointed public official is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all rental units. 
(b)  The tenant or person in charge of a rental unit shall at all reasonable times give the building official or designated official free access only to the leased portion of the same or central facilities serving the same for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. 
(c)  Upon learning that any rental unit governed by this article has been vacated, the building official shall post on the premises, in a prominent place, a written notice stating that reoccupancy of such unit pursuant to any lease or rental agreement is prohibited by ordinance of the city until such unit has been inspected and a certificate of compliance issued by the building official. A copy of the notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of the rental unit. 
(d)  No rental unit as to which there is no current landlord license and current certificate of compliance in effect shall be occupied. 
(Code 1988, § 8.173; Ord. No. 382, § 3, 12-19-1995) 
Sec. 8-264. - Notice of revocation and hearing. 
    A landlord license may be revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 8.174; Ord. No. 382, § 4, 12-19-1995) 
Sec. 8-265. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.175; Ord. No. 416, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Secs. 8-266-8-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LAWN CARE SERVICES 

Sec. 8-281. - Definitions. 
    "Lawn care service" means an individual or business entity engaged in the business of cutting, trimming, fertilizing, rolling or otherwise maintaining or improving any lawn for any house or building in Huntington Woods. It does not include landscape services or services involved in the care of trees even though such entities may be required to fertilize, roll or repair a lawn as long as such service is incidental to the primary service for which they have been engaged. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-282. - License required. 
    No person or entity shall engage in the business of operating a lawn care service in the City of Huntington Woods without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. The license must be renewed annually and shall expire on December 31 of each year. The fee for the license shall be established by the city commission from time to time. No license shall be required for a lawn care service in which no truck, trailer or other motor vehicle is utilized. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-283. - Use of vehicles by lawn care services. 
    No person or entity shall operate a truck or other motor vehicle with or without a trailer in the course of operating a lawn care service business in the City of Huntington Woods unless a vehicle tag has been issued by the city clerk for such a vehicle or trailer. The vehicle tag must be prominently displayed on the exterior of the vehicle and/or trailer in a manner so as to be readily observable. Vehicle tags shall be issued to licensed lawn care services upon request made either at the time of issuance of the license or thereafter for specified trucks, trailers or other motor vehicles registered to such licensee and upon payment of such fee per vehicle as may be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-284. - Yard waste. 
    No person engaged in the operation of a lawn care service or employed by a lawn care service business mowing and/or maintaining lawns in the City of Huntington Woods shall place, throw, deposit, scatter or leave grass clippings or other yard waste in any street or public area. Yard waste disposed of in the city shall be in accordance with Huntington Woods City Code section 30-22. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-285. - Compliance with Huntington Woods ordinances. 
    All licensed lawn care services shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the City of Huntington Woods, including subsection 14-56(12) relating to noise and section 30-22 relating to the placement of bags or debris at curbside. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Secs. 8-286-8-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SNOW REMOVAL SERVICES 

Sec. 8-301. - Snow removal license required. 
    No person or entity shall engage in the business of snow removal utilizing mechanically driven vehicles without first obtaining a license from the City of Huntington Woods. Licenses shall be issued annually and shall expire on June 30 following issuance. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-302. - Contents of application for license. 
    Every applicant for a license required by the provisions of this section shall submit an application to the department of public safety on a form provided by the department, which shall include the name and address of the applicant, the type of mechanical equipment to be used, the street, streets or portion of any streets upon which the mechanical snow removal equipment will be used, and the weight of the vehicle including personnel that may be included in the operation of the vehicle. If the vehicle is self-propelled, a description of the type of tires and wheels to be used on the vehicle shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-303. - Grant or denial of license. 
    The decision to grant or deny a license to perform snow removal in the City of Huntington Woods shall be made by the director of public safety. If in the opinion of the director, the equipment described in the application for a permit would damage the street, sidewalk or any other area upon which its use is proposed, the application will be denied. If the director determines that the vehicle or equipment used for snow removal will not damage or tend to damage any street, sidewalk or other area, the license shall be granted. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-304. - Bond and/or liability insurance. 
    Every person or entity engaged in the business of snow removal in the City of Huntington Woods as regulated by this section shall furnish a cash or surety bond and/or evidence of liability insurance coverage protecting against damage to person and property in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-305. - Permit applicable to specific equipment. 
    A license issued under this section shall be applicable only to the equipment described in the application for such license. Persons or entities using multiple pieces of equipment must apply for a license for each piece of snow removal equipment as described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Sec. 8-306. - Disposal of snow. 
    Snow removed from driveways or sidewalks by licensees shall either be removed from the city or placed on the property of the person or entity who engaged the licensee. A licensee shall not deposit snow, ice or slush onto a city street or onto the private property of a person or entity other than the person or entity who engaged the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Secs. 8-307-8-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TREE SERVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted June 17, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as art. XII, §§ 8-306-8-312. To avoid duplication of section numbers and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. XIII, §§ 8-331-8-337. 

Sec. 8-331. - Definitions. 
    Diameter breast height (DBH): The diameter in inches of the tree measured at 41/2 feet above the existing grade. 
    Tree service, contractor: Any person or entity engaged in the business of removing, relocating, cutting, trimming, pruning, spraying or otherwise treating trees with power equipment. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-332. - License required. 
    No person or entity shall engage in the business of operating a tree service on public or private land in the City of Huntington Woods without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. The license must be renewed annually and shall expire on December 31 of each year. The application for a license shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance, proof of worker's compensation insurance for all employees as required by the Workers Disability Compensation Act, and a licensing fee. The certificate of insurance shall be in such form and amount as to protect the city and any person in the city from damage to person or property resulting from the tree service's or contractor's action. The fee for the license and the minimum amounts of insurance shall be established by resolution of the city commission and updated from time-to-time. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-333. - Exception. 
    An annual license shall not be required of any public utility company granted an annual trimming permit by the city manager in accordance with the regulations in section 14-181. This exemption shall only apply in the case that the public utility itself is performing the trimming or tree service work. In the event the public utility has engaged the services of an outside tree service contractor to perform the tree service work, that tree service contractor shall be required to obtain a license as required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-334. - Permit required. 
    A tree removal permit is required for removing or relocating any tree in the City of Huntington Woods with a DBH of six inches or greater on any property, public or private. Such tree removal or relocation shall be in accordance with the regulations of article VII of chapter 14 of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-335. - Work hours. 
    Tree removal, relocation, cutting, trimming, pruning, spraying or other work on trees shall not take place on Sundays or any other day between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except for emergency removal described in section 14-175. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-336. - Removal of tree trunks, branches and debris required. 
    The tree service or contractor shall remove from the city all tree trunks, limbs, branches and debris resulting from the cutting, trimming or removing of a tree within 48 hours of the actual work performed, and all tree trunks, limbs, branches and debris shall not block, cover or impede any public sidewalk or street after the end of work on any day. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-337. - Compliance with city ordinances. 
    All licensed tree services and contractors shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the City of Huntington Woods, in particular article VII Trees, of chapter 14 of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Secs. 8-338-8-360. - Reserved. 
Chapter 9 - RESERVED 
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Odd-year election. 
(a)  An election to be known as the "odd-year general election" shall be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year. Nominating petitions shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of the Charter of the city, except that the last day for filing such petitions with the city clerk shall be on or before 4:00 p.m. on the 15th Tuesday prior to the election. Persons who have been notified by the city clerk that timely and sufficient nominating petitions have been filed on their behalf and who desire to become a candidate for any elective city office shall have until no later than 4:00 p.m. of the Friday following the last day for filing nominating petitions to file an acceptance of such nomination with the clerk as set forth in the Charter. 
(b)  In the event that any incumbent elected official desires to become a candidate for any other elective office at an election, and the term of office of such official does not expire on the Monday following such election, then the nominating petitions of such official for such other elective office, together with his acceptance of such nomination, shall be filed with the city clerk on or before 4:00 p.m. on the 18th Tuesday prior to the election, and such acceptance so filed shall constitute the resignation of such official and he shall be deemed to have resigned as of the first Monday following such election. The unexpired term of such office shall be filled by electoral vote at the same election, and nominating petitions may be filed therefor and notice thereof shall be included in the notice of such election as provided by law. 
(Code 1988, § 1.14; Ord. No. 401, § 1, 7-15-1997; Ord. No. 537, § 1, 4-26-2011; Ord. No. 539, § 1, 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 573, § 1, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 575, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 10-2. - Officers elected. 
    The mayor and commissioners shall be elected for four-year terms. At each odd-year general election two city commissioners shall be elected to succeed the two commissioners whose terms are to expire and at the odd-year election prior to the expiration of the mayor's term of office, a mayor shall be elected. The terms to which said officers shall be elected shall expire at 7:30 p.m. on the first Monday after the odd-year general election held four years after the election of said officers. Officers elected to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1988, § 1.14) 
Sec. 10-3. - Constable's office abolished. 
    Pursuant to section 32 of Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.32), the office of constable is abolished in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 1.14) 
Sec. 10-4. - Conduct of elections. 
    All elections shall be conducted in the manner elections for state and county offices are conducted. 
(Code 1988, § 1.14) 
State Law reference- Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
Chapter 11 - RESERVED 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS POLICY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq. 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(b)  Terms defined in the emergency management act, Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.) shall have the meanings therein prescribed. 
(Code 1988, § 1.171) 
Sec. 12-20. - Organization for emergency services. 
(a)  The mayor, as executive head of the city government, shall be the director of the emergency services forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager, with the approval of the commission, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the city. 
(c)  The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An office of emergency services established within city government. The office of emergency services shall have an administrative head appointed who will be known as the coordinator, office of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and committees suitable for or adaptable to emergency service activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be recommended by the city manager with the approval of the commission. 
(d)  All officers and employees of departments, committees, boards, institutions and other agencies of the city government designated by the city manager, with the approval of the commission, as emergency services forces shall cooperate with the emergency services coordinator in the formulation of the emergency operations plan and they shall assist the coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 1.172) 
Sec. 12-21. - Emergency services coordinator; assistants; deputies. 
(a)  Assistant coordinators appointed by the city manager shall be designated to work with the coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant coordinators shall be appointed as need dictates. 
(b)  Assistant coordinators shall assume the duties of the coordinator whenever the coordinator is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations. 
(Code 1988, § 1.173) 
Sec. 12-22. - Mayor powers, duties. 
(a)  The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified herein. Whenever a situation requires or is likely to require that the mayor invoke such power and authority, the mayor shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the commission to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands and shall report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the commission unless specifically provided herein. 
(b)  Under the following circumstances, the mayor may assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use: 
(1)  Whenever on the basis of information received from authoritative sources the mayor feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation affecting the city is imminent. 
(2)  During any period of disaster in the city, county or state and thereafter as long as the mayor shall deem it necessary. 
(c)  Whenever any condition in the city has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, the mayor may assemble and utilize emergency services forces and may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use. The mayor, with the approval of the commission, is hereby empowered to enter into mutual aid agreements with other public or private agencies for reciprocal aid and assistance during disasters which are beyond local capabilities and resources. The mayor may, when deemed in the public interest, send emergency services forces of the city to the aid of other communities stricken by disaster as provided by mutual aid agreements; provided that after the commission convenes, the future continuance of any such disaster relief and the period thereof shall be subject to the action of the commission. 
(d)  The city manager, with the approval of the commission, may establish regulations permitting the coordinator to assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in section 12-23(1) and (2). 
(e)  When obtaining formal approvals would result in significant delay of relief activity, the mayor may, until the commission convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and the expenditure of existing funds, and the commission is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(f)  The city manager, with the approval of the commission, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(Code 1988, § 1.174) 
Sec. 12-23. - Emergency services coordinator powers, duties. 
    The emergency services coordinator shall be responsible for all emergency preparedness activities in the city. The coordinator shall maintain liaison with state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. The coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Development of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property, and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and facilities for emergency purposes. 
(3)  Through public information programs, educating the civilian population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of disaster. 
(4)  Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the city's regulations, procedures and operations. 
(5)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief program. 
(6)  Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
(7)  Establish and maintain administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters. 
(8)  Establish property accountability procedures for federal surplus property acquired by the city, federal excess property on loan to the city, or any other property or equipment loaned to the city for use in disaster or emergency situations. 
(Code 1988, § 1.175) 
Sec. 12-24. - Volunteers' appointment; records. 
(a)  Subject to the approval of the coordinator, each department, committee, board or other agency of city government may appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such city department, committee, board or agency in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as emergency services volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, committee, board or agency head for such volunteers. 
(b)  The coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the city has no counterpart or to temporarily augment personnel engaged in emergency activities. The coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for worker's compensation purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 1.176) 
Sec. 12-25. - Rights of city employees. 
    City employees assigned to duty as part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall retain all of the rights, privileges and immunities of city employees and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
(Code 1988, § 1.177) 
Sec. 12-26. - No governmental or private liability. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. As such, neither the city nor agents and representatives of the city nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trustee nor any of the agents thereof acting in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of said activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to this state or a political subdivision of this state a license or privilege, or otherwise permits this state or a political subdivision of this state the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of the real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice disaster, together with his successors in interest, if any, is not civilly liable for negligently causing the death of or injury to any person on or about the real estate or premises under the license, privilege or other permission or for loss or damage to the property of the person. 
(Code 1988, § 1.178) 
State Law reference- Liability for personal injury or property damage, MCL 30.411. 
Sec. 12-27. - Federal surplus property. 
    The emergency services coordinator is hereby designated as the person responsible for accepting federal surplus property with the power and full authority to sign for such surplus property. The mayor shall provide a written statement to appropriate federal officials designating the current name of the coordinator as responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The coordinator is responsible for the accountability and will maintain the necessary records for all surplus property obtained for emergency purposes until relieved from accountability by state and federal authorities. 
(2)  The coordinator is further authorized to direct payment of service charges for surplus property to complete all transactions. 
(3)  Misappropriation or unauthorized private use of such public property while still accountable is subject to prosecution under federal and state statute. 
(Code 1988, § 1.179) 
Chapter 13 - RESERVED 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Public nuisance defined and prohibited. 
    Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. No person shall commit, create, or maintain any nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1) 
State Law reference- Public nuisances and abatement, MCL 600.3801 et seq. 
Sec. 14-2. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, a person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall limit the availability of injunctive relief to the city in appropriate circumstances, or otherwise limit, in any way, such police and remedial actions as are available to the city under law. 
(Code 1988, § 9.2; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 14-3. - Dense smoke prohibited. 
    No person shall operate any stove, furnace, boiler or combustion apparatus of any kind, nor shall any person owning any stove, furnace, boiler or combustion apparatus of any kind permit the same to be operated, in a manner so as to emit dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof; provided that the emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for a period of 20 minutes in any one hour, once in every 24 hours, when a new fire is being kindled, shall not constitute a violation of this chapter; and provided further that the emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for a period aggregating six minutes in any one hour, and not exceeding two minutes of continuous emission, shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 9.6) 
Sec. 14-4. - Smoke measurement. 
    For the purpose of defining the term "dense smoke" which shall constitute a prohibited density hereunder, the standards established by the "Ringelmann Smoke Chart," 1955 edition, are hereby adopted, as published by the Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines (I.C. 7718) with its accompanying publication written by Ralph Rudolph Kudlich and revised by L. R. Durdick, as published by Bureau of Mines, Publication-Distribution Section, 4800 Forbes Street, Pittsburgh 13, Pennsylvania, in accordance with Department of Interior Public Notice Number 84932. Smoke of a density equal to or greater than the density described as number two on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart shall be considered and held to be "dense smoke" as the term is used in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 9.7) 
Secs. 14-5-14-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 

Sec. 14-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter means rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris, or other foreign substances or a vehicle that is considered abandoned under section 252a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.252a). 
    Public or private property or water means, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  The right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach of a body of water or watercourse, including the ice above the water. 
(2)  A park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area. 
(3)  Residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
    Vehicle means a motor vehicle registered or required to be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
    Vessel means a vessel registered under part 801 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.). 
(Code 1988, § 9.9) 
Sec. 14-24. - Litter. 
(a)  A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property, or the owner of private property, dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. 
(b)  A person who removes a vehicle that is wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road, or street shall remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road, or street as a result of the accident. 
(Code 1988, § 9.9) 
Sec. 14-25. - Litter on highway. 
    A person shall not knowingly cause litter or any object to fall or to be thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle traveling upon a highway. 
(Code 1988, § 9.9) 
Sec. 14-26. - Litter violation. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section involving litter from a leased vehicle or leased vessel, in a proceeding for a violation of this part involving litter from a motor vehicle or vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(b)  There is a rebuttable presumption that the driver of a vehicle or vessel is responsible for litter that is thrown, dumped, deposited, placed, or left from the vehicle or vessel on public or private property or water. 
(c)  In a proceeding for a violation of this part involving litter from a leased motor vehicle or leased vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the lessee of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the lessee of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(d)  In a proceeding for a violation of this part involving litter consisting of an abandoned vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was abandoned, and that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the titled owner or lessee of the vehicle at the time it was abandoned, gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the defendant abandoned the vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 9.9) 
Secs. 14-27-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL WITHIN THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 576, § 1, adopted June 16, 2015, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 14-56 and 14-57 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1988, §§ 9.11, 9.12; Ord. No. 384, § 1, adopted Apr. 16, 1996; Ord. No. 393, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 489, § 4, adopted Aug. 17, 2004; Ord. No. 525, § 1, adopted June 17, 2008; and Ord. No. 566, § 1, adopted June 17, 2014. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle mufflers, MCL 257.707 et seq. 

Sec. 14-56. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, all terminology used in this section, not defined in this section, shall be in conformance with the applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network as specified in the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1983, or its successor provision. The sound pressure level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    Authorized city official means all designated Huntington Woods Public Safety Officers, Building Officials or Code Enforcement Officers, authorized to investigate all complaints of violation of this section and who are further authorized to issue municipal civil infractions. 
    City commission means the City Commission of the City of Huntington Woods. 
    Commercial area means property zoned for uses other than residential or parks-recreation, regardless of whether the property has a commercial use. 
    Continuous sound means any sound with a duration of more than one second, as measured with a sound level meter set to the "fast" meter response. 
    Decibel (dB) means a unit of sound pressure level on a logarithmic scale measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in compliance with the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1983, or its successor provision. 
    Extraneous sound means a sound which is relatively intense, intermittent and of short duration and is neither part of the neighborhood residual sound, nor comes from the sound source under investigation. The sources of extraneous sound are noted, but excluded from all measurements (e.g., passing vehicle or distant train). 
    Immediate vicinity means any distance beyond the property line of the parcel or lot from which the source of noise or disturbance is emanating as determined by the authorized city official during the course of investigating a complaint of noise disturbance. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled whether or not licensed or intended for use on the public roads. 
    Neighborhood residual sound level means that measured value which represents the summation of the sound from all of the discrete sources affecting a given site at a given time. Neighborhood residual sounds are differentiated from extraneous sounds by the fact that the former are a more steady state, although they may not be continuous. 
    Parks-Recreation means Zone 4 as defined by the Huntington Woods Code of Ordinances. 
    Person means any owner, lessee or occupant of property, including any individual, corporation, business or other entity; "person" also means any individual in any public place or any private place open to the general public. 
    Property line means the imaginary line which represents the legal limits of property owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person or business entity. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public right-of-way, the property line shall be the nearest boundary of the public right-of-way. 
    Public right-of-way means the entire easement width or ownership interest of any publicly dedicated street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place. 
    Residential area means property used for temporary or permanent dwelling purposes. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels. This instrument shall comply with the standards for type 1 or type 2 sound level meters as specified in the American National Institute Standard ANSI S1.4-1983, or its successor provision. 
    Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals. This sound pressure level is expressed in decibels (dB). 
    Total sound level means that measured level which represents the summation of the sounds from the sound source under investigation and the neighborhood residual sounds which affect a given place at a given time, exclusive of extraneous sound sources. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-57. - Interference with sound monitoring equipment. 
    No person shall remove or render inaccurate or inoperative any sound level meter or any similar monitoring instrument or device positioned for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-58. - Prohibited acts; purpose generally. 
    It is the purpose of this article that no person shall create, assist in creating, continue or permit the continuation of any excessive or unnecessarily loud disturbance of noise of a high volume or intensity which is clearly audible and disturbs, annoys or endangers the safety of others beyond the immediate vicinity of the disturbance ("noise disturbances"). Only those noise disturbances not in compliance with section 14-59 or section 14-60 shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-59. - Prohibited acts; specifically. 
    No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts of noise disturbance which are deemed a violation of this section: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn, car alarm or signaling device in any vehicle while not in motion except as a danger signal, or where the car alarm is properly used or to give warning of intent to enter a lane of traffic. 
(2)  The playing or use of any battery or electrically powered or electronic sound-producing or amplifying device, speaker or instrument, including a musical instrument, in such a manner or in such a loud volume or intensity, at any time or place, that exceeds permissible sound levels in section 14-60. 
(3)  The sound created by any domesticated animal kept or maintained by any person, when such animal creates a noise disturbance that is frequent or continued and clearly audible at a distance within or beyond the immediate vicinity of the noise as determined by an authorized city official. 
(4)  No person shall create a noise disturbance in or with a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other motorized equipment so as to disturb or destroy or endanger the peace, comfort or repose of a person within or beyond the immediate vicinity of the source of the noise disturbance as determined by an authorized city official. No person shall operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other motorized equipment without a properly functioning muffler. 
(5)  Engaging in the erection, including excavating therefor, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, at any time on Sundays, and on other days, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (or between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on properties in Zone 4 Parks and Recreation), unless a permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-60. - Maximum permissible sound levels for amplified sounds and mechanical devices. 
    Use of any loud speaker, amplifier or other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any purpose, except by speakers in the course of public address which is noncommercial in character (recognized First Amendment speech), shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Continuous sound. 
a.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any source of amplified sound on any property or in the public right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits listed in Table I as measured at any location at or within the property line of another person's property. A sound source shall not continuously exceed the sound level listed in Table I for longer than the period of time defined in subsection (1)b. Sound pressure levels in excess of those established in Table I for the period of time in subsection (1)b, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is in violation of this Code. 
TABLE I
  MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE
  SOUND LEVEL LIMITS DB(A) 
Commercial and Parks-Recreation 
(all times): 65 Residential (all times): 65  
b.  The limits defined in Table I may not be exceeded continuously for more than one minute. 
c.  Nothing in this section supersedes the requirements of employers to comply with the Occupational Noise Exposure Standard of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (29 CFR Part 1910.95). Compliance will help conserve workers' hearing, and reduce potential liability for the source. 
(2)  Steady pure tones. If the sound source under investigation is a mechanical device, and is in the authorized city official's opinion emitting a sound with a steady tonal quality, the maximum permissible sound level limits in Table I shall be reduced by 5dB. The sound emissions must be comprised of a single frequency and/or its harmonics, which may be referred to as a tone, whine, hum or buzz. Such sound sources include, but are not limited to: heating, ventilating or air conditioning units; refrigeration units; and transformers. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-61. - Procedures for the determination of sound levels. 
    The sound level shall be measured with a field calibrated sound level meter. The sound level meter shall conform with ANSI S1.13 of 1973, or its successor provision. The DB(A) methodology will be used to measure sound levels, and the meter readings will be set for a fast response. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-62. - General exemptions. 
    The following activities are exempted from specific prohibited acts and/or the sound pressure level limitations set forth in section 14-60: 
(1)  Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster; to restore public utilities; or to protect persons or property from imminent danger. 
(2)  Sounds made to alert persons to such emergency, danger or attempted crime, which shall not exceed five minutes in duration. 
(3)  Parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar activities, if approved by the city commission, subject to any sound pressure limits specified in the city commission's approval. 
(4)  Athletic, musical or cultural activities or events (including practices and rehearsals) conducted by or under the auspices of public or private schools. 
(5)  Bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with an ongoing religious service. 
(6)  Sounds created while conducting yard work or lawn maintenance between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. including, but not limited to, lawn mowing, leaf blowing, brush clearing, the use of chain saws, etc. However, no more than two gas-powered pieces of equipment shall be permitted to be used or operated at any one time on any single residential property. 
(7)  Sounds created during new construction, remodeling or maintenance activities on a building or structure between the hours as specified in subsection 14-59(5), subject to the limitation that no more than two gas-powered machines shall be operated or in use at one time on any single residential property. 
(8)  Sounds created while removing snow or cleaning streets, roads, driveways, parking lots or sidewalks necessary to allow safe access and transport. 
(9)  The use of fireworks in compliance with state law and city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-63. - Temporary exemptions. 
(a)  The city commission is authorized to grant a temporary exemption from the provisions of this section if such temporary exemption would be in the public interest, and if there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the activity or the method of conducting the activity for which the temporary exemption is sought. 
(b)  The following factors shall be considered by the city commission in determining whether to grant a temporary exemption: 
(1)  The hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons if the exemption is not granted, balanced against the adverse impact on the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons if the exemption is granted; 
(2)  The nearness of any residence or residences, or any other land use which would be adversely affected; 
(3)  The sound pressure level to be generated by the activity for which the temporary exception is sought; 
(4)  Whether the type of sound to be produced by the activity is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the exemption is requested; 
(5)  The density of population in the area where the activity is to take place; and 
(6)  The time of day or night during which the activity will take place. 
(c)  A temporary exemption may be granted only for the period of time that is reasonably necessary to conduct the activity, up to 30 days, which may, if necessary be extended by the city commission upon written request by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-64. - Liability of owner, lessee or occupant. 
    If the person responsible for an activity which violates this section cannot be determined, the owner of the property upon which the activity is located shall be deemed responsible for the violation unless the property is leased or occupied by persons other than the owner, in which case the lessees or occupants in possession and/or control of the property shall be responsible for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Sec. 14-65. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This section governs the initiation of enforcement actions and the imposition of civil penalties for violations of this Code. 
(b)  If a person violates any provision of this Code, or an order issued, the city may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to prohibit and prevent such violation or violations and the court may proceed in the action in a summary manner. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this Code is guilty of a municipal civil infraction. Each day during which the violation continues shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
Secs. 14-66-14-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BLIGHT CONTROL 

Sec. 14-88. - Control of blight and blighting factors. 
    It is hereby determined that the following uses, structures and activities are causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods. No persons shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of these causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property in the city owned, leased, rented or occupied by such persons. This section shall apply to any blighting factor located in any open area on private property clearly visible from a street, public place, or adjoining residential property under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The storage or parking upon private property of any unlicensed or inoperative vehicle; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to inoperable vehicles located at a service station or collision facility while awaiting repairs. For the purpose of this section, the term "vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices exclusively moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. This section shall apply when: 
a.  The vehicle so stored or parked is not validly licensed for operation upon the highways in the state for a period in excess of five calendar days; or 
b.  The vehicle so stored or parked, whether currently validly licensed or not, is inoperable for any reason for a period in excess of five calendar days. 
(2)  The storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon said property and said materials are intended for use in connection with such construction. Building materials shall include, but shall not be limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. 
(3)  The storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind except domestic refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period of not to exceed 30 days. The term "junk" shall include parts or machinery or vehicles, unused stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers, or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other materials of any kind whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(4)  The existence of any structure or part of any structure which, because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable, if a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  The existence of any vacant dwelling, garage, or other out building, unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals. 
(6)  The existence of any partially completed structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city, which construction is to be completed within 12 months from the date of issuance of the building permit or within an approved extension period if extended by the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 9.16; Ord. No. 313, § 1, 4-5-1988; Ord. No. 579, § 1, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 14-89. - Notice to remove. 
    The owner, if possible, and the occupant of any property upon which any of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in section 14-88 are found to exist shall be notified, in writing, to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors from such property within ten days after service of notice upon the owner. Such notice may be served personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1988, § 9.17; Ord. No. 313, § 1, 4-5-1988) 
Sec. 14-90. - Failure to comply. 
    Failure to comply with the notice to remove or eliminate blighting factors described in section 14-88 by the person upon whom such notice is served within the time allowed in section 14-89 shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9.18; Ord. No. 313, § 1, 4-5-1988) 
Sec. 14-91. - When city to do work. 
    If the provisions of sections 14-88 and 14-89 are not complied with, the city manager, or the duly authorized representative thereof, shall cause such blighting factors to be removed and eliminated and the actual cost of such action, plus 15 percent for inspection and other costs incurred therewith, shall be collected as a special assessment against said premises as provided in sections 8, 9 and 10, chapter XII, of the Charter of the city. Levying or collection of such special assessments shall not relieve any person offending against this article from the penalty prescribed for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.19; Ord. No. 313, § 1, 4-5-1988) 
Secs. 14-92-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WEED CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

Sec. 14-111. - Responsibility of occupant or owner. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of every parcel of land and the owner of any vacant property to maintain all yards, including the portion of right-of-way abutting such yards that is not otherwise paved or improved, in a condition that will not detract from the appearance of the neighborhood. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of every parcel of land and the owner of any vacant property shall be responsible for cutting or destroying by lawful means, all long grass or weeds, or noxious or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Where the property is occupied by a tenant, the tenant shall be responsible and subject to the penalties provided for violation of this article. However, this shall not relieve the owner of responsibility and upon failure to maintain the property as required by this article, the city may do such work as is required and assess its cost against the property. 
(Code 1988, § 9.20; Ord. No. 383, § 1, 3-18-1996) 
Sec. 14-112. - Unlawful growth. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or occupant of an occupied or unoccupied parcel of land to permit or maintain on such property any growth of long grass or weeds, or noxious or harmful vegetation to a greater height than six inches on the average, or to permit or maintain any accumulation of dead grass, weeds, brush or noxious or harmful vegetation. 
(Code 1988, § 9.21; Ord. No. 383, § 2, 3-18-1996) 
Sec. 14-113. - Annual notice. 
(a)  Each year, the city shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city during the month of March that long grass or weeds (as defined in section 14-112), or noxious or harmful vegetation not cut or lawfully destroyed by May 1 of that year may be cut or lawfully destroyed by the city, without further notice to the owner, agent, occupant or such other person or entity that has control over the premises or the right to conduct maintenance upon the premises, as many times as is necessary through October 31 of that year to comply with the provisions of this article. The notice will provide a summary of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The owner, agent, occupant or such other person or entity that has control over the premises or the right to conduct maintenance upon the premises who fails, after publication of notice, to comply with the provisions of this article shall be provided with only one subsequent notice by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall notify the owner, agent, occupant or such other person as described herein of an initial violation of this article in section 1-11. The owner, agent or occupant or person or entity as defined herein shall then have 72 hours after the posting or receipt of this notice to comply with this article, and upon failure of such owner, agent or occupant or person or entity in control of the premises to comply with this article within such time, the city manager or the city manager's duly authorized representative may enter upon such land and put the premises in compliance. Upon subsequent violation of this article in the same calendar year by the same owner, agent or occupant of land as defined herein, the city manager or the city manager's duly authorized representative may enter the land and put the premises into compliance without the necessity of any additional or further notice. 
(Code 1988, § 9.22; Ord. No. 383, § 3, 3-18-1996; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 6-12-2000; Ord. No. 562, § 1, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 14-114. - When city to do work. 
(a)  If the provisions of sections 14-111 and 14-112 are not complied with by the owner, agent or occupant of the land by May 1, within seven days after receipt of notice, or at any time thereafter, between May 1 and October 31, the city manager or the city manager's duly authorized representative may cause such long grass or weeds, or noxious or harmful vegetation to be cut or completely destroyed as many times as is necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The actual cost of such cutting, removal or destruction, as determined by the city manager or the city manager's designee, plus a minimum fee of 15 percent for inspection and other costs in connection therewith, shall be a lien upon the property on which such long grass or weeds, or noxious or harmful vegetation were located, and such charges shall be collected as a special assessment against said premises as provided in sections 8, 9 and 10, chapter XII, of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9.23; Ord. No. 383, § 4, 3-18-1996; Ord. No. 388, § 1, 7-16-1996; Ord. No. 444, § 2, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-115. - Penalty. 
    The levy or collection of a special assessment for work done by the city or its employees or agents shall not relieve any person violating this article from the penalty prescribed for violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 9.24; Ord. No. 383, § 5, 3-18-1996; Ord. No. 422, § 2, 5-19-1998) 
Secs. 14-116-14-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RODENT CONTROL 

Sec. 14-144. - Purpose. 
    Rats spread diseases such as salmonellosis, leptospirosis, plague and rat bite fever; they bite people; they contaminate and destroy food; and they destroy property. Indifference and carelessness in maintaining property, handling food, and disposing of household refuse fosters rat population growth, health concerns, and serious nuisance issues. The purpose of this article is to curtail and control this rodent population. 
(Code 1988, § 9.28; Ord. No. 458, § 1, 7-17-2001) 
Sec. 14-145. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure, public or private, that is used for occupancy as a dwelling, for the transaction of business, for the rendering of services, for the storage of articles, vehicles or equipment, or for any use that is accessory to the above-named uses. 
    Rat control means the removal of food and shelter, the distribution of poison, setting of traps and/or other methods of eradication. 
    Rat shelter means any condition under which rats may find shelter or protection. 
    Ratproofing means a form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of rats to or from a given space or building. It consists of closing and keeping closed by the use of materials impervious to rats, every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, walls, roofs, and other places that may be reached and entered by rats. 
(Code 1988, § 9.29; Ord. No. 458, § 1, 7-17-2001) 
Sec. 14-146. - Sources of shelter. 
    Rats seek shelter along building walls, around outbuildings, in stacks of firewood, under concrete slabs, under brush, in tall weeds or grass, in barrels and other containers, in garbage storage areas and other sheltered areas. To deny access to shelter: 
(1)  Every building erected and every alteration, addition, extension, enlargement, or repair thereto, and the ground around it shall be rat-proofed when a rat shelter or potential shelter exists, and shall thereafter be maintained in such condition. 
(2)  All wood, firewood, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers, machinery, raw materials, junk as defined in subsection 14-88(3), and other materials which may afford shelter for rats shall be stored or stacked upon rat-proof paved areas or elevated 18 inches above the ground, and shall be so separated into storage units as to minimize the possibility of rat shelter and as to permit inspection and extermination procedures. 
(3)  No owner or occupant of a parcel of land shall permit or maintain on such property any growth of long grass or weeds to a greater height than six inches on average, or permit or maintain any accumulation of dead grass, weeds or brush in which rats may find shelter. 
(Code 1988, § 9.30; Ord. No. 458, § 1, 7-17-2001) 
Sec. 14-147. - Sources of food. 
    Pet food, bird seed, dog droppings and garbage are primary sources of food for rats. To deny access to food: 
(1)  No person shall feed wild birds other than by means of bird feeders elevated at least 48 inches above the ground level. 
(2)  Yards shall be kept free of dog droppings, uneaten food, and improperly composted yard and household waste. 
(3)  No person shall leave pet food outside on the ground or in open containers where it is accessible to rats. 
(4)  All garbage stored outside shall be in watertight plastic or metal containers with tight-fitting covers sufficient to keep rats out. Plastic bags are not rat proof and shall not be used for overnight outside storage except when placed at curbside for weekly trash pickup. 
(Code 1988, § 9.31; Ord. No. 458, § 1, 7-17-2001) 
Sec. 14-148. - Extermination and eradication. 
    Rats will leave when their food source is eliminated. It is important to kill them before they find another home. There are two main ways to kill rats: by poisoning or trapping them. 
(1)  An owner, occupant, or person in control of a building or land may place or authorize the placement of traps for rats in such building or on such land along runways or close to rat shelters. They may be baited with foods such as peanut butter, raisins, bacon or canned cat food. 
(2)  No person other than a licensed pest control operator with the approval of the owner, occupant or person in control of the land shall use rat poisons outdoors. 
(Code 1988, § 9.32) 
Sec. 14-149. - Penalty. 
(a)  An owner, occupant, or person in control of any building or premises who fails to maintain such building or premises as required by the provisions of this article, and a person who violates any other provision of this article, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to limit, in any way, the police and remedial actions available to the city under the law. 
(Code 1988, § 9.33; Ord. No. 458, § 1, 7-17-2001) 
Secs. 14-150-14-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TREES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 569, § 1, adopted Aug. 19, 2014, amended art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VII, §§ 14-166-14-184, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1988, §§ 3.41-3.55, 3.57-3.59; Ord. No. 419, § 1, adopted May 19, 1998; Ord. No. 438, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1999; and Ord. No. 564, § 1, adopted June 17, 2014. 
State Law reference- Municipal forests, MCL 324.52701 et seq. 

Sec. 14-167. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the department of public services. 
Director means director of the department of public services. 
Park means all public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Prohibited species means any tree of the species of poplar ( Populus Sp. ), willow ( Salix Sp. ) and box elder ( Acer Negundo ). 
Public utility means any person, owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or conduit located in any public street or over or along any public easement or right-of-way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone service or telegraph service. 
Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, highways and boulevards in the city. 
Tree means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(b)  The provisions of this article, except as otherwise specifically stated herein, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land publicly owned or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-168. - Responsibility. 
    The director shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-169. - Permits for tree planting, care, removal. 
    The city manager shall have control over all trees located within the street rights-of-way and parks in the city and the planting, care and removal thereof, subject to the regulations contained in this article. The owner of land abutting on any street may, upon obtaining prior written permission of the director, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that part of the street abutting the owner's land not used for public travel, but no person shall otherwise prune, spray, plant or remove any tree in any street or park. Every such permit shall specify the extent of the authorization and the conditions to which it is subject. Where an owner of abutting property requests the removal of a tree, the director is authorized, in the director's discretion, to require as a condition to granting of approval for such removal, that such property owner make the removal in accordance with regulations established by the department, assume all or any part of the costs of removing such tree, and also to require that the tree removed, be replaced at some other nearby location by planting another tree, not necessarily of the same type. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-170. - Removal of dead, diseased and prohibited trees. 
    All dead trees and trees afflicted with any fatal or communicable disease shall be removed by the department with the approval of the manager. The city manager is hereby authorized to direct the department to remove any tree of a prohibited species. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-171. - Tree protection. 
    No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire, or permit any fire, or the heat thereof, to injure any portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree. No electric wires or any other lines or wires shall be permitted to come in contact with any tree or shrub in any manner that shall cause damage thereto, and no person shall attach any electric insulation to any tree. No person shall use any tree as an anchor, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree. All persons having under their care, custody or control, facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree, shall, after notice thereof by the department, promptly abate such interference in such manner as shall permit the trimming or removal of such tree by the department. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-172. - Removal of other trees. 
    Trees may be removed which are not dead or infected with any disease when such trees are of an undesirable, though not prohibited, species, but only upon notice to the owner of the abutting property, and if such owner shall file written objection with the city clerk within 48 hours after service of such notice, a public hearing on such removal shall be had before the city commission and the abutting owner shall be notified of the time and place of such hearing. The city manager is hereby authorized to direct the department to remove any tree growing within any street, park or public place, when such tree interferes with fire hydrants, sewer and water mains, visibility of street intersections, traffic control devices or construction within street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-173. - Tree planting regulations. 
(a)  No tree of any prohibited species shall be planted in any street or park, nor shall any such tree be planted on any private property within 50 feet of any street or sidewalk right-of-way or any sewer or sewer extension. Shade trees planted in any street right-of-way shall be spaced not less than 40 feet apart, except that trees may be planted less than 40 feet from an existing tree in the right-of-way, providing the existing tree has been approved for removal within a period of two years from the date of planting of the new tree. The owner of a single lot may, in order to provide a shade or ornamental tree in front of the owner's lot, secure special permission from the department to have a tree planted closer than 40 feet from an existing tree, but in no case shall such planting be within 30 feet of any existing tree, within the right-of-way. 
(b)  No tree shall be planted in any planting strip between the street proper and the sidewalk where the distance between the back of the curb and the sidewalk is less than three feet in width. No tree shall be planted nearer to the intersection of any streets than 25 feet from the comer of such intersection. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-174. - Excavations near trees. 
    Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within six feet of any tree without a written permit from the director. Any person making such excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a good substantial frame box to be approved by the department, and all building material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-175. - Covering surface near trees. 
    No person shall place within the street right-of-way, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a sidewalk of authorized width and location. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-176. - Private trees-Clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or right-of-way. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, such trimming to be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way. All shrubs and bushes located on the triangle formed by two centerlines at the intersection of two streets, and extending for a distance of 75 feet each way from the intersection of the centerlines on any corner within the city, shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than three feet above the centerline point of the surface of the roadway, nor two feet above the surface of the sidewalk, in order that the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be obstructed. Trees may be planted and maintained in this area, provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of eight feet above the roadway surface. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-177. - Same-Dangerous, diseased or infested. 
    When the director shall discover that any tree growing on private property within the city is dead, dying, damaged, or has broken or decayed tree limbs and constitutes a hazard to the safety of persons or property, or is afflicted with any dangerous and infectious insect infestation or tree disease, the director shall forthwith serve a written notice upon the owner or the owner's agent, or the occupant of the property, describing the tree, its location and the nature of the hazard, infestation or tree disease and ordering the owner, agent and occupant to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary to eliminate such hazard or cure such infestation or disease and to prevent the spreading thereof, specifying the measures required to be taken. Such order may require the pruning, spraying or destruction of trees as may be reasonably necessary. Every such notice shall be complied with within ten days after service thereof, upon the owner, agent or occupant of the property on which the hazardous or afflicted tree is located, or within such additional time as may be stipulated in such notice. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-178. - Dutch elm disease. 
    Every elm tree, regardless of species or variety, infected with the fungus ceratostomella ulmi, popularly called Dutch elm disease, shall be cut and burned; if on public property, within ten days after the manager shall learn of the condition and, if on the property, within ten days after notice as specified in section 14-177. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-179. - Appeal. 
    In case the owner, agent or occupant of the property shall feel aggrieved at an order of the director requiring the treatment or destruction of any tree, the owner, agent or occupant may within 48 hours make an appeal to the city commission by communication filed with the city clerk. The city commission shall hear such appeal at its next regular meeting, unless another time shall be set, and shall determine the matter. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-180. - Private trees-Owners' failure to comply. 
    In case the owner, agent and occupant of the property refuse to carry out the order of the director within the time limited, or in case of an appeal, within five days after the commission shall have affirmed such order, the director shall carry out the pruning, spraying or destruction of the trees as deemed necessary by the director and shall bill the owner, agent or occupant of the property for the cost thereof. In case the owner of such property shall fail to pay such bill within 30 days after the same has been rendered, the director shall report the same to the city commission for collection as a single lot assessment against said property in accordance with the Charter. The director may, without serving the above notice, when the owner or occupant of any property shall consent thereto and pay the reasonable cost thereof, cause trees growing on private property to be sprayed when the director deems the same necessary on account of any infestation or disease or threat thereof. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-181. - Same-Inspection. 
    The director and the director's assistants and employees shall have the authority to enter upon private premises for the purpose of examining any trees, shrubs, plants or vines for the presence of destructive insects or plant diseases. No damages shall be awarded for the destruction of any tree, shrub or plant or fruit or injury to the same, if done by the director or under the director's direction, in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-182. - Overhead lines trimming permit. 
    The city manager shall annually issue permits granting permission to public utilities to trim and keep trimmed all trees within the streets, alleys, parks and public places, in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines of such public utilities safe and accessible. Such trimming shall be done in accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the director of the department. Said permit shall require reasonable prior notice to the city before any work is commenced thereunder. In the event of an emergency requiring immediate maintenance work on the overhead lines of said public utilities, prior notice of commencing work under said permit shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-183. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall make such rules and regulations supplementary to this article and not in conflict herewith, as the director may from time to time deem necessary. Until changed pursuant to this section, the rules and regulations in effect at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article shall continue in effect. No person shall fail to obey any rule or regulation effective hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 14-184. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Any tree maintained in violation of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive process. Each day of maintenance contrary to this article after notice of violation shall be deemed an additional and distinct violation thereof. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, in any way, the police and remedial actions available to the city under the law. 
(Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Secs. 14-185-14-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ABANDONED PROPERTY 

Sec. 14-201. - Vacant or abandoned structures; purpose. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Huntington Woods by preventing blight, protecting property values and neighborhood integrity, remedying these nuisances and ensuring safe and sanitary maintenance of vacant or abandoned structures. Vacant or abandoned structures are hereby declared a nuisance. 
(b)  Legislative finding. The City Commission of the City of Huntington Woods makes the following legislative findings: 
(1)  Vacant or abandoned structures create a serious and substantial problem and are public nuisances. 
(2)  Vacant or abandoned structures that are not maintained constitute a hazard to public health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  Vacant or abandoned structures often become dilapidated because they are not maintained and repaired by their owners. 
(4)  Vacant or abandoned structures attract children, harbor vermin, shelter vagrants and criminals, and are more likely to be damaged by vandals or arsonists than occupied properties. 
(5)  Unkempt grounds surrounding vacant or abandoned structures invite dumping of garbage, trash, and other debris. 
(6)  Vacant or abandoned structures may be on narrow lots and close to neighboring structures, increasing the risk of fire and spread of insect and rodent infestation. 
(7)  Vacant or abandoned structures contribute to blight; cause a decrease in property values; and discourage neighbors from making improvements to structures. 
(8)  Vacant or abandoned structures that remain boarded up for an extended period of time also exert a blighting influence and contribute to a decline of the neighborhood by decreasing property values, discouraging persons from moving into the neighborhood, and encouraging persons to move out of the neighborhood. 
(9)  Vacant or abandoned structures that may otherwise provide safe, affordable, homeownership often continue to deteriorate to the point that demolition of the structure is required, decreasing available housing in the community and contributing to neighborhood decline. 
(10)  The blighting influence of vacant or abandoned structures adversely affects the tax revenues of local government. 
(11)  The City of Huntington Woods spends resources and staff time to maintain, secure, demolish or otherwise respond to problems associated with vacant or abandoned structures. 
(12)  Owners, those persons or entities in control of, or those persons or entities having contractual responsibility for the maintenance and security of vacant or abandoned structures should be held accountable for the physical condition of their structures. At a minimum, they should prevent such structures from exerting a negative influence on the well-being of the neighborhoods where they are located. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 14-202. - Definitions. 
(a)  Vacant or abandoned structure means a parcel of real property with a structure or building, that has been without occupancy for 30 days or more, and is either: 
(1)  Subject to foreclosure as defined by this section; or 
(2)  Is not maintained in compliance with applicable codes and ordinances of the City of Huntington Woods, including without limitation, the state construction code and the property maintenance code, found in chapter 6 of the City Code, nuisance regulations, found in chapter 14 of the City Code, and solid waste regulations, found in chapter 30 of the Code, and meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Has one or more broken or boarded windows; 
b.  Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365 days; 
c.  Has utilities disconnected or not in use; 
d.  Has a structure for which a building permit has expired that is only partially completed and is not fit for human occupancy; 
e.  Has a structure which is open to casual entry or trespass; 
f.  Suffers deterioration from neglect; 
g.  Has a structure that is damaged by fire, flood, weather, or vandalism to an extent which prohibits human occupancy; 
h.  Is under a condemnation notice or legal order to vacate; 
i.  Has a structure that is structurally unsound, or is a potential hazard or danger to persons, including but not limited to those conditions listed in section 6-186 of the City Code. 
(b)  Enforcing officer means the building official, code enforcement officer, or other designee of the city manager. 
(c)  Foreclosure means the process by which a mortgage, security interest or lien is enforced against a parcel of real property through sale or offering for sale the real property to satisfy a debt or claim. For the purposes of this section, a property becomes "subject to foreclosure" upon issuance or publication of a notice of foreclosure and/or a notice of trustee's sale, when subject to a pending tax sale, when it has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure, and/or where title was transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
(d)  Owner is defined as any person or entity with legal or equitable ownership of real property or who has contractual responsibility for security or maintenance over any real property. The term owner for the purpose of imposing responsibility and accountability under this article shall include, but is not limited to, a bank, credit union, trustee, real estate agent or any person or entity which is in possession (in whole or in part) of the real property or in the process of foreclosing a lien or mortgage interest in the affected property, whether or not legal or equitable title has been attained. The term owner applies to all agents of such owner having the authority and/or duty to maintain the property. 
(e)  Securing means such measures as may be directed by the enforcing officer that render the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, and the repair of doors, windows, and other openings. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 14-203. - Registration. 
(a)  An owner of a vacant or abandoned structure in the city shall register the structure with the enforcing officer within 15 days after: 1) the structure becomes subject to foreclosure; or 2) the date of notice by the enforcing officer that the structure has been declared a vacant or abandoned structure, whichever is earlier. 
(b)  Service of the notice shall be made upon the owner or owner's registered agent, by: 
(1)  Personally delivering a copy to the owner or owner's registered agent; 
(2)  Mailing a copy by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the owner or owner's registered agent at his last known address, and posting a copy thereof upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure; or 
(3)  When service cannot be made by either of the methods described in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section and when the whereabouts of the owner and his residence are unknown, publishing a copy in a newspaper at least once each week for four consecutive weeks, mailing on or before the second publication a copy to the owner or owner's registered agent at his last known address, and posting a copy thereof upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(c)  Once a vacant or abandoned structure has been properly registered by the owner, such registration shall be valid and effective until January 10 of the following year and shall be renewed annually thereafter until the property has become occupied and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(d)  Registration information. 
(1)  For each vacant or abandoned structure required to be registered, the owner(s) shall register with the enforcing officer on a form provided by the department and shall provide the following information: 
a.  Address of the vacant or abandoned structure; 
b.  Date on which the structure became vacant or abandoned; 
c.  Legal name of the owner(s); 
d.  Address(es), telephone number and e-mail address of owner(s); 
e.  Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of any agent or representative authorized by the owner to handle the affairs of the structure, if employed; 
f.  Telephone number(s) of owner for contact purposes; 
g.  Such additional information as required by the enforcing officer; 
h.  A statement allowing authorized city staff to enter the premises for inspection purposes. 
(2)  Requirement to keep information current. If at any time the information contained in the registration is no longer valid, the property owner has ten days to file a new registration containing current information. There shall be no fee to update the current owner's information. 
(3)  Fee; administrative late charge. An administrative late charge as established by a resolution adopted by the city commission shall be paid by the owner if registration of a vacant or abandoned structure does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Fees. All fees applicable to this chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city commission and shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  Annual registration fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner at the time of registration of the vacant or abandoned structure. 
(2)  Failure to register fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner for failing to register the vacant or abandoned structure as required by this section. 
(3)  Monitoring fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner for periodic inspections by the enforcing officer to assure continuing compliance with the duties set forth in section 14-204. A nonrefundable payment of the first two monitoring fees shall be prepaid by the owner at the time of registration. 
(4)  Certificate of occupancy fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner for a certificate of occupancy as described in section 14-206. 
(5)  Inspection fee. Shall be the fee charged to the owner for any inspection requested by the owner or necessitated by the owner's failure to comply with the maintenance and security duties as set forth in section 14-204. 
(6)  Administrative charges. Administrative charges shall also be charged to the owner as applicable for search warrant, title search, boarding and securing, debris/rubbish removal, and prosecution preparation. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 14-204. - Duty to maintain and secure. 
    An owner of a vacant or abandoned structure shall comply with all of the following maintenance and security requirements: 
(1)  The property on which the structure is located shall be in compliance with article V of chapter 14, of the City Code for grass and vegetation maintenance. 
(2)  The property shall be kept free of dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state, or local law), discarded items (including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, unapproved signage, containers, equipment, construction materials), or other inappropriate materials. 
(3)  The property and structure shall be maintained free of graffiti. 
(4)  Pools, hot tubs, and other water features shall be maintained in working order and the water shall be circulated and filtered or chlorinated, or otherwise treated so as not to create an odor, environmental concern, or provide breeding area for mosquitos. If the pool, hot tub or water feature is not in working order it shall be covered by a safety cover approved by the International Property Maintenance Code and comply with the minimum security fencing and barrier requirements of applicable building and housing and property maintenance codes. No person shall permit a ground depression, ground excavation, cover of a pool, hot tub, wading pool, artificial pond or debris located on his/her property to contain standing water for a period in excess of four days. Any person owning property not maintained pursuant to the requirements of this subsection, shall take steps to remedy the situation by filling or draining off the body of water or the treatment of the same with a larvacide. 
Standing water means any water, other than a natural body of water that exists on a permanent basis or contained within a municipally owner storm sewer management system, that is found on the ground or in debris as defined by this section. 
Debris shall mean any material whatsoever capable of holding water and without limiting the generality of the foregoing includes pools, tires, wheelbarrows, upturned garage can lids, containers of any kind and garden fixtures. Debris that contains standing water will be deemed a public nuisance in violation of section 14-1. 
(5)  The property and structure shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and any other openings of such size that may allow a child or other person to access the interior of the property and/or structures. 
(6)  The structure shall be properly winterized so as to prevent bursting of pipes unless the buildings are served by a heating system that requires the use of water for heating or fire suppression. 
(7)  The structure shall be maintained in accordance with applicable sections of the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Huntington Woods, as adopted in article VI of chapter 6, of the City Code. 
(8)  The structure shall not have any type of window or door that is "boarded up" for a length of time to exceed seven days. Any material such as metal, wood, fiberglass or plastic shall be replaced by glass or door material comparable to what was damaged within seven days of the occurrence giving rise to the damage. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 3-20-2012; Ord. No. 584, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-205. - Violations, inspections, abatement. 
(a)  Inspection-Frequency. Periodic inspections shall be conducted by the enforcing officer to assure continuing compliance with the duties set forth in section 14-204. A fee determined by resolution of the city commission shall be established to offset the cost of monitoring the property and vacant or abandoned structures. A nonrefundable payment of the first two monitoring fees shall be prepaid by the owner at the time of registration. 
(b)  Notice-Service. Notice of any cited violations or demand for abatement shall be served upon the registered owner of record by first class mail and by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place or on or about the structure affected by the notice. 
(c)  Notice-Contents. Whenever the enforcing officer determines that there has been or is a violation of any duties required by this article, he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person responsible therefor. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(3)  Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required; and 
(4)  Indicate the time in which correction is required. 
(d)  Duty of owner, etc., to secure and maintain. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the city to inspect, secure and maintain the premises as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of section 14-204 of this Code. 
(e)  Abatement by city; charging cost. If the owner fails to secure or maintain the premises as required under section 14-204 of this Code, such failure shall constitute a hazardous and nuisance condition. Within 72 hours after the notice to abate has been provided, an enforcing officer may abate the nuisance without giving further notice. The enforcing officer may abate the offending condition by arranging for city employees or private contractors to secure and board the structure, remove rubbish and debris from the premises, or make repairs to maintain the building(s) and premises to conform to section 14-204. The cost of abating the nuisance condition(s) may be charged against the premises and the owner in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Huntington Woods City Charter. 
(f)  Emergency abatement by city; charging cost. An enforcing officer may abate a public nuisance under section 14-204 of this Code without giving notice, if the public health or safety requires immediate abatement. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against the premises and the owner in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Huntington Woods City Charter. 
(g)  Appeal of assessment. An owner assessed for abatement costs may appeal the assessment to the City of Huntington Woods Construction and Property Maintenance Board of Appeals. On appeal, the board shall determine: 
(1)  Whether the property and/or structure was in violation of section 14-204 of this Code; 
(2)  Whether the city provided notice as required by subsection (b) of this section before the city abated the condition (except for emergency abatements); and 
(3)  Whether the costs assessed against the owner were reasonable. 
    An appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the city serves notice on the property owner that the costs will be assessed against the owner and the premises. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 14-206. - Prohibition on transfer or occupancy after registration. 
(a)  A registered vacant or abandoned structure shall not be occupied by any person until both of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
(1)  All outstanding fees required by section 14-203 have been paid; and 
(2)  A certificate of occupancy has been issued by the enforcing officer after inspection. 
a.  A certificate of occupancy shall only be issued after a complete inspection of the property and structure have been conducted and all violations are corrected in accordance with the applicable requirements of the state construction code and the property maintenance code of the city. 
b.  The property shall be occupied within 30 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the property is not occupied within 30 days, the certificate of occupancy shall terminate. 
c.  Should any structure for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued remain vacant and unoccupied for a period of more than 30 days after the issuance of such certificate, no occupancy of such structure may thereafter occur until the owner complies with the provisions of subsection (a)(2)a. of this section and any additional fees have been paid. 
(b)  No real property on which a registered vacant or abandoned structure is located shall be sold or transferred without first being inspected by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 14-207. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Any property maintained in violation of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive process. This process shall be initiated by the Huntington Woods City Attorney at the request of the city manager. Each day of maintenance contrary to this article after notice of the violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation thereof. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, in any way, the police and remedial actions available to the city under the law. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Secs. 14-208-14-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STANDING WATER AND MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 14-231. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Huntington Woods by protecting the public safety by requiring that pools, hot tubs, and other water features be maintained in working order so as not to create an odor, environmental concern, or provide breeding area for mosquitos. Pools, hot tubs, and other water features not maintained in working order as required by this section are hereby declared a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-232. - Definitions. 
    Standing water means any water, other than a natural body of water that exists on a permanent basis or contained within a municipally owner storm sewer management system, that is found on the ground or in debris as defined by this section. 
    Debris shall mean any material whatsoever capable of holding water and without limiting the generality of the foregoing includes pools, tires, wheelbarrows, upturned garage can lids, containers of any kind and garden fixtures. Debris that contains standing water will be deemed a public nuisance in violation of section 14-1. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-233. - Duty to maintain. 
    Pools, hot tubs, and other water features shall be maintained in working order and the water shall be circulated and filtered or chlorinated or otherwise treated. If the pool, hot tub or water feature is not in working order it shall be covered by a safety cover approved by the state construction code and comply with the minimum security fencing and barrier requirements of applicable building and housing and property maintenance codes. No person shall permit a ground depression, ground excavation, cover of a pool, hot tub, wading pool, artificial pond or debris located on his/her property to contain standing water for a period in excess of four days. Any person owning property not maintained pursuant to the requirements of this article, shall take steps to remedy the situation by filling or draining off the body of water or the treatment of the same with a larvacide. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-234. - Notice; violations; abatement. 
(a)  Notice-Service. Notice of any cited violations or demand for abatement shall be served upon the registered owner of record by first class mail and by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place or on or about the structure affected by the notice. 
(b)  Notice-Contents. Whenever the enforcing officer determines that there has been or is a violation of any duties required by this article, he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person responsible therefor. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
(3)  Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required; and 
(4)  Indicate the time in which correction is required. 
(c)  Abatement by city; charging cost. If the owner fails to secure or maintain the premises as required under this article of the Code, such failure shall constitute a hazardous and nuisance condition. Within 72 hours after the notice to abate has been provided, an enforcing officer may abate the nuisance without giving further notice. The enforcing officer may abate the offending condition by arranging for city employees or private contractors to make repairs or take such other action deemed necessary. The cost of abating the nuisance condition(s) may be charged against the premises and the owner in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Huntington Woods City Charter. 
(d)  Emergency abatement by city; charging cost. An enforcing officer may abate a public nuisance under this article of the Code without giving notice, if the public health or safety requires immediate abatement. The cost of abating the nuisance may be charged against the premises and the owner in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Huntington Woods City Charter. 
(e)  Appeal of assessment. An owner assessed for abatement costs may appeal the assessment to the City of Huntington Woods Construction and Property Maintenance Board of Appeals. On appeal, the board shall determine: 
(1)  Whether the property and/or structure was in violation of section 14-233 of this Code; 
(2)  Whether the city provided notice as required by subsection (b) of this section before the city abated the condition (except for emergency abatements); and 
(3)  Whether the costs assessed against the owner were reasonable. 
An appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the city serves notice on the property owner that the costs will be assessed against the owner and the premises. 
(f)  A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(g)  Any property maintained in violation of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive process. This process shall be initiated by the Huntington Woods City Attorney at the request of the city manager. Each day a violation exists shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation thereof. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, in any way, the police and remedial actions available to the city under the law. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Secs. 14-235-14-260. - Reserved. 
Chapter 15 - RESERVED 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State Fire Prevention Code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; Explosives Act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 16-23. - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference as the fire prevention code for the city the 2012 Edition of the International Fire Code, including its appendices, as published and promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., for the purpose of regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, hereby referred to, are adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein, with amendments and deletions as set forth in section 16-24. 
(Code 1988, § 8.30; Ord. No. 318, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 560, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 588, § 1, 12-20-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 16-24. - Amendments and deletions; limits established. 
(a)  Changes. The fire prevention code adopted by the provisions of this article is hereby amended, changed and altered in the following respects: 
Section 101.1. Title is amended to read as follows: 
These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan, hereinafter referred to as this Code. 
Section 108.1. Appeals is amended to read as follows: 
The City of Huntington Woods Construction and Property Maintenance Board of Appeals, created by section 6-26 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Huntington Woods, is hereby designated to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code. The Board may, as required, adopt rules or procedures for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the fire code official. 
Section 109.3. Violation Penalties. 
This section is deleted and penalties shall be as provided by applicable ordinance. 
Section. 114.4. Failure to Comply is amended to read as follows: 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be responsible for a violation of this Code and liable to a fine as provided by ordinance. Every day that work shall continue shall constitute a separate and additional offense. 
(b)  Limits established. The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2012 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
Section 3204.3.1.1. (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationery containers is prohibited): Prohibited in all areas of the city. 
Section 3404.2.9.5. (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): Prohibited in all areas of the city. 
Section 3406.2.4.4. (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above ground tanks is prohibited): Prohibited in all areas of the city. 
Section 3804.2. (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas): Prohibited in all areas of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 8.31; Ord. No. 318, § 1, 6-21-1988; Ord. No. 509, § 2, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 560, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 588, § 1, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 16-25. - Permits. 
    The fire official shall inspect all structures and premises, except single-family dwellings, at least once each year. 
(1)  An inspection permit shall be issued by such fire official annually and such permit shall remain effective for such period of time as specified on the permit or until the next annual inspection. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to engage in any business activity without first obtaining such a permit from the fire official. 
(3)  Permits are not transferable and any change in use, operation or tenancy shall require a new permit. 
(Code 1988, § 8.33; Ord. No. 560, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 16-26. - Fees. 
    A fee shall be charged for such inspection and permit as required under section 16-25 and the permit shall not be issued until the designated fee has been paid. Such fee may be revised by resolution of the city commission from time to time. The fee for any appeal taken to the board of appeals pursuant to this article shall be in such amount as may be prescribed by the city commission by resolution. 
(Code 1988, § 8.34; Ord. No. 342, § 1, 7-25-1989; Ord. No. 560, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 16-27. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article, or of the fire prevention code adopted in section 16-23 by reference, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, an appropriate action may be instituted to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. 
(Code 1988, § 8.35; Ord. No. 413, § 1, 5-19-1998; Ord. No. 560, 6-18-2013) 
Chapter 17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale means such terms as "home sale," "basement sale," "attic sale," or any other type of so called residential sale of used tangible personal property such as, but not limited to, clothing, household effects, tools, garden implements, toys, recreation equipment or other used or secondhand items customarily found in and about the home and advertised in a manner whereby the public at large is, or can be, aware of such sale. All such sales must be conducted within a home, garage, or other sheltered place. No open yard sales are permitted. 
(Code 1988, § 7.131) 
Sec. 18-2. - Permit. 
    The homeowner or occupant shall first obtain a permit from the public safety department before advertising or conducting any garage sale. The fee for such a permit shall be such amount as may be prescribed by the city commission by resolution. The public safety department shall provide the applicant with three signs to be used to advertise the garage sale. No signs shall be used to advertise a garage sale other than the signs provided by the public safety department. 
(Code 1988, § 7.132; Ord. No. 340, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 18-3. - Duration and frequency. 
    Each garage sale shall be limited to two consecutive days of operation and no more than two such sales may be conducted by any household or member thereof per calendar year. No sale shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1988, § 7.133) 
Sec. 18-4. - Signs. 
    No more than three signs of four square feet in area shall be used to advertise a garage sale. The signs pertaining to the garage sale must be placed behind the sidewalk on private property and such signs shall be removed immediately after the garage sale. If signs are placed on private property other than on the property of the homeowner or occupant sponsoring the garage sale, permission must be obtained. No other signs pertaining to a garage sale shall be permitted on public or private property. 
(Code 1988, § 7.134) 
Sec. 18-5. - Nature of goods sold. 
    No person other than the homeowner or occupant shall conduct a garage sale, so called, and no merchandise of any nature shall be brought in from any commercial source to supplement such sale. However, this shall not prevent homeowners from conducting a joint garage sale. 
(Code 1988, § 7.135) 
Sec. 18-6. - Exempt sales. 
    This chapter shall not apply to a householder who, during the normal course of housekeeping, advertises or otherwise offers for sale individual pieces of furniture or an appliance of value which is being replaced or is no longer needed. 
(Code 1988, § 7.136) 
Chapter 19 - HUMAN RIGHTS 

Sec. 19-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Huntington Woods Human Rights Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 19-2. - Purpose. 
    In recognition of the inherent dignity and equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family, it is the policy of the City of Huntington Woods in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare, to assure equal opportunity to all persons in the area of employment, housing, public accommodations and public services. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 19-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Age is defined as an individual's chronological age, except as otherwise provided by law. 
    Color is defined as an individual's skin pigmentation. 
    Discrimination or discriminate means without limitation, any act which, because of race, color, religion, sex, age, height or weight, marital status, sexual orientation, familial status, national origin, or physical or mental disability, results in the unequal treatment or separation of any person, or denies, prevents, limits or otherwise adversely affects the benefit or enjoyment of any person, of employment, ownership or occupancy of real property or public accommodations and public services. 
    Employment is defined as the act of hiring, recruiting, retaining and promoting of a person to perform the duties of a particular job or position. 
    Familial status is defined as one or more individuals under the age of 18 years residing with a parent or other person having custody or in the process of securing legal custody of the individual or individuals or residing with the designee of the parent or other person having or securing custody, with the written permission of the parent or other person. For purposes of this definition, "parent" includes a person who is pregnant. 
    Height or weight is defined as the physical characteristics of an individual as it relates to that individual's size and shall apply only to employment. 
    Housing is defined as the opportunity to purchase, lease, sell, hold, rent, use, and convey dwelling units. 
    Marital status is defined as the state of being single, married, separated, widowed, or divorced. 
    National origin is defined to include the national origin of an ancestor. 
    Person is defined as an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, unincorporated organization, labor organization, trustee, receiver or other fiduciary. 
    Physical or mental disability is defined to mean one or more of the following: 
(1)  A determinable physical or mental characteristic of an individual, which may result from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth, or functional disorder, if the characteristic: 
a.  Where applicable, substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of that individual and is unrelated to the individual's ability to perform the duties of a particular job or position or substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of that individual and is unrelated to the individual's qualifications for employment or promotion; 
b.  Where applicable, is unrelated to the individual's ability to utilize and benefit from a place of public accommodations and public services; 
c.  Where applicable, is unrelated to the individual's ability to utilize and benefit from educational opportunities, programs, and facilities at an educational institution; 
d.  Where applicable, substantially limits one or more of that individual's major life activities and is unrelated to the individual's ability to acquire, rent, or maintain property. 
(2)  A history of a determinable physical or mental characteristic described in subparagraph (1)a. 
(3)  Being regarded as having a determinable physical or mental characteristic described in subparagraph (1)a. 
(4)  "Unrelated to the individual's ability" means, with or without accommodation, an individual's disability does not prevent the individual from doing one or more of the following: 
a.  Where applicable, performing the duties of a particular job or position; 
b.  Where applicable, utilizing and benefitting from a place of public accommodation or public services; 
c.  Where applicable, utilizing and benefitting from educational opportunities, programs, and facilities at an educational institution; and 
d.  Where applicable, acquiring, renting, or maintaining property. 
    Place of public accommodations is defined as any business or educational, cultural, governmental, health care, day care, entertainment, recreational, refreshment, transportation, financial institution or facility of any kind, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public. 
    Public services is defined as a public facility, department, or agency owned, operated, or managed by or on behalf of a city, village, township, county or school district, or any authority, agency, or combination thereof, or a tax exempt private agency established to provide services to the public. 
    Sexual orientation is defined as, real or perceived, male or female heterosexuality, bisexuality, homosexuality, or gender identity. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 19-4. - Prohibition. 
    No person or persons shall discriminate against any person or persons within the City of Huntington Woods regarding employment, housing, public accommodations and public services on the basis of that person's race, color, religion, sex, age, height or weight, marital status, sexual orientation, familial status, national origin, or physical or mental disability. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 19-5. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Private club exemption. The prohibition of section 19-4 shall not apply to a private club, or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the private club or establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of another establishment that is a place of public accommodation or is licensed by the state under Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of 1933, being MCL 436.1-436.58, the Michigan Liquor Control Act, as amended. 
(b)  Religious exemption. The prohibition of section 19-4 shall not apply to a religious educational institution or an educational institution operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious institution or organization which limits admission or gives preference to an applicant of the same religion. 
(c)  Private residence exemption. The prohibition of section 19-4 shall not apply to: 
(1)  The rental of housing accommodations in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family resides in one of the housing accommodations, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor's immediate family resides in the dwelling. 
(2)  The rental of housing accommodations for not more than 12 months by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him/her and maintained as his/her home for at least three months immediately preceding occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal residence. 
(3)  With respect to the age provision only, the sale, rental or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations otherwise intended, advertised, designated or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons 50 years of age or older. 
(d)  Bona fide occupational qualification exemption. The prohibition of section 19-4, with respect to employment only, shall not apply where a protected classification set forth in section 19-4 is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of a business or enterprise. A person shall have a burden of establishing that the qualification is reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that person's business or enterprise. 
(e)  Private educational institution exemption. The prohibition of section 19-4 relating to sex only shall not apply to an educational institution which now or hereafter provides an education to persons of one sex. 
(f)  Governmental exemption. The prohibition of section 19-4 shall not apply to any action by a governmental entity or agency where a person's qualification is expressly limited by statute, charter, ordinance, policy, or otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 19-6. - Complaints. 
    All persons claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory act(s) may, by themselves or through legal counsel, file a verified complaint with public safety officers who are hereby authorized to process such complaints pursuant to the provisions of chapter 9 (Municipal Civil Infractions) of the City of Huntington Woods Ordinance Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 19-7. - Violations, fines and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination or admission of responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00, costs of prosecution and such other costs, damages, expenses, sanctions and remedies as authorized by law, including but not limited to, the Revised Judicature Act, and specifically MCL 600.8302, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 19-8. - Limitation of action. 
    No complaint shall be accepted, nor action taken unless filed within one year from the date of the alleged discriminatory act(s). 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Chapter 20 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION CONTROL 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
    All terms defined in the Land Division Act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), shall have the meanings therein provided when used in this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 5.191) 
Sec. 20-20. - Planning commission report. 
    The city planning commission shall consider and report by resolution to the city commission upon any plat or proposed subdivision of land within the incorporated area before the plat shall be approved finally by the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 5.192) 
Sec. 20-21. - Pre-application review meeting. 
    The proprietor may request that a pre-application review meeting take place by submitting a written request to the chairperson of the county plat board and submitting copies of a concept plan for the preliminary plat to the city and to each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113 to 118 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.113-560.118). A pre-application review meeting shall take place not later than 30 days after the written request and concept plan are received. The meeting shall be attended by the proprietor, representatives of each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113, 114 and 118 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.113, 560.114, 560.118), and a representative of the city. Representatives of each agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 115 to 117 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.115-560.117) shall be informed of the meeting and may attend. The purpose of the meeting is to conduct an informal review of the proprietor's concept plan for the preliminary plat. 
Sec. 20-22. - Preliminary plat. 
    Any person desiring to subdivide lands in the city, including resubdivision of existing platted lands, shall first submit to the planning commission four copies of preliminary sketches of the proposed subdivision plat. Such preliminary sketch shall be made to a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch. Each such preliminary sketch shall show: 
(1)  An exact legal description of the land to be contained in the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  The location of existing property lines, streets, culverts, underground structures, buildings, water lines, sewers and other features within the area to be subdivided, and similar facts in property immediately adjacent to such proposed subdivision. 
(3)  The location, number and dimensions of all lots to be platted in the proposed subdivision. 
(4)  The location and width of proposed streets, alleys, building lines and private and public easements in the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  The name of the proposed subdivision, together with the names and addresses of all the proprietors of the proposed subdivision. 
(6)  The names, boundaries and lot division of each adjoining subdivision. 
(Code 1988, § 5.193) 
Sec. 20-23. - Additional preliminary data. 
    There shall be transmitted with every such preliminary sketch of every plat, the following data: 
(1)  An opinion from qualified legal counsel as to status of ownership of the land in the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Copies of the proposed building and use restrictions to be imposed on the said proposed subdivision. 
(3)  Such other information as the planning commission may reasonably require, including but not limited to, a statement of the character of the development to be had in the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1988, § 5.194) 
Sec. 20-24. - Planning commission recommendation. 
    Prior to making any recommendation, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed plat in accordance with the requirements of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq., as amended. The planning commission shall consider the data and documents required in sections 20-22 and 20-23 as soon as may be feasible to allow for the public hearing, and shall promptly forward said recommendation on the preliminary plat to the city commission. The planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the preliminary plat within 63 days after the plat is submitted to the planning commission, unless the proprietor waives this requirement or consents to an extension. 
(Code 1988, § 5.195; Ord. No. 571, § 1, 10-21-2014) 
Sec. 20-25. - Notice of approval. 
    The city commission shall, upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, consider the same together with preliminary sketches and data accompanying the same, and shall, within 60 days after it was submitted to the clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was conducted, or within 90 days after it was submitted to the clerk, if a preapplication review meeting was not conducted, indicate that it will approve or reject the proposed plat. If the city commission indicates that it will approve such plat, the city clerk shall instruct the proprietors, or agents of the proprietors, of the said proposed subdivision, to submit to the city commission five copies of final plats of the proposed subdivision plat, drawn according to the findings of the city commission. Upon receipt by the city commission of said final plats, drawn in conformity to the conditions required by the city commission and the provisions of the Land Division Act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the plat shall be approved. If the city commission shall reject a proposed plat, corrections, amendments or modifications may be submitted for the city commission's consideration. 
(Code 1988, § 5.196) 
Sec. 20-26. - Fee. 
(a)  A fee of such amount as may be prescribed by the city commission by ordinance shall be payable to the city on the filing of all preliminary and final plats and all such plats shall be in conformity with all pertinent provisions of state law and this article. 
(b)  The fee as described in subsection (a) shall be $500.00 for a preliminary plat and $500.00 for a final plat. 
(Code 1988, § 5.197; Ord. No. 333, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 20-27. - Security for improvements. 
    No plat of land on which streets and utilities herein required have not been installed, shall be finally approved until the proprietors shall execute a written agreement to construct streets, and install drains, water and sewer facilities, nor until security for performance of such agreement in the form authorized by section 182 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.182) shall be filed with the city clerk, approved as to form by the city attorney and accepted by the city commission. Such security shall guarantee the performance of the agreement for construction of streets, water systems and sewer facilities in the proposed subdivision. The amount of such security shall be determined by the city commission on recommendation of the city manager. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the requirements for the construction of streets, drains, water lines and sewer facilities and the agreement for such construction, shall be governed by current city specifications applicable thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 5.198) 
Sec. 20-28. - Street specifications. 
    The minimum requirement for proper surfacing of streets shall be curb and gutter, with a minimum width of 26 feet between faces of said curbs, and bituminous street surfacing in accordance with the specifications of the director of public works. 
(Code 1988, § 5.199) 
Sec. 20-29. - Final plat; filing. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to see that all plats are presented to, and filed, if accepted, with the proper authorities of the state and of the county. 
(Code 1988, § 5.200) 
Sec. 20-30. - Division of land in a subdivision. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjoining lot means the lot or outlot adjoining a sublot. 
Divided lot means a lot or outlot in a recorded plat that is partitioned or divided. 
Lot means a lot or outlot in a recorded plat. 
Owner means a natural person, which may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Parcel means the land included within the description on the assessment roll of the city under a single tax parcel identification (Sidwell) number, and may include one or more lots, or parts of lots. 
Partitioning or dividing means the partitioning or dividing of a lot or parcel of land by the owner thereof for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development. 
Recorded plat or subdivision means land which has been subdivided pursuant to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), or any predecessor statute. 
Sublot means one part of a divided lot. 
Sublots means two or more parts of a divided lot. 
Subparcel means one part of a divided parcel. 
Subparcels means two or more parts of a divided parcel. 
(b)  Prohibition against partitioning or dividing lots or parcels of land. It shall be unlawful for any person to divide or partition any lot or parcel of land in a recorded plat except as provided in this section. 
(c)  Approval of partitioning or dividing of lots or parcels that comply with City Code. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall review the partitioning or dividing of a lot or a parcel in a recorded plat. If the application is made pursuant to this subsection (c), the city manager shall grant or deny the same within 30 days of its filing if the applicant complies with the procedural requirements of this section, including the filing of a fully executed affidavit pursuant to subsection (e), and: 
(1)  In the case of a lot, each of the sublots is to be combined with and used in conjunction with an adjoining full lot, and the combined size of each such resulting parcel meets or exceeds the minimum lot size requirement of the city applicable to the zoning district in which it is located; 
(2)  In the case of a parcel consisting of more than one lot, each of the subparcels, after division, contains at least one full lot and equals or exceeds the minimum lot size requirements of the city applicable to the zoning district in which it is located; 
(3)  A sublot, whether governed by subsections (c)(1) or (2) of this section, shall be used in conjunction with an adjoining full lot and may not be developed or used separately, except as provided in subsection (c)(4) below; 
(4)  Any sublot that is not to be developed or used with the adjoining lot shall comply with the minimum requirements of the city zoning ordinances; and 
(5)  Each resultant parcel shall be in conformity with all pertinent ordinances of the city, shall have access to a public street or permanent access easement, shall be or can be served by necessary utilities, and shall not in any way adversely affect the integrity of the recorded plat. 
(6)  There are no due or unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property. 
(d)  Approval of partitioning or dividing lots that do not comply with the City Code where there is a hardship or practical difficulty. 
(1)  An applicant for a partition or division under this subsection (d) shall submit written documentation to the city containing information to support a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship related to the parcel. After receipt of the written documentation, the city will provide notice to all property owners within 300 feet of the parcel which is the subject of the application. Said notice shall be provided no later than 15 days prior to the meeting where the application will be heard. 
(2)  The members of the zoning board of appeals (sitting in the capacity as the administrative board under this article and not in their capacity acting under the zoning ordinance) may approve the partitioning or dividing of a lot in a recorded plat for the development of and use of a sublot with the adjoining lot or outlot if the use of the lot as platted would result in practical difficulty or undue hardship to the owner of such property. 
(3)  Permission to partition or divide under this section shall only be granted if the following criteria are met: 
a.  The applicant has established a practical difficulty or undue hardship which would support granting the petition; 
b.  The sublot that is to be developed or used with the adjoining lot may not thereafter be developed or used separately unless the parcels after partition or division meet or exceed the minimum lot size requirements of the city applicable to the zoning district in which they are located; 
c.  The relief granted shall in no instance be greater than necessary to relieve the practical difficulty or hardship; 
d.  The applicant complies with the procedural requirements of this section; 
e.  The sublot used in conjunction with the adjoining lot and the remaining sublot both have access to a public street or permanent access easement, are or can be served by necessary utilities, and do not in any way adversely affect the integrity of the recorded plat; and 
f.  There are no due or unpaid taxes or special assessments on the property. 
(e)  Procedure for partitioning or dividing lots in platted subdivisions. 
(1)  Any property owner desiring to partition or divide a lot in a platted subdivision shall file with the city clerk a fully executed affidavit in a form sufficient for recording with the county register of deeds and signed by all persons who have any legal or equitable interest in the lot, and, where a sublot is to be developed or used with an adjoining lot, signed by all persons who have any legal or equitable interest in such adjoining lot. The affidavit shall include the name, business address and telephone number of all such persons. In addition, the affidavit shall provide the following information: 
a.  The legal description of the lot to be partitioned or divided; 
b.  The legal description of the sublots; 
c.  The legal description of the adjoining lot or adjoining lots; 
d.  For each sublot that is to be used with an adjoining lot, the combined legal description of the sublot and adjoining lot; and 
e.  Whether any of the described lots have previously been the subject of an application for partitioning or dividing, the date and disposition of such application. 
(2)  Legal descriptions shall indicate the area involved to the nearest square foot. 
(3)  Affidavits shall be accompanied by a plan illustrating the information contained in the affidavit and meeting the following requirements: 
a.  The plan shall be at least 81/2 inches by 14 inches and of a scale not less than one inch equaling 20 feet; 
b.  The plan shall depict a north arrow; 
c.  The plan shall be dated, including the dates of any revisions; 
d.  The plan shall depict existing utilities and drainage courses within 50 feet of the lot to be partitioned or divided; 
e.  The plan shall depict all roadways, and existing easements for drainage, utilities and floodplain preservation; 
f.  The plan shall depict the location of all property irons and monuments found or to be placed on the lots; 
g.  The plan shall depict existing buildings and all front, rear and side yard setbacks of each of the resulting lots; 
h.  The plan shall depict the zoning classification of the involved lots; and 
i.  The plan shall be signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
(4)  At the time the affidavit and accompanying documents are filed with the city clerk, the applicant shall pay the city clerk a fee in an amount as may be prescribed by the administrative board by ordinance or resolution. 
(5)  If the application is made pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, it shall be returned to the city clerk with the recommendation of the city manager or the city manager's designee, for placement on the city administrative board's agenda. The administrative board shall grant or deny the application within 60 days of its filing. The approval of an application shall be indicated on the endorsed affidavit, which the city clerk shall promptly file with the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1988, § 5.201; Ord. No. 303, § 1, 9-16-1986; Ord. No. 333, § 2, 7-25-1989; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 2-12-2003; Ord. No. 586, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 20-31. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 5.201; Ord. No. 303, § 1, 9-16-1986; Ord. No. 333, § 2, 7-25-1989; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 2-12-2003) 
Chapter 21 - RESERVED 
Chapter 22 - LIBRARY AND CULTURAL CENTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- District library establishment act, MCL 397.171 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Established. 
    The city shall maintain the Public Library and Cultural Center established in said city as a free public library and cultural center and for such purpose the commission shall include in the annual budget such sum as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of maintaining said library and cultural center. 
(Code 1988, § 1.151) 
Sec. 22-2. - Library board. 
(a)  There shall be an advisory library board that shall consist of seven members who shall be citizens of the United States. 
(b)  Five members of the advisory library board shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the mayor of the city with the approval of the city commission. The present members of the library board shall serve as members until their respective terms expire. Prior to January 1 in each year, one member or two members, as the case may be, of the library board who are residents of the city shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
(c)  Two members of the advisory library board shall be residents of the City of Pleasant Ridge and shall be appointed to the advisory library board for terms beginning January 1, 1997, in such a manner as may be determined appropriate by the mayor and city commission of the City of Pleasant Ridge. One of these two members shall be appointed to a three years term and the other shall be appointed to a two year term, and successors to each such member shall be appointed upon the expiration of their respective terms of office, such successors to serve full three year terms if the library services agreement between the City of Huntington Woods and the City of Pleasant Ridge is extended; provided that no such term shall extend beyond the termination date of such agreement. 
(d)  Upon termination of the library services agreement between the City of Huntington Woods and the City of Pleasant Ridge, the terms of the two members who are residents of the City of Pleasant Ridge shall end and the advisory library board shall return to a five-member board, all members of which shall be residents of the city. 
(e)  Within ten days after appointment to the library board and before entering upon their duties as members of the library board, each appointee shall file written acceptance with the city clerk and subscribe and file with the clerk an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state and to faithfully perform the duties of the office of library board member to the best of the board member's ability. All library board members shall serve without compensation as such. Each member of the present library board, and each member hereafter appointed, shall serve until the member's successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(Code 1988, § 1.152; Ord. No. 310, § 1, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 12-17-1996) 
Sec. 22-3. - Board organization. 
    The library board shall organize by electing annually at its first regular meeting a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the duties of the board. The secretary shall notify the commission of the names of all such officers promptly after their appointment. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1988, § 1.153; Ord. No. 391, § 2, 12-17-1996) 
Sec. 22-4. - Power and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the library board to study and observe the manner in which the library is managed and maintained by the city, and for that reason it may make or adopt such recommendations to the city manager or the city commission as may be expedient and not inconsistent with this chapter, the Charter of the city and the general laws of the state. It shall make recommendations concerning library hours, custody and purchase of the books, magazines, furniture, fixtures and equipment in said library and cultural center. The library board may accept donations, contributions and gifts, either general or for specific purposes, on behalf of the city. All monies, including fines, received by the library board shall be deposited with the city treasurer and except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, credited to the general fund. 
(Code 1988, § 1.154) 
Sec. 22-5. - Records. 
    The library board shall keep a complete record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1988, § 1.155) 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
Sec. 22-6. - Provisions for use. 
    The library and cultural center shall be maintained for the use and benefit of the residents and freeholders of the city. All residents shall have free use of said library and cultural center, subject only to such reasonable rules, regulations and fees as may be adopted by the city commission. Nonresidents may be granted permission to use the library under such conditions and upon payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the city commission. Residents of the City of Pleasant Ridge shall be entitled to receive library services in accordance with the library services agreement between the City of Huntington Woods and the City of Pleasant Ridge, effective January 1, 1997. 
(Code 1988, § 1.156; Ord. No. 391, § 3, 12-17-1996) 
Chapter 23 - RESERVED 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public place means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
(Code 1988, § 9.61) 
Sec. 24-2. - Attempt to commit offenses. 
    Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited under this chapter, and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration, or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the same, shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.205) 
State Law reference- Attempt to commit crime, MCL 750.92. 
Sec. 24-3. - Inducement of illegal acts. 
    No person shall solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal act. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(19)) 
State Law reference- Soliciting or accosting, MCL 750.448. 
Secs. 24-4-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 24-21. - Obstruction of justice. 
    No person shall obstruct, resist, hinder, or oppose any member of the police force or any peace officer in the discharge of the police force or the officer's duties as such. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(24)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 24-22. - False alarm. 
    No person shall summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(33)) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false report of crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Secs. 24-23-24-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 24-46. - Assault and battery. 
    No person shall commit an assault, or an assault and battery on any person. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(1)) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 24-47. - Window peeping. 
    No person shall be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the city in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(7)) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 24-48. - Harassment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, to: 
(1)  Follow a person in or about a public place; or 
(2)  Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(10), (11), (30)) 
Sec. 24-49. - Malicious use of service provided by telecommunications service provider. 
    A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service provided by a telecommunications service provider with the intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy another person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of another person by any of the following: 
(1)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(2)  Falsely and deliberately reporting by message through the use of a telecommunications service or device that a person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death or has been the victim of a crime or an accident. 
(3)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telecommunications device and another telecommunications device or between a telecommunications device and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(4)  Using vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(5)  Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
(6)  Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call that is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call made by a person or recording device on behalf of a person soliciting business or contributions. 
(7)  Deliberately engaging or causing to engage the use of a telecommunications service or device of another person in a repetitive manner that causes interruption in telecommunications service or prevents the person from utilizing the provider's telecommunications service or device. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(34)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Secs. 24-50-24-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 24-78-24-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRESPASS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq. 

Sec. 24-98. - Trespassing. 
    No person shall prowl about any alley or the private premises of any person in the nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(25)) 
Sec. 24-99. - Trespass after entry prohibited. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
Secs. 24-100-24-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DAMAGE TO PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 

Sec. 24-127. - Spitting. 
    No person shall spit on any street or sidewalk, or in any public carrier upon the floor, seat, or walls thereof, or upon the floor, walls, stairs, or seats of any public building or place of public assemblage. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(26)) 
Sec. 24-128. - Defacing public property. 
    No person shall willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not owned by such person, or any public school building, or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, streetlight, street sign, traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, parking meter, or shade tree belonging to the city or located in the public places of the city, or mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of, any public building, or fence, tree, or pole within the city, or damage, destroy, take, or meddle with any property belonging to the city, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, or stored, without proper authority. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(27)) 
Sec. 24-129. - Injuring trees; shrubs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down or carry off any wood, underbrush, trees or timber, or to girdle or otherwise despoil or injure any trees, shrubs, or bushes on any land or private property within the city limits without first having obtained the leave, license or consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.382. 
Secs. 24-130-24-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - THEFT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Larceny generally, MCL 750.356 et seq. 

Sec. 24-157. - Larceny. 
    Any person who shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing of the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record is in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.63; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 3-23-1999) 
State Law reference- Larceny generally, MCL 750.356 et seq. 
Sec. 24-158. - Receiving and concealing or possessing stolen property. 
    Any person who shall commit the offense of buying, receiving, possessing, concealing or aiding in the concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods or property knowing the money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled, or converted is in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.202) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.535. 
Sec. 24-159. - Drawing or delivering a check without sufficient funds. 
(a)  A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud and knowing at the time of the making, drawing, uttering, or delivering that the maker or drawer does not have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository to pay the check, draft, or order, in full, upon its presentation. 
(b)  A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud if the person does not have sufficient funds for the payment of the check, draft, or order when presentation for payment is made to the drawee. This subsection does not apply if the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause and that fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered, or delivered the check, draft, or order. 
(Code 1988, § 9.203; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 8-19-1997; Ord. No. 428, § 3, 3-23-1999) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.131. 
Sec. 24-160. - Falsely representing or impersonating another. 
    Any person who shall falsely represent or impersonate another, in such assumed character, and receive any money, or other property, which was intended to be delivered to the party so impersonated, with the intent to convert the same to the person's own use, shall be deemed by so doing, to be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.204) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.363. 
Sec. 24-161. - Retail fraud. 
    A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity shall be in violation of this Code: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(3)  With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store. 
(Code 1988, § 9.206; Ord. No. 354, § 1, 6-19-1990; Ord. No. 428, § 4, 3-23-1999) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356d(4). 
Sec. 24-162. - Theft of soil; vegetation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, excavate, or carry away any stone, ore, gravel, clay, sand, turf or mould, or any roots, fruits, plants, vegetation or flowers from any lands or property within the city, without having first obtained the leave, license or consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.92) 
State Law reference- Entering improved land of another, MCL 750.547. 
Sec. 24-163. - Failure to return books. 
    Whoever willfully or negligently detains or fails to return to the city public library any book, magazine, pamphlet, map, manuscript, picture, microfilm, phonograph record, clipping or other property belonging to such library, or pay the reasonable value thereof, within 30 days from the date of the posting by registered or certified mail of a notice addressed to such person at the last address furnished the public library, and which notice may be given at any time after the date on which such person, under the rules of the library, should have returned the loaned property, shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.65) 
State Law reference- Larceny from libraries, MCL 750.364. 
Sec. 24-164. - Deceptive practices. 
    Whoever shall give a fictitious or incorrect name or address at the city public library in order to obtain possession or use of any book, magazine, pamphlet, map, manuscript, picture, microfilm, phonograph record, or clipping, the property of such library, or shall practice any deceit of any kind whatsoever to conceal or mislead in respect to identity or address or place of employment, of such person, shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.66) 
Sec. 24-165. - False pretenses with intent to defraud. 
    Any person who, with intent to defraud or cheat and by color of a false token or writing, by a false or bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by counterfeit coin or metal that is intended to simulate a coin, or by any other false pretense, causes any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or mortgage land or an interest in land, or obtains a person's signature on a forged written instrument, or obtains from a person any money or personal property or the use of any instrument, facility, article, or other valuable thing or service, or by means of a false weight or measure obtains a larger amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, or by means of a false weight or measure sells or disposes of a smaller amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, if such land or interest in land, money, personal property, use of the instrument, facility, article, or valuable thing, service, larger amount obtained, or smaller amount sold or disposed of, has a value of $200.00 or less, shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.71; Ord. No. 428, § 2, 3-23-1999) 
State Law reference- False pretenses and misrepresentation, MCL 750.217a et seq. 
Secs. 24-166-24-183. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 24-184. - Loitering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering on private property means the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking aimlessly, and shall also include knowingly or willingly entering upon the property of another, without the consent of the owner, lessee or other person rightfully in charge or possession thereof, if either of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The premises is fenced or enclosed in a manner to exclude intruders; or 
(2)  Notice against trespass is given by posting on the premises in a conspicuous manner. 
(b)  Certain types prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to: 
a.  Create, or cause to be created, any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
b.  Create, or cause to be created, a danger of breach of the peace; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
(2)  This subsection (b)(2) shall include the making of any unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose hearing such remarks are made. 
(c)  Request to leave. Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, the owner, lessee or person rightfully in charge or possession thereof or any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(15)) 
Sec. 24-185. - Under the influence. 
    No person shall be under the influence of narcotics or any other drug or be intoxicated in a public place and either endanger directly the safety of another person or property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(2)) 
State Law reference- Disorderly intoxication, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 24-186. - Publicly impaired. 
    No person shall be present in any public place with such person's ability to walk, talk, or see significantly impaired by the use of any controlled substance; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person whose faculties have been impaired by medication prescribed by a physician and taken as directed. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(3)) 
Sec. 24-187. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
    A person shall be in violation of this Code if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if the conduct of such person is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person willfully uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to any other person when such words, by their very utterance, inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace and invade the right of others to pursue their lawful activities. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(7)) 
Sec. 24-188. - Public affray. 
    No person shall engage in any disturbance, fight, or quarrel in a public place. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(12)) 
Sec. 24-189. - Illegal gathering. 
    No person shall collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage or abet the collection of persons in crowds for illegal or mischievous purposes in any public place. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(13)) 
State Law reference- Riots and unlawful assemblies, MCL 752.541 et seq. 
Sec. 24-190. - Public gathering. 
    No person shall jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park, public building, or any place open to or frequented by the public. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(14)) 
State Law reference- Such persons deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 24-191. - Disturbing the public. 
    No person shall disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous, or vulgar conduct. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(22)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 24-192. - Disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by that person to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(23)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 24-193. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No person shall willfully make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order are disturbed. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(31)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Secs. 24-194-24-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-225. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any indecent exposure of self person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(9)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 24-226. - Obscenity. 
    No person shall engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(4)) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 
Sec. 24-227. - Prostitution. 
    No person shall engage in any act of prostitution. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(17)) 
State Law reference- Prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Sec. 24-228. - Illegal business. 
    No person shall knowingly attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, illegal gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or where any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(18)) 
Sec. 24-229. - Promote prostitution. 
    No person shall knowingly transport any person to a place where prostitution is practiced, encouraged, or allowed for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in any illegal act. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(20)) 
Sec. 24-230. - Illegal gaming. 
    No person shall keep or maintain a gaming room, gaming tables, or any policy or pool tickets, used for gaming, or knowingly suffer a gaming room, gaming tables, or any policy or pool tickets to be kept, maintained, played or sold on any premises occupied or controlled by such person, except where such activity is authorized by state law. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(21)) 
Secs. 24-231-24-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 

Sec. 24-261. - Offenses. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, or knowingly or intentionally possess, sell, transfer or transport, any controlled substance as defined in Schedules 1 through 5 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7201 et seq., as amended), unless: 
(1)  The controlled substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner (practitioner being defined in MCL 333.7109(a) and (b)), while acting in the course of such practitioner's professional practice; or 
(2)  The use, possession, sale, transfer or transportation is pursuant to, and in conformance with, the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, (MCL 333.26421 et seq., as amended); or 
(3)  The use, possession or transfer is less than one ounce of marihuana, on private property not used by the public, or transportation of one ounce or less of marihuana, by a person who has obtained the age of 21 years, in accordance with the City Charter. 
(Code 1988, § 9.121; Ord. No. 572, § 1, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 24-262. - First offenders. 
    When any person who has not previously been convicted as set forth in this division, or under any statute of the United States, or state law, or municipal ordinance relating to possession or use of the substances as defined above, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of violating this division, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused person, may defer further proceedings and place the accused person on probation upon certain terms and conditions, including therein such requirement that the accused person attend courses of instruction on rehabilitation on the medical, psychological and social effects of the misuse of drugs and/or the substances defined above. Upon violation of terms or conditions, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as the court determines. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceeding against such person. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for the purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon the conviction of a crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any person. The police department shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section. This record shall be furnished to any court or police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action involving possession or use of the substances, as defined in this division, has already once availed self of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 9.122) 
Sec. 24-263. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance means a drug, substance or immediate precursor included in schedules 1 to 5 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7201 et seq.). 
    Drug paraphernalia means any equipment, product, material, or combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting; manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing; testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing; injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance. 
(2)  Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance. 
(3)  A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance. 
(4)  A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed for use with a controlled substance. 
(5)  A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
(6)  An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body. 
(7)  A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(8)  A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances. 
(9)  A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade and a mirror. 
(10)  A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user. 
(11)  A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose. 
(12)  A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled substances. 
(13)  A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body. 
(Code 1988, § 9.123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 333.7451. 
Sec. 24-264. - Hypodermic syringes, needles, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any hypodermic syringe, needle or any other instrument or implement for the illegal use of narcotic or dangerous or hallucinatory drugs as defined by Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7201 et seq.), by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or method of introduction and which is possessed, sold, offered, dispensed or given away for that purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 9.124) 
Sec. 24-265. - Loitering about places where drugs, etc., are illegally stored, kept or used. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that the substances, devices and/or other instruments enumerated and prescribed within this division are being illegally sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored, kept or used, to loiter about, frequent or be present in such building, apartment, automobile, boat or place of any description wherein such illegal activity is being carried on, conducted or operated, or wherein such illegal substances, devices and/or instruments prescribed herein are being illegally kept or stored. 
(Code 1988, § 9.125) 
Sec. 24-266. - Drug paraphernalia. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any pipe, device or contrivance adapted for the use of smoking or inhaling marijuana (Cannabis Sativa L.), hashish or opium; provided, however, that such pipe, device or contrivance has been used for the purpose of smoking or inhaling marijuana, hashish or opium. 
Secs. 24-267-24-302. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 

Sec. 24-303. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors in public places. 
    For the purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic liquor" shall be defined as in section 2 of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, and shall include any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, including beer, wine and spirits. 
(1)  No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while in or upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways. 
(2)  No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or other open container containing alcoholic liquor on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any other public way. 
(3)  No person licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, or its employees or agents, shall permit any person to remove from such premises, any alcoholic liquor in any open container. 
(4)  No person shall possess alcoholic liquor upon or within any off-street parking lot or parking garage, except in its original unopened container with the seal unbroken. 
(Code 1988, § 9.144) 
State Law reference- Possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on streets, parks, places of amusement or publicly owned areas, MCL 436.1915. 
Sec. 24-304. - Display of spirits. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall display spirits in an area that is open to the public. All such displays shall be behind a counter or similar fixture. 
(b)  A temporary bin display, as specifically authorized by state liquor control commission regulations, and which has a capacity of up to 15 cases of 24, 12-ounce or 0.375-liter containers or the equivalent in other sizes of wine or spirits, may be installed on the premises of a retail licensee who is licensed for off-premises sales only. 
(c)  The term "spirits," as used in this section, means a beverage that contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with potable water or other substances, or both, in solution, and includes wine containing an alcoholic content of more than 21 percent by volume, except sacramental wine and mixed spirit drink. 
(Code 1988, § 9.145; Ord. No. 451, § 1, 2-20-2001) 
Secs. 24-305-24-326. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-327. - Icebox or refrigerator; abandoned without removing snaplock or locking device, penalty. 
    Any person who knowingly leaves, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child therein, without first removing the snaplock or other locking device from the lid or cover thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 9.15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 24-328. - Firearms. 
    No person shall discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol or bow and arrow in the city, except when lawfully acting in the defense of persons or property or the enforcement of law or at a duly established range, the operation of which has been approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(5)) 
State Law reference- Discharge of weapons, MCL 750.234 et seq. 
Sec. 24-329. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth herein: 
Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
Alcoholic liquor means that term as defined in Section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1d. 
Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standards 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
Controlled substance means that term as defined in Section 8b of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.8b. 
Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standards 87-1, 4.1. 
Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
Minor means an individual under 18 years of age. 
National holiday means New Year's Day (January 1); Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr. (third Monday in January); Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4); Labor Day (first Monday in September); Columbus Day (second Monday in October); Veterans Day (November 11); Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); and Christmas Day (December 25). 
Novelties means that term as defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in paragraph (1) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth-inch in diameter. 
(4)  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices. 
(b)  General prohibitions; exception. No person shall ignite, discharge, or use fireworks within the city at any time, except that: 
(1)  Fireworks may be discharged in strict compliance with any permit issued by the city in accordance with the Act. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks may be discharged between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight only on the day before, the day of, and the day after, a national holiday, except on New Year's Day when consumer fireworks may also be discharged between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. A person who ignites, uses or discharges a consumer firework at any time except as set forth in this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(3)  This subsection (b) shall not apply to low-impact fireworks. 
(c)  Additional prohibitions; penalties. 
(1)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used on public property, including public streets and rights-of-way, or on school property, church property, or the private property of another, without the express written permission from the person or entity legally in possession and control of that property to undertake such action. A person who ignites, uses or discharges a consumer firework at any time except as set forth in this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(3)  Low-impact fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(4)  Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to a minor. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 for the first offense, or $1,000.00 for a second or subsequent offense. 
(5)  No minor shall use, ignite or possess any consumer fireworks unless under the direct supervision of an adult at all times. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(d)  Novelties not regulated. This section does not apply to novelties. 
(e)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the fire chief, police chief, their designees, and any sworn law enforcement officers. 
(f)  Determination of violation; seizure of fireworks. 
(1)  If an enforcing official determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the official may seize the fireworks as evidence of such violation. Upon a finding of responsibility or guilt, the city may destroy or dispose of any consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks retained as evidence for prosecution of the violation. 
(2)  In addition to any other penalty provided herein, a person found responsible for a violation of this section shall reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying any consumer or low-impact fireworks seized. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(4); Ord. No. 551, § 1, 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 24-330. - Ball games in streets and on sidewalks. 
    No person shall play any ball game in any public street or sidewalk or otherwise obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups thereon, for any purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(16)) 
Sec. 24-331. - Snowballs thrown at automobiles. 
    No person shall wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving automobile. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(28)) 
Sec. 24-332. - Snowball throwing. 
    No person shall wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or automobile, or on the private property of another person. 
(Code 1988, § 9.62(29)) 
Secs. 24-333-24-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRCRAFT 

Sec. 24-371. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aircraft means any airplane, gas bag, balloon, helicopter, hang glider, ultra-light, any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used primarily as safety equipment. 
(Code 1988, § 9.101) 
Sec. 24-372. - Federal aviation administration regulations. 
    No person shall operate any aircraft over or within the city in violation of any valid Federal Aviation Regulation established by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Code 1988, § 9.102) 
Sec. 24-373. - Take offs and landings. 
    No person shall cause any aircraft to take off or land upon any property within the corporate limits of the city, except in the case of emergency, without the permission of the director of public safety or the director of public safety's representative. 
(Code 1988, § 9.103) 
Sec. 24-374. - Dropping objects from aircraft. 
    No person in any aircraft shall cause or permit to be thrown out, discharged or dropped within the corporate limits of the city, any circular, device, object or thing. 
(Code 1988, § 9.104) 
DIVISION 3. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 24-375. - Definitions. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible efforts by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standards 87-l, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standards 87-l, 4.1. 
    Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designated for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    Novelties means that term as defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cup. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subsection (1) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth-inch in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 550, § 1, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 24-376. - Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks. 
    No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the city; provided, that this prohibition shall not preclude any person from the ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday as provided by section 7(2) of Public Act 256 of 2011. 
(Ord. No. 550, § 1, 8-21-2012) 
Secs. 24-377-24-411. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO UNDERAGE PERSONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-412. - Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children. 
    Any person who shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined in section 2 of chapter 12a of Public Acts No. 288 of 1939, as added by Act No. 54 of the Public Act No. 54 of the First Extra Session of 1944 (MCL 712 A.1 et seq.), and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1988, § 9.64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.145. 
Secs. 24-413-24-437. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 

Sec. 24-438. - Furnishing alcoholic liquor to persons under 21. 
(a)  Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The term "diligent inquiry," as used in this section, means a diligent good faith effort to determine the age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an official state operator's or chauffeur's license, an official state personal identification card, or any other bona fide picture identification card, or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the identity and age of the person. 
(Code 1988, § 9.141; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 3-4-1997) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1701. 
Sec. 24-439. - Purchase, consumption or possession by persons under 21. 
(a)  A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, a person under the age of 21 is deemed a "minor." A person less than 21 years of age who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions: 
(1)  For the first violation of this section, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, the minor is responsible for a civil infraction, shall be fined not more than $100.00, and shall be subject to the court orders described in subsections (a)(4) and (d). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection (a)(1), MCL 436.1703(1)(a), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute. 
(2)  If a violation of subsection (a), MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, occurs after one prior judgment for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (a)(6), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds that the person violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction, a fine of not more than $200.00, or both, and the court orders described in subsections (a)(4) and (d). A minor who pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of this subsection (a)(2), may request deferral of proceedings and placement on probation under subsection (c). 
(3)  If a violation of subsection (a) of this section, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, occurs after two or more prior judgments for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (a)(6), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60 days if the court finds that the person violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction, a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, as applicable, and the court orders described in subsections (a)(4) and (d). 
(4)  The court may order a minor that is responsible for or guilty of a violation under this subsection (a) to: (i) participate in substance use disorder services as defined in MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, (ii) perform community service, and (iii) to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment as provided in MCL 436.1703(5) and subsection (d), all of which shall be at the minor's own expense. 
(5)  A minor that is subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsections (a)(2) or (3), may be ordered by the court to submit to random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis, which may be requested by the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
(6)  For purposes of subsections (a)(2) and (3), "prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, or finding or admission of responsibility for a violation of the statutes listed in this subsection, or any federal or state law or local ordinance that substantially corresponds to any of those listed statutes: 
a.  This subsection (a) or MCL 436.1703(1). 
b.  A misdemeanor violation that is dismissed under subsection (c), MCL 436.1703(3), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute. 
c.  MCL 436.1701 (Sale/furnish alcohol to minors). 
d.  MCL 436.1707 (Sale/service/furnish alcohol to intoxicated persons). 
e.  MCL 257.624a (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle). 
f.  MCL 257.624b (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle by minor). 
g.  MCL 257.625 (Operating motor vehicle while intoxicated/impaired). 
h.  MCL 324.80176 (Operating boat while under influence). 
i.  MCL 324.81134 (Operating off-road vehicle while under influence). 
j.  MCL 324.82127 (Operating snowmobile while under influence). 
k.  MCL 750.167a (Hunting with firearm/weapon while intoxicated). 
l.  MCL 750.237 (Carry/possess/use/discharge firearm while under influence). 
(b)  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(c)  If a minor pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of subsection (a)(2), the court may defer further proceedings and place the minor on probation under MCL 436.1703(3), which provides for dismissal of the proceedings upon the terms and conditions of probation being fulfilled. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation or upon a finding that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of subsection (a) of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under MCL 436.1703(3) as to an individual. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The Secretary of State shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of the following: 
(1)  To a court, prosecutor, or police agency upon request for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection. 
(2)  To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law enforcement agency, upon the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions: 
a.  At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency. 
b.  The record is used by the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee has violated the conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for employment. 
(d)  The court may order the person found responsible for or convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section to undergo screening and assessment to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
(e)  The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsections (a)(2), (a)(3), or (b) of this section as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.319). 
(f)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person under 21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a person under 21 years of age does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. A peace officer may initiate municipal civil infraction or misdemeanor charges for a violation of subsection (a) based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution to determine whether the person has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(g)  A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq.), allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) of this section is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq.). The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a) of this section, parents or legal guardian of that individual shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(h)  This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of such person's employment if employed by a person licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, as amended, by the state liquor control commission, or by an agent of that commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for the person's personal consumption. 
(i)  This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of this section. 
(j)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person less than 21 years of age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(k)  The consumption by a person less than 21 years of age of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this section. 
(l)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a person less than 21 years of age who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the person purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the person purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(m)  The state police, the commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a person less than 21 years of age for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(n)  In a municipal civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution for the violation of subsection (a) of this section concerning a person less than 21 years of age having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the person consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(o)  As used in this section, "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(1)  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(2)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(Code 1988, § 9.143; Ord. No. 394, § 3, 3-4-1997; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 595, § 1, 9-19-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703. 
Secs. 24-440-24-461. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPEN HOUSE PARTIES 

Sec. 24-462. - Regulating the use of alcoholic liquors and drugs at open house parties. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Control means any form of control, regulation or dominion, including a possessory right or the paying or contracting for rental premises. 
Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence or rental premises which includes persons other than or in addition to the owner or person with rights of possession, and their immediate family members. 
Rental premises means a hotel room, motel room, hall, or limousine which is rented on a short-term basis for lodging or a social function. 
Residence means a home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, and includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit. 
(b)  No person having control of any residence or rental premises shall allow an open house party to occur or continue at said residence or rental premises if the person knows or reasonably should know that a person less than 21 years of age is in possession of or consuming alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance at said residence or rental premises. 
(c)  Attendance at gathering. No person shall knowingly remain present at an open house party where a person less than 21 years of age is in possession of or consuming alcoholic liquor. A person who violates this subsection shall have committed a municipal civil infraction. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities. 
(Code 1988, § 9.250; Ord. No. 302, § 1, 12-17-1985; Ord. No. 370, § 1, 3-22-1994) 
Chapter 25. - PRIVATE GROUNDWATER WELLS 

Sec. 25-1. - Purpose. 
    There are overall capital, operating and maintenance costs to the city for supplying water and sewer services to its citizens. These include the cost of obtaining clean and purified water, installing pipelines to transmit the water, pumping the water, repairing and replacing broken water mains, installing sewer lines, cleaning the sewers, cleaning catch basins, repairing and replacing broken lines and in general, maintaining the entire system. The total cost for providing water and sewer services is shared equitably by all consumers within the city, collected in proportion to the demand of each household or business consumer based on water meter readings. If the water is not metered, the property owner is not paying his/her fair share of the maintenance and wastewater disposal costs and therefore, is being subsidized by other owners in the city. Because metering water from groundwater wells would generate additional costs to the city and the owner's temptation to cross connect (use outdoor water for indoor domestic use) would be great, controlling abuse of the system would not be possible, thereby creating even more of a financial burden for the property owners without groundwater wells. 
    Therefore, the City Commission of the City of Huntington Woods finds that the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens will be protected if the drilling and use of groundwater wells and water supplied from such wells for human consumption, irrigation or other purposes is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1(2.600), 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
    City. The City of Huntington Woods. 
    Groundwater. Subsurface water in the zone of saturation that fills the pore spaces of the subsurface geologic material. 
    Well. An opening in the surface of the earth, however constructed, that is used for the purpose of withdrawing groundwater. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1(2.601), 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 25-3. - Wells and use of groundwater prohibited. 
    Except as provided in section 25-4 below, no person shall install, maintain or utilize a well within the city for any purpose, including open-loop geothermal heating and cooling systems. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1(2.602), 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 25-4. - Exceptions to prohibition. 
(a)  Groundwater monitoring. A well may be installed or utilized for groundwater monitoring or remediation as part of response activities approved by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) or Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), without prior approval or issuance of a permit by the city, provided such installation and utilization complies with federal and state environmental laws. 
(b)  Public emergencies. A well may be installed or utilized in the event of a public emergency as such emergency is determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1(2.603), 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 25-5. - Violations; remedies. 
(a)  A person who installs, maintains or utilizes a well in violation of any provision of this chapter, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the payment of a civil fine of not less than $150.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by subsection 1.13(b) of this Code. 
(b)  Any well installed, maintained or utilized in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive process. Each day the violation continues after notice of violation is given shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, and shall be punishable as such. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit, in any way, the police and remedial actions available to the city under the law. 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1(2.604), 7-20-2010) 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-19. - Injury to park property. 
    No person shall obstruct any walk or drive in any public park or playground and no person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner, any monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplaces, or other public property within or pertaining to said parks. 
(Code 1988, § 3.1) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 26-20. - Prohibition of possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor. 
    No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic liquor in or at any public park or playground owned or operated by the city. Signs shall be posted or notices placed on bulletin boards in the parks, stating that the possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor is prohibited in city parks or playgrounds. 
(Code 1988, § 3.2; Ord. No. 395, § 1, 3-4-1997) 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, MCL 436.1915. 
Sec. 26-21. - Waste containers. 
    No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, paper or miscellaneous waste in any park or playground except in containers provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 3.3) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 26-22. - Ball games. 
    No baseball, football or softball throwing, or other violent or rough exercises or play shall be engaged in, in any public park or other public place, except in areas designated therefor by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 3.4) 
Sec. 26-23. - Additional rules. 
    The city manager is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city commission, pertaining to the conduct and use of parks and public grounds as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 3.5) 
Sec. 26-24. - Prohibition of smoking. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Smoking or smoke, as used in this section, means the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device. 
(b)  Smoking prohibited in public parks. An individual shall not smoke in a public park or playground owned or operated by the city. 
(c)  Signs. Signs shall be posted in parks and playgrounds owned or operated by the city which state that smoking in such parks and playgrounds is prohibited. 
(d)  Penalty. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 3.6; Ord. No. 395, § 2, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 26-25. - Failure to leave when requested. 
    A person who violates any rule, regulation or ordinance regulating conduct in a park or playground owned or operated by the city may be ordered to leave the park or playground by a public safety officer or authorized park attendant. Any person who fails or refuses to leave a public park or playground when properly directed to do so is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 3.7; Ord. No. 395, § 3, 3-4-1997) 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 26-26. - Skateboarding and rollerblading prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Skateboard means any board or platform device having at least two axles with wheels on each end of a style commonly occurring on rollerskates, or any other similar device, such device intended to be ridden by a person who propels self by pushing the platform forward and then riding upon it as it coasts. 
(b)  No person shall use or operate a skateboard or inline skates, rollerblades or rollerskis on any city-owned tennis court or in any city building unless it is a city-sponsored event. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 3.8; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 26-27. - Val Jones Park. 
(a)  No person shall ride upon a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates at Val Jones Park unless that person is wearing knee and elbow pads and a properly fitted and fastened safety helmet upon such person's head. The safety helmet shall satisfy appropriate ANSI, ASTM, or SNELL Memorial Foundation standards and the manufacturer's certification label of the applicable safety standard must be conspicuously attached to the safety helmet. 
(b)  No bicycles are permitted in Val Jones Park. No person shall bring a bicycle into Val Jones Park or ride a bicycle on the skateboarding or skating surfaces at Val Jones Park. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 3.9; Ord. No. 469, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
Chapter 27 - RESERVED 
Chapter 28 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 592, § 1, adopted June 20, 2017, amended ch. 28 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 28, §§ 28-1-28-39 was entitled "Peddlers, Solicitors and Handbills," and derived from: Code 1988, §§ 7.61-7.67, 7.75-7.84; Ord. No. 385, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 1996; and Ord. No. 589, § 1, adopted Mar. 28, 2017. 
State Law reference- Home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; Charitable Organizations and Solicitations Act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; Public Safety Solicitation Act, MCL 14.301 et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE; DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety and welfare through regulations that promote public safety and help protect residents, businesses and the public from crime, fraud and undue annoyance and interference with privacy rights that can be caused by certain activities, in a manner that does not unlawfully interfere with or burden the exercise of First Amendment and other constitutional rights. To those ends, this chapter defines and provides different procedural requirements for peddling, and general regulations applicable to all peddlers, and to solicitors and canvassers in certain situations, including peddler licensing regulations intended to: (i) deter persons with criminal or fraudulent intent from posing as legitimate peddlers and solicitors; (ii) provide a minimal amount of basic information necessary to the city and its public safety department to allow efficient and effective performance of governmental, law enforcement and crime prevention functions; and (iii) provide city residents with a right to know if persons coming upon their property are in compliance with those regulations and a basis for reporting persons that are not in compliance with the these regulations to the public safety department. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvass and canvassing means to enter upon private property, without any prior specific invitation or appointment, to inform, educate, advocate, petition, secure petition signatures, request or enlist support or opposition, or to convey any other message regarding religion, philosophy, ideology, politics, including parties, candidates, initiatives and issues, charitable organizations, or other cause or issue, by verbal, written, or other forms of communication, including the distribution of handbills, flyers, or other materials. 
    Canvasser means a person that engages in canvassing in the city without requesting or accepting the payment, delivery, donation, pledge, or commitment of money, credit, financial assistance, membership, property, goods, services, or other thing of value, and without selling or attempting to sell any property, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription, membership, or other thing, whether of value or not. 
    Charitable, religious or political organization means a charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, fraternal, social, or civic organization, registered and in good standing under Section 501(c) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, that solicits or obtains contributions from the public for such charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, fraternal, social, or civic organization. 
    Charitable purpose means a charitable, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, veterans support, religious, youth, fraternal, social, civic, conservation, recreational, or other nonprofit objective of a charitable or religious organization, or political organization. Charitable purpose does not include political campaign fundraising or nonprofit objectives of an individual. 
    City clerk means the City Clerk for the City of Huntington Woods, or his or her designee. 
    Director of public safety means the Director of Public Safety for the City of Huntington Woods, or his or her designee. 
    Insurance shall mean general liability insurance of a minimum of $500,000.00 per person per occurrence issued with the City of Huntington Woods, its agents and employees as additional named insureds primary and non-contributory with a notice of cancellation or non-renewal directed to the City of Huntington Woods, attention city manager, such notice to be furnished at least 30 days prior to any cancellation or non-renewal. 
    Parent organization means: (1) the person or organization that a peddler is employed by or represents in the course of peddling, the principal manufacturer and distributor of goods being peddled, or the principal provider of services being peddled; or (2) a charitable, religious or political organization that a solicitor is employed by or represents in the course of soliciting in the city; or (3) such organization that sends multiple solicitors for purposes of soliciting in areas of the city on its behalf. 
    Peddle and peddling means traveling by foot or automobile from place to place or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, including food produces, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether the subject is collecting advanced payments on such sales or not. 
    Peddler means any person engaged in peddling. The term "peddler" shall not include a person who conducts such activities at a social gathering within a home at the invitation of the owner or an occupant of the home. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, nonprofit corporation, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, political party or organization, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
    Public way shall mean all areas legally open to public use such as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, alleys and public parking lots. 
    Roadway shall mean the area of a paved or unpaved private, or public street, highway or road designed for vehicular travel generally including the area from curb to curb, or if no curb is present, from outer edge of shoulder to outer edge of shoulder. 
    Solicit and soliciting means a direct or indirect request by or on behalf of a charitable, religious, or political organization or other charitable organization to any person in the city for the payment, delivery, donation, pledge, or commitment of money, credit, financial assistance, membership, property, goods, services, or other thing of value, on the plea or representation what is requested will be used for charitable purposes of the charitable, religious, political organization, or charitable organization, and includes sales and sales offers of any property, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription, membership, or other thing, whether of value or not, on the pleas or representation that the proceeds of the sale will be used for charitable purposes of the charitable, religious, or political organization. 
    Solicitor means any person engaged in soliciting in the city. 
    Special event shall mean any occasion including, but not limited to parades, golf tournaments, fairs, shows, exhibitions, city-wide celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically defined area of the city. 
    Stand shall mean any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed and registered by the department of motor vehicles, and is used for the display, storage or transportation of goods and/or services offered for sale by a peddler. 
    Standing shall mean to remain within the roadway other than is reasonably necessary to traverse across the roadway, or to complete activity within an area of the roadway necessitated by an emergency such as a traffic accident, mechanical breakdown, or other similar event. 
    Street and curb soliciting means soliciting on any street, sidewalk, curb, road edge, alley, public parking lot and/or driveway in a manner that requires the solicitor, when engaged in the transaction, to stand within the limits of streets, sidewalks, curbs, road edges, alleys, public parking lots and/or driveways within the city. 
    Street soliciting means soliciting for charitable purposes where solicitors are allowed to be within the travelled portion of a street and areas of the street abutting the traveled portion. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 599, § 1, 12-19-2017) 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS 

Sec. 28-3. - Peddler licensing. 
(a)  No person shall be a peddler or engage in peddling in the city without first obtaining a peddler license from the city clerk, unless such person is specifically exempt from this licensing requirement under section 28-4 below. 
(b)  In order to obtain a peddler license required by this chapter, a peddler shall apply for said license upon forms prescribed and furnished by the city clerk. The information provided by the applicant shall include all the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant who proposes to peddle within the city, including his or her business street address, website address (if any) and telephone number, and the applicant's home address and telephone number, driver's license number and physical description including height, weight, and color of hair and eyes. 
(2)  The complete name, street address, website address (if any) and telephone number of the parent organization and where and when the parent organization was established or incorporated and the form of its organization. 
(3)  A detailed description of the type of peddling to be undertaken and the method to be used in conducting the peddling. 
(4)  The dates and times when, and locations where, peddling will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such peddling and the hours of the days thereof. 
(5)  The types of goods, wares, merchandise and services to be sold or for which the peddling will be made. 
(6)  Whether the applicant or parent organization has ever been denied a license for peddling, had a license for peddling suspended or revoked, or been prohibited from peddling in the City of Huntington Woods or in any other community. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, or any officer, partner, member or director of the parent organization has been convicted of a felony or any misdemeanor within the past ten years of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the applicant's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct, and if so, a brief description of the crime or violation, including its location and date, and an explanation of the reason therefore. 
(8)  Two color photographs of the applicant, one being a photograph taken within 60 days prior to the date of filing of the application and the other photograph being from the applicant's driver's license, a copy of such driver's license to be attached to the applicant's application. The photograph that is not from the applicant's driver's license shall be at least two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. If the applicant has not been issued a driver's license or it has been revoked, then the applicant shall submit a second separate photograph with the application, such photograph being at least two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(9)  The applicant's State of Michigan sales tax license number. 
(10)  A criminal background report of the applicant's criminal history. Such reports shall be obtained by the applicant through the Internet Criminal History Access Tool (ICHAT) for applicants residing in Michigan and/or through another state-sponsored or authorized criminal history access source for applicants who reside in other states or have resided in other states within five years prior to the date of the application. The applicant is responsible for all charges incurred in requesting and receiving the ICHAT report or other criminal history report and the report must be dated within 30 days of the date of the application. 
(11)  If under 18 years of age, the applicant must provide a copy of a valid work permit issued by the applicant's school, school district offices or other authorized issuing agency to the applicant for purposes of the peddling activity proposed to be undertaken in the city. 
(12)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the city, the applicant must provide information to verify that the applicant has a valid driver's license, has not been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation within the last three years, or has not been found responsible for three or more motor vehicle moving violations under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or local ordinances within the last three years. 
(13)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the city, the vehicle from which the peddling is to occur shall be brought to the city and inspected by a designated representative of the public safety department and must be found to meet any safety standards adopted by the public safety department and any standards adopted by the State of Michigan, and the public safety department's checklist form signed by the designated public safety department representative verifying such compliance shall be submitted with the application. 
(14)  If the applicant will be engaging in the sale of food or beverages, a health license issued by the Oakland County Health Department. Such peddler's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the Oakland County Health Department at the time of application, as required by the state public health code. 
(c)  An administrative processing and license fee for a peddler license application shall be established by resolution of the city commission and such fee shall be paid when the application is filed with the city. The city commission shall also establish fees for licenses issued for special events. 
(d)  The city clerk and director of public safety shall examine all peddler license applications and shall make or cause to be made such further investigation of the application or applicant as the city clerk and/or director of public safety shall deem necessary. If the city clerk and director of public safety both find the application to be complete and satisfactory in consideration of the purpose, intent and applicable provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall approve and issue the license. The city clerk may deny issuance of a license if he or she finds that: 
(1)  The applicant failed to truthfully provide in his or her application the information required in this chapter; 
(2)  The applicant has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted within the past ten years of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the applicant's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct; 
(4)  The applicant is listed on any criminal sex offender registry or has any outstanding warrants for any misdemeanor or felony; 
(5)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the city, the applicant does not have a valid driver's license, has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation within the last three years, or has been found responsible for three or more motor vehicle moving violations under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or local ordinances within the last three years; 
(6)  The applicant has had a license to conduct peddling or soliciting suspended or revoked within the past ten years. 
(e)  A peddler license shall bear the name, address and photograph of the peddler; the date issued; the dates within which the license holder may peddle; the expiration date of the license; and a statement that the license does not constitute an endorsement by the city of the purpose or products involved or of the persons or parent organization conducting the peddling. All peddler licenses shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(f)  A peddler license shall be valid for a period of up to 120 days as determined by the city clerk with consideration of the application, except for special events, which shall be limited to the period of the special event. Peddler licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-4. - Exempt persons. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the licensing, registration and fee requirements of this chapter, but shall be subject to the other sections of this chapter: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the occupation of distribution of newspapers. 
(2)  City of Huntington Woods merchants and representatives engaging in year-round business with a permanent location in the city. 
(3)  Any honorably discharged veteran who is a resident of this state and who has obtained a veteran's license from a county clerk within the State of Michigan. 
(4)  Any person who proposes to sell produce which he has raised himself. Produce may only be sold on the site where it is raised. 
(5)  Persons peddling or soliciting to fellow members of the peddler's or solicitor's parent organization. 
(6)  Persons peddling or soliciting by telephone, email or mail. 
(7)  Recognizing that the city maintains or has available to it the information otherwise required for licensing under this chapter, city public safety personnel shall be exempt from the fee and licensing requirements set forth in this chapter, provided the city clerk is provided advanced notification describing the peddling activity and its duration and verification that the peddling activity is for a recognized, legitimate and valid charitable police or fire association project. Such persons shall be subject to all other regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(8)  An individual or organization entering upon private property to inform, educate, advocate, petition, secure petition signatures, request or enlist support or opposition, or to convey any other message regarding religion, philosophy, ideology, politics, including parties, candidates, initiatives and issues, charitable organizations, or other cause or issue, by verbal, written, or other forms of communication, including the distribution of written materials, as long as no payment or other form of financial assistance is requested or taken. 
(9)  Solicitations made to a congregation or group in attendance at one location and made by the person or organization inviting the individuals composing the congregation or group. 
(10)  Solicitations made over the radio, television or telephone. 
(11)  Any peddler traveling on an established route at the request, express or implied, of their customers. 
(12)  Salespersons calling on regularly-licensed business establishments. 
(13)  The distribution of written materials where the individual distributing them does not accept payments, orders or contributions. 
(14)  Persons under 18 years of age engaged in peddling or soliciting within three miles of their residence for a bona fide school, charity, religious or youth organization. 
(15)  Solicitors and canvassers. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-5. - Peddler license renewals. 
    Peddler licenses may be renewed provided an application for renewal and license fees are received by the city no later than the expiration date of the current license. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new applications. The city shall review each application for renewal to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the city finds that the new application meets the above requirements, the city shall issue a new license. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-6. - Peddler license suspension. 
(a)  The city clerk may suspend a peddler license upon determining that any of the following circumstances exists: 
(1)  The licensee failed to truthfully provide in his or her application the information required in this chapter, or that the licensee has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(2)  The licensee has been convicted of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the licensee's ability to conduct the business for which the license has been issued in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct; 
(3)  The licensee is listed on any criminal sex offender registry or has any outstanding warrants for any misdemeanor or felony; 
(4)  If the licensee will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the public ways of the city, the licensee's driver's license has been suspended or revoked or the licensee has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation; 
(5)  The licensee has, during peddling in the city, engaged in conduct that is contrary to the peace, privacy, safety, health and welfare of the residents, businesses and persons in the city; or 
(6)  Intervention by the state or county health department due to uncorrected health or sanitation violations. 
(b)  A licensee shall be given written notice of the cause and term of the suspension. A licensee shall have the right to appeal the suspension within 30 days of the date of suspension. A licensee shall provide written notice and request for a reversal of the suspension, and a hearing shall be conducted by the city commission no later than 15 days following receipt of a written request by the licensee, unless a later date is set by agreement of the licensee. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the city clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. At the hearing, or at an adjourned date, the city commission shall determine whether to reverse, modify or affirm the suspension and shall put its decision and the reasons therefore in the form of a resolution, which the city clerk shall forward to the licensee. The city commission's decision may be appealed and reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-7. - Peddler license revocation. 
(a)  The city commission may revoke a peddler license upon the recommendation of the city clerk and after a hearing at which it is shown that any of the circumstances listed in subsections 28-6(a)(1)-(6) exists. 
(b)  Reasonable written notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The written notice shall be mailed by regular mail to the license holder at the business address provided on the licensee's application and shall set forth the alleged reason or reasons for considering revocation of the license and the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the city clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. At the hearing, or at an adjourned date, the city commission shall determine whether the license should be revoked or suspended and shall put its decision and the reasons therefore in the form of a resolution, which the city clerk shall forward to the licensee. The city commission's decision may be appealed and reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 28-8. - Voluntary notification. 
    In the interest of the public, and to protect against the potential for crime or fraud, the city requests that solicitors voluntarily notify the city clerk's office that soliciting will be taking place in the city and that the following information be voluntarily provided: 
(1)  The names of the individuals who will be soliciting in the city and the identity of the organization associated with the solicitation efforts. 
(2)  A description of the type of soliciting to be undertaken. 
(3)  The dates and times when and locations where the soliciting will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such soliciting and the hours of the days thereof. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-9. - Failure to provide notification; exemption. 
    The failure of a solicitor to provide the voluntary notification noted in section 28-8 shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Secs. 28-10, 28-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR PEDDLERS/SOLICITORS/CANVASSERS 

Sec. 28-12. - Material change to peddler application information. 
(a)  While any peddler license issued pursuant to this chapter is in effect, a peddler shall, within seven calendar days, report to the city clerk in writing any material change in any information previously provided on the application form. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person knowingly to file or to cause to be filed an application for a peddler license containing one or more false statements. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-13. - Inferred endorsement by the city. 
    A peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall not represent that its activities or speech are endorsed by the city or by any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-14. - Hours for peddling. 
    No peddling shall take place in the city after 8:00 p.m. or the official time of sunset, whichever is earlier, or before 10:00 a.m., prevailing time. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-15. - Display of peddler license. 
    While carrying on peddling in the city, a peddler shall visibly display on the exterior of his or her clothes at all times a valid peddler license issued under this chapter and shall tender such license, upon request, to any public safety officer, city employee, or any person dealing with the peddler. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-16. - Obstructing traffic; solicitation or standing within traveled roadway by persons. 
    A peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall not block, obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public highway, public parking lot, street, road, alley, drive or sidewalk or within public buildings and other public areas within the city by means of a barricade, object or device of with his/her person. 
    Notwithstanding, the above prohibitions do not apply to a person who is soliciting contributions on behalf of a charitable of civic organization, during daylight hours, if all the followings conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Only charitable and civic organizations are permitted to solicit or complete solicitation transactions within the roadway. As used in this section, "charitable or civic organization" means a nonprofit organization that is qualified under sections 501(c)3 or 501 (c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC 501, or a veteran's organization that has tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  All persons engaged in permitted solicitation shall wear high visibility safety apparel meeting the current American Standards promulgated by the International Safety Equipment Association. In the event that such persons are acting for or on behalf of any entity or agency, lettering identifying such entity or agency upon clothing, a hat, or any small container utilized by such individuals shall be provided that is legible from 20 feet. 
(3)  Such persons shall attempt to move off the roadway portion of the road when traffic is moving. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to solicit on behalf of any charitable or civic organization. 
(5)  Persons shall only carry or hold a container of a small size, shape and weight so as to not impede safe pedestrian and vehicular movement. Signs and other objects are prohibited unless approved by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(6)  Solicitation shall not occur at any time during inclement weather such as snow, ice, or fog, as determined by the public safety director and/or/ his/her designee. 
(7)  Solicitation shall occur only during daylight hours which is defined to mean one-half hour after the sunrise and one-half hour before sunset based on published sunrise and sunset times on the applicable day where solicitation occurs. 
(8)  Solicitation is not permitted within any work zone. 
(9)  Solicitation shall not occur at any permitted intersection where traffic controlled devices are either not present or not functioning. 
(10)  The charitable or civic organization shall maintain at least $500,000.00 in liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 599, § 2, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 28-17. - Harassment and noise. 
    No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall threaten or harass any resident of the city during their activities or in any way engage in any conduct that would tend to threaten the health and safety of another. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-18. - Misrepresentation. 
    No fraudulent or misleading representations to any person shall be made in connection with any peddling, soliciting or canvassing, including, but not limited to, any misleading representation concerning the product or service involved, the purposes for which contributions solicited will be used, the name of the peddler, the trade name and nature of the parent organization, or the purposes for which the parent organization was organized. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-19. - Peddling on public property. 
(a)  Peddling is prohibited within a public right-of-way, including any street corner or intersection road, and on any highway, street, road, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley, public parking lot any or publicly-owned property, except for peddling conducted as provided in subsections (b) and (c), below. 
(b)  For special events conducted by or with the approval of the city, a peddler shall apply for a peddler's license at least 30 days prior to the scheduled special event and provide the information required in this article, unless exempt under this article. If the peddler license is approved by the city, the term of the license shall be limited to the period of the special event. If the peddler license is approved by the city, a peddler may conduct activities only on the specific public property in the location identified and approved by the city for the special event. If the special event is to take place in any of the public parks and/or adjacent public property, roads or parking lots, a peddler license shall be obtained under this chapter. 
(c)  Peddlers of food products from a vehicle approved by the public safety department may engage in peddling on residential public streets and rights-of-way only, and may not peddle on streets considered major thoroughfares or public parking lots, provided such peddlers comply with all otherwise applicable requirements of this Code, including provisions relating to noise and hours of operation, and otherwise applicable laws and regulations. In the case of ice cream trucks, the ringing of an unamplified bell is permitted so long as it does not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhoods or structures. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-20. - Fixed stands prohibited; miscellaneous. 
(a)  No peddler shall establish a fixed stand upon any street, road, highway, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley, public parking lot or publicly-owned property. 
(b)  Peddler temporary stands shall not impede access to the entrance, parking lot or driveway of any adjacent building. Such stands shall be located on private property within the city only when permission of the property owner has been obtained. Permission to be located on public property is to be obtained from the city for a special event in accordance with section 28-19. 
(c)  All peddlers selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-21. - Posted property; access to premises restricted. 
    No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall enter into or upon private property that has posted a "no peddling," "no solicitation," "no soliciting", "no canvassing" or "no trespassing" sign, or similar notice. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-22. - Request to leave. 
    No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall remain on private property after having been asked or directed to leave the premises by any person lawfully in possession of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 28-23. - Contracts. 
    The city reserves the right to contract with individual vendors to provide limited vending services in public areas. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Secs. 28-24-28-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PENALTY 

Sec. 28-30. - Violation; penalty. 
    A violation of this chapter 28 shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 592, § 1, 6-20-2017) 
Secs. 28-31-28-55. - Reserved. 
Chapter 29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Garbage Disposal Act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; Hazardous Waste Management Act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous Materials Transportation Act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; Solid Waste Management Act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; Waste Reduction Assistance Act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; Clean Michigan Fund Act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; Low-Level Radioactive Waste Authority Act, MCL 333.26201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Material deposited at public works yard. 
    No person shall place, deposit, throw or leave any material to be disposed of in the public works yard except: 
(1)  Such materials which conform to the specific designation on a recycling container may be placed therein. 
(2)  Other materials may be deposited in a designated public works yard general waste container; provided that a written permit therefor has first been obtained from the department of public services. 
(Code 1988, § 9.10; Ord. No. 359, § 1, 4-7-1992) 
Secs. 30-2-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 542, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 2011, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 30-21-30-31, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1988, §§ 2.1-2.11; Ord. No. 325, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 1989; Ord. No. 355, § 1, adopted May 21, 1991; Ord. No. 390, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 1996; and Ord. No. 418, § 1, adopted May 19, 1998. 

Sec. 30-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meaning, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulky scrap metal includes metal wastes, including but not limited to, metal box springs, metal awnings, metal railings, cast iron tubs and sinks, lawn mowers, bicycles, metal bed frames, metal shelving, furnaces, metal fencing, plumbing pipe, exercise machines, barbeque grills, garage doors and garage door runners, metal desks, file cabinets, ladders, barbells, metal playground equipment, audio/visual carts, aluminum siding, metal wheelbarrows, screen doors, small metal sheds, car doors; and white goods, such as appliances, including but not limited to, water heaters, water softeners, water tanks, washers, dryers, stoves, air conditioners, refrigerators and freezers. 
    Bulky waste means large items of solid waste whose large size precludes handling by normal collection, processing, or disposal method. Bulky waste includes but is not limited to, furniture, mattresses, box springs, fixtures, toilets, sinks, carpets and pads, railroad ties, and fence posts or fences not exceeding four feet × four feet in dimension, and small quantities of building debris resulting from repair or remodeling personally done by the home occupant which have been placed at the curb properly tied or bundled in lengths of not more than four feet and other oversize wastes. Bulky waste does not include bulky scrap metal items including white goods and engines, transmissions or rear axles, or bulky items resulting from the home occupant's personal repair or remodeling that exceed four feet in length. 
    Compost facility means the SOCRRA yard waste composting facility located at 1741 School Road, in the City of Rochester Hills, Michigan. 
    Contract waste means the materials that contractor is responsible to collect under this article including, refuse (including bulky waste), recyclables (including bulky scrap metal) and yard waste as otherwise defined in this article. 
    Contractor means the party contracted by SOCRRA, its successors or assigns, or duly authorized agents or legal representatives to perform the services for the city set forth in this article, or any part of it. 
    Designated collection days means the days scheduled for collection of contract waste, as established by SOCRRA, with approval by the city. 
    Designated services means any service that the contractor is authorized by SOCRRA to provide under the terms of this article and the controlling membership agreement between SOCRRA and the city. 
    Disposal means the lawful deposit/management of contract waste at a lawful disposal facility. 
    Disposal facility(ies) means the sanitary landfill or other solid waste facility that will ultimately be utilized for the disposal of contract waste under this article. 
    Facilities means SOCRRA's Troy Transfer Station, Madison Heights Transfer Station, MRF and Compost Facility, and/or any other building or site that is mutually agreed on for the provision of services under this article. 
    General manager means the general manager of SOCRRA, or his/her designated representative. 
    Hazardous waste means a hazardous waste as defined in RCRA, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 USC, § 6901 et seq., as amended. 
    Household hazardous waste means any solid waste generated in single-family and multifamily dwellings by a consumer, which except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261. 
    Litter means contract waste that is not properly placed at curbside for collection, but is discarded contrary to published instructions to residents and contrary to this article. 
    Madison Heights Transfer Station means the building/site located at 29470 John R, Madison Heights. 
    MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, which is the State of Michigan's designated regulatory authority concerning solid waste regulations, or any successor thereof, including any agency or department to which the powers of the department of environmental quality shall be transferred, including the MDNRE. 
    MRF means the materials recovery facility/recycling facility (995 Coolidge Hwy.) owned by SOCRRA. 
    Member community or member currently means the following current SOCRRA members: Berkley, Beverly Hills, Birmingham, Clawson, Ferndale, Hazel Park, Huntington Woods, Lathrup Village, Oak Park, Pleasant Ridge, Royal Oak and Troy. 
    Membership agreement means the document titled membership contract between SOCRRA and the city under MCL 123.305 and incorporated fully by reference herein. 
    Nuisance means whatever annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; interferes with or destroys or renders dangerous any street, highway, or other public place, or allows accumulation of junk or obnoxious matters on private property; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of the codes and ordinances of the city and the common and statutory laws of the State of Michigan. 
    Private premises means any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by any person whether or not improved with any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building, or other structure erected thereon. 
    Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks, parking areas, squares, spaces, ground and buildings. 
    Recyclable materials or recyclables means those materials which would otherwise become refuse and which may be collected, separated or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products pursuant to SOCRRA's collection requirements, and/or are acceptable materials at the MRF. Recyclables are typically defined on an annual basis by SOCRRA, and, unless specified otherwise, consist of those items specified and bulky scrap metal. 
    Refuse means those solid wastes as set forth in Michigan Public Act 641, which are acceptable for disposal in a type II sanitary landfill and shall not include any waste, or portion thereof, which is liquid, radioactive, volatile, highly flammable, explosive, infectious or pathological, asbestos, special waste (including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste incinerator ash) or hazardous waste. Unless specified otherwise, refuse includes bulky waste. 
    Residential unit means any individual living unit in a single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling or mixed use dwelling intended for, or capable of being utilized for, residential living. Residential unit does not include any other type of individual living unit in a hotel or motel, guesthouse, residential care facility, extended care facility, emergency residential shelter, hospital, convent, or monastery, that would be defined as a commercial establishment as defined by the Municipal Code. 
    Service district or service area means any geographic area that the contractor is authorized by SOCRRA to provide basic service or optional service. 
    Responsible party means a homeowner, tenant, occupant, real estate agent, realtor, bank, mortgage company or any other entity who owns, occupies or is responsible for maintaining any residential unit or business within the City of Huntington Woods. Responsible party includes any entity having access either actual or contractual to property within Huntington Woods for the purpose of assuring its security and/or maintenance. 
    Service unit or service recipient means any residential unit in the service district eligible to receive the designated services by SOCRRA. 
    Service unit count means the number of service units, as established by the city and verified by SOCRRA, that are eligible to receive a specific designated service to be used by SOCRRA in arrangements with and compensation to the contractor. Service unit counts shall be adjusted quarterly based on construction permits, demolition permits and any audit activity that may provide a more accurate count. 
    SOCRRA or authority means the Southeastern Oakland County Resource Recovery Authority (SOCRRA), a title adopted by the Southeastern Oakland County Incinerator Authority, and any other prior authorized name. 
    SOCRRA member or member means any municipality that lawfully belongs to SOCRRA by having a current, approved and signed municipality membership agreement with SOCRRA. 
    SOCRRA rules and regulations mean SOCRRA's requirements of contractor with respect to the delivery of contract waste to the facilities. 
    Solid Waste Act means Public Act 641 of 1978 (Act 641) of the State of Michigan and the Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto. 
    Transfer station or transfer station facility means the Troy Transfer Station and the Madison Heights Transfer Station owned by SOCRRA and utilized for the provision of services in accordance with this article and licensed by the MDEQ and any other transfer station owned and operated by SOCRRA. 
    Troy Transfer Station means the building/site located at 991 Coolidge Hwy., in Troy. 
    Unacceptable waste means any material that is not contract waste. 
    White goods means metal residential appliances, including but not limited to, water heaters, washers, dryers, stoves, air conditioners and refrigerators. 
    Yard waste means compostable materials, as defined by state law and which SOCRRA designates for collection and transportation to SOCRRA's compost facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, leaves, grass clippings, vegetable or other garden debris, shrubbery, brush or tree trimmings less than four feet in length and not exceeding 40 pounds, but excludes agricultural waste, animal waste, sewage sludge and treated wood. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-22. - Storage, collection and disposal of contract waste. 
    The city has arranged for SOCRRA to provide designated services to the service district for the collection and transportation of contract waste which owners and occupants of service units may desire to have removed, and for which the city has authorized SOCRRA to so service, provided that the owners and occupants have prepared the contract waste as provided for in this section and as otherwise required in SOCRRA rules and regulations. SOCRRA may refuse to collect any contract waste that does not conform to the provisions of this section. 
(1)  General. Contract waste will be collected from the service units on designated collection days, beginning at 7:00 a.m. and ending no later than 6:00 p.m., with the exception of the following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. When a holiday occurs on a weekday, contract waste will be collected on the day following the regularly scheduled designated collection day, for example: If the normally scheduled designated collection day is Monday, collection shall be made on Tuesday. No contract waste shall be placed at the curb or street for collection prior to 4:00 p.m. on the day preceding the day scheduled for collection. After the collection of container contents has been made, the empty containers shall be removed from the curb or street as soon as possible but no later than midnight on the day that collection has occurred. A responsible party who sets out contract waste or unacceptable waste prior to the times set by this section, or fails to remove containers or uncollected waste within the time established by this section, shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(2)  Refuse collection. Every responsible party, including an owner, tenant or occupant of any eligible service unit within the designated service area, or any person responsible for organizing a gathering place for people for any purpose, shall use the following procedures to set out refuse as contract waste: 
a.  Residential service unit refuse set out and collection requirements: Eligible refuse must be set out by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day in approved refuse bags or 35-gallon maximum capacity watertight containers of substantial construction with tight-fitting lids and lifting handles sufficient to hold the accumulated refuse. Approved mechanically lifted rolling carts which exceed 35 gallons may be used only with prior permission of SOCRRA. Cardboard boxes, buckets, bushel baskets, paper bags, paint pails, and other similar containers are considered unapproved containers and the city may not collect refuse when placed in these unapproved containers. Large residential refuse items that cannot be conveniently placed in approved containers shall be broken down or disassembled and placed in approved containers, or securely tied in bundles which do not exceed four feet in length and four feet in girth and set out next to the containers. 
b.  Weight limits: SOCRRA is not required to collect refuse in: a) any nonmechanical container if the container and its contents weigh over 60 lbs.; or b) in approved plastic bags if the contents weigh over 40 lbs. SOCRRA is not required to collect any single piece of refuse if it weighs over 60 lbs., except bulky waste items as set forth below. 
c.  Residential bulky waste: Eligible bulky waste that is prepared as provided for SOCRRA rules and regulations shall be set out as part of the regularly-scheduled refuse set out. 
d.  Unacceptable waste: Contract waste that is prepared as provided for in SOCRRA rules and regulations shall be set out as part of the regularly-scheduled refuse set out. Unacceptable waste items are specifically excluded from such collection. 
e.  Small multifamily, commercial and institutional locations in residential refuse route: Small multifamily, commercial and institutional buildings in residential and residential-like areas shall follow the requirements for residential service if the city has designated these buildings as eligible service units. These include attached condominiums and two, three and four unit residential units as well as churches and other small commercial establishments largely in residential areas that are considered to be part of the residential curbside collection system (i.e., serviceable by 90-gallon curb carts or small refuse collection containers). The city must be notified if the refuse will exceed two cubic yards at any single location, except that SOCRRA will not collect more than two cubic yards, or the equivalent thereof, at any single location unless additional pay arrangements are made with SOCRRA. 
f.  Multifamily, commercial and institutional locations outside the residential refuse route: Multifamily, commercial and institutional buildings located outside the residential refuse route shall prepare refuse for collection by SOCRRA as follows if the city has designated these buildings as eligible service units. All containers shall be in compliance with SOCRRA rules and regulations and shall be large enough to hold all refuse deposited inside with the lids closed and without litter or nuisance. All containers needed for these services shall be obtained from SOCRRA and SOCRRA shall be responsible for their maintenance, repair and replacement unless existing containers are available from the service unit, in which case the service unit will be responsible for all maintenance, repair and replacement. Service unit shall be responsible for payment to SOCRRA or designee of all amounts due for services above the service levels authorized by city. 
(3)  Recyclables collection. Every responsible party, including an owner, tenant or occupant of any eligible service unit within the designated service area, or any person responsible for organizing a gathering place for people for any purpose, shall use the following procedures to set out recyclables as contract waste. Recyclables are not to be mixed with any other contract waste at any time. 
a.  Residential recyclables set out and collection requirements: Eligible recyclables must be separated from refuse and set out for placement by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day using containers provided by SOCRRA as provided for in SOCRRA rules and regulations. Excess recyclables and corrugated cardboard shall be set out beside the container in a manner otherwise set forth by SOCRRA. 
b.  Weight limits: The weight of any loaded container of recyclables shall not exceed 60 lbs. Mechanically-lifted rolling carts may be used only with prior permission from SOCRRA. 
c.  Small multifamily, commercial and institutional locations in residential recycling route: Small multifamily, commercial and institutional buildings in residential and residential-like areas shall follow the set out requirements for residential recyclables if the city has designated these buildings as eligible service units. This includes attached condominiums and two, three and four unit residential units as well as churches and other small commercial establishments largely in residential areas that are considered to be part of the residential curbside or rolling curb cart recyclables collection system. 
d.  Other multifamily, commercial and institutional recyclables set out and collection requirements: Multifamily, commercial and institutional buildings located outside the residential recycling route shall separate eligible recyclables from refuse and prepare them for collection by SOCRRA as follows if the city has designated these buildings as eligible service units. All containers shall be in compliance with SOCRRA rules and regulations and shall be large enough to hold all recyclables deposited inside with the lids closed and without litter or nuisance. All containers needed for these services shall be obtained from SOCRRA and SOCRRA shall be responsible for their maintenance, repair and replacement. Service unit shall be responsible for payment to SOCRRA or designee of all amounts due for service above the services levels authorized by city. 
(4)  Collection of yard waste and woody materials. Every responsible party, including an owner, tenant or occupant of any eligible service unit within the designated service area, or any person responsible for organizing a gathering place for people for any purpose, shall use the following procedures to set out yard waste or woody materials as contract waste: 
a.  Residential yard waste set out and collection requirements: Eligible yard waste must be separated from refuse and set out for placement by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day using containers, including but not limited to, ten to 35-gallon refuse cans marked with a "yard waste" sticker, or in 30-gallon paper yard waste bags weighing no more than 50 pounds, or otherwise as provided for in SOCRRA rules and regulations. If in yard waste containers, the yard waste container(s) shall be placed at the curb so that the yard waste sticker faces the street. Yard waste is not to be mixed with refuse at any time. At no time will SOCRRA collect yard waste in plastic bags. 
b.  Residential yard waste collection season: Eligible yard waste shall be set out during the yard waste collection season - a nominal 37-week collection period from the first Monday in April through the third Friday in December. 
c.  Small multifamily, commercial and institutional locations in residential curbside route: Small multifamily, commercial and institutional buildings in residential and residential-like areas shall follow the set out requirements for residential yard waste if the city has designated these buildings as eligible service units. These include attached condominiums and two, three and four unit residential units as well as churches and other small commercial establishments largely in residential areas that are considered to be part of the residential curbside collection system. All other commercial/industrial building owners shall be responsible to arrange for private pickup or delivery for yard waste and cannot dispose of yard waste as described in this section. 
d.  Woody materials: Woody materials consisting of four to 12-foot long branches (up to six-inch diameter), are eligible for chipping if stacked neatly at the curb, with large ends closest to the street. The definition of woody materials eligible for chipping may be amended by the city from time to time. Woody materials shall be set out by 7:00 a.m. on days designated by the city. The chipping season shall be determined by the city. 
(5)  Bulky scrap metal collection. Every responsible party, including an owner, tenant or occupant of any eligible service unit within the designated service area, or any person responsible for organizing a gathering place for people for any purpose, shall use the following procedures to set out bulky scrap metal as contract waste. Bulky scrap metal is not to be mixed with any other contract waste at any time. 
a.  Residential bulky scrap metal set out and collections requirements: Eligible bulky scrap metal must be separated from refuse and set out for placement by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day as provided for in SOCRRA rules and regulations. For safety reasons refrigerator doors shall be removed before placing item(s) at the curb. No item shall exceed 250 pounds. 
b.  Multifamily bulky scrap metal set out and collection requirements: Each apartment complex may set out a maximum of four bulky scrap metal items per week if the city has designated these buildings as eligible service units. All such setouts at apartment complexes must be approved through the property manager. The property manager is responsible for arranging bulky scrap metal collections beyond the weekly collection specified for that service unit and shall be responsible for direct payment to SOCRRA or designee of all amounts due for service above the service levels authorized by city. 
(6)  Composting on private property. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit composting on private property. The construction and maintenance of yard waste composting bins/piles shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Acceptable contents: The contents of compost bins/piles may consist of a combination of biodegradable material including those items listed as acceptable by composting authorities such as the MDEQ or SOCRRA. 
b.  Unacceptable contents: The contents of compost bins/piles shall not include meats, bones, fish, dairy products, vegetable or animal fats, cooked foods, carnivorous animal manure, plastics, synthetics, or other non-biodegradable material. 
c.  Acceptable locations: Compost bins/piles are permitted in rear yards, a minimum of three feet from any lot line and 15 feet from any dwelling located on adjacent property. 
d.  Unacceptable locations: Compost bins/piles are not permitted in drainage or utility easements. 
e.  Size restrictions: Composting bins/piles are limited in size to a maximum of three feet × three feet in area and four feet in height. Each parcel is limited to a maximum of three bins/piles, which may be immediately adjacent to each other. 
f.  Nuisance controls: Composting must be maintained in a manner to prevent the escape of offensive, unwholesome, or nauseous odor as a nuisance to adjacent property and not be an active attraction/refuge for rodents. In addition, there must be adequate screening to shield any compost bins/piles from the view of adjoining residential properties. 
g.  Any person who constructs or maintains a composting bin or pile in a manner contrary to this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-23. - Limits, quality control. 
(a)  Rejection of contract waste, tagging of containers. 
(1)  If any contract waste is rejected by the SOCRRA contractor because it does not conform to the requirements of this article, the SOCRRA contractor shall give notice to the owner or occupant of the premises by placing a tag on the rejected contract waste. The tag shall advise the owner or occupant of the nonconformity and shall include a telephone number to call for additional information and possible alternatives. Any tagged item must be removed by midnight on the date that collection was scheduled to occur. A responsible party who violates this provision is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(2)  If the city determines the owner or occupant has failed to correct the tagged violation, the city may request SOCRRA to make a special collection of the rejected contract waste. The property owner shall be liable for any expense(s) SOCRRA incurs to make the special collection. 
(b)  Spillage. SOCRRA and its contractor shall not be responsible for cleaning up unsanitary conditions around contract waste containers caused by the carelessness of the service unit. 
(c)  Disturbing containers/scavenging. No person other than the owner of refuse or recyclables or agent or employees of licensees of the city shall disturb, remove, or attempt to remove refuse or recyclables in containers or bags, or disturb, remove or attempt to remove any recyclables not in containers whether same is on public or private property. This section does not apply to police officers or law enforcement officials who are lawfully engaged in their duties. 
(d)  Improper use of yard waste and recyclables containers. Recyclables container(s) and containers marked with a "yard waste" sticker facing the street shall not be used to set out or collect regular refuse. 
(e)  Storage of containers on private properties prior to removal; container maintenance. All containers used for the storage of waste and recyclable materials shall be inaccessible to vermin, domestic animals, and insects, so as to prevent a nuisance. For purposes of this section, the term "containers" shall include waste material containers, refuse containers, recycling carts, and yard waste containers or bags. 
(1)  On residential properties, all refuse containers shall be covered tightly at all times to prevent the harboring of rodents and the scattering of debris. Containers shall be placed at the rear of the house. In the event the physical characteristics of the property result in the inability to place the containers at the rear of the house, then the containers may be placed at the side of the house no further forward than the front corner of the house. Placement at the road for pick up shall be restricted to the time period beginning 4:00 p.m. the day prior to the morning of the regularly scheduled collection by the SOCRRA contracted hauler. 
(2)  On nonresidential premises, all containers stored outside of the building must be stored in containers that are emptied by either a SOCRRA contracted waste hauler or a private contracted waste hauler at intervals frequent enough to prevent development of a food source for animals, as well as prevent an overflow of items that will cause litter. The containers shall be kept in rear or side yards at all times, unless another location has been approved in accordance with the City of Huntington Woods Code of Ordinances. Containers holding waste materials shall be covered tightly as possible, in accordance with OSHA safety regulations, to prevent the harboring of rodents and the scattering of debris. 
(3)  A violation of this subsection may be abated by the city pursuant to section 30-27, or alternatively, a violation will result in a municipal civil infraction pursuant to section 30-30. 
(f)  Quantity of refuse collected. In every case where the owner, occupant, or user of any service unit accumulates more than two cubic yards of refuse within any one-week period, it shall be the responsibility of such owner, occupant, or user to arrange for and pay for additional collection and disposal services through SOCRRA or to arrange for private collection and disposal. 
(g)  Bag/can limit and bag/tag system option. SOCRRA reserves the right to impose a bag/can limit on some or all of the service units and/or implement a bag/tag system. Should such a system be implemented, the owner, occupant, or user of any service unit would only set out bags, containers or other household items that are within the bag/can limit or are properly tagged. If a bag/can limit is imposed upon a service unit, or a bag/tag system implemented, the property owner or other responsible party shall be notified in writing. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. 593, § 1, 6-20-17) 
Sec. 30-24. - Disposal of construction refuse and assessment against property. 
(a)  Construction refuse generated by a contractor shall be considered unacceptable waste and shall be the responsibility of the producer, or owner thereof and shall not be disposed of within the city. It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, occupant or other person responsible for construction work to arrange, at their own expense, the removal of such construction refuse from the premises within a reasonable time after the completion of such construction work. 
(b)  If the same is not removed within 48 hours after notice is given to the owner or contractor by the city, the city administrator or designee may order it to be removed; the cost thereof to be assessed against the land or taken from the deposit made for such purposes under the provisions of the applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-25. - Hazardous waste; ignitable waste. 
(a)  Hazardous waste. Hazardous waste shall be considered unacceptable waste and shall be the responsibility of the producer, or owner thereof and shall not be disposed of within the city. In addition, hazardous waste shall not be stored or transported within the city without the written approval of the city manager or public works director. Written approval will not be granted unless the city manager designates a supervisor who has knowledge of the safety measures required to protect the public health and safety during the storage, transport, or disposal of hazardous waste. 
(b)  Ignitable waste. Ignitable waste (e.g., rags soaked with turpentine) shall be considered unacceptable waste and shall be the responsibility of the producer, or owner thereof and shall not be disposed of within the city. No person shall set out any materials that could ignite waste in a container or waste collection vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-26. - Litter. 
(a)  Prohibition against litter. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, or in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(b)  Use of waste receptacles. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(c)  Sweeping litter into gutters. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(d)  Litter on occupied private property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except the owner or person in control of private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(e)  Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The responsible party, including the owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-27. - Enforcement-Notice to abate. 
(a)  The city or its authorized designee is charged with the enforcement of this article. No person who is a responsible party, including but not limited to the owner or person in charge of or occupant of any private premises, shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of any litter on the private premises owned, controlled or occupied by him in a manner prohibited by the provisions of the ordinance. When any litter shall be accumulated or permitted to accumulate on any private premises in a manner prohibited by this section, the enforcing officer shall notify the owner, person in control or occupant of such private premises to remove the litter and clear said private premises within a time limited in the notice, such time not to be less than two days, nor more than ten days from the time said notice is served. Such notice shall be served as otherwise provided for in the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  If the owner, person in charge or occupant of any premises, or other responsible party, notified to abate a nuisance consisting of the accumulation of litter on any private premises shall fail to abate the same within the time limit in said notice therefore, the enforcing officer is hereby authorized to enter upon such private premises and abate said nuisance by removing said litter and clearing said private premises. The cost of abating such nuisance plus an additional 15 percent for overhead and other expenses shall constitute a lien against the private premises and shall be charged to the occupant thereof or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If not paid within 60 days after the bill for such charges is rendered, such charges may be collected as a single lot assessment against said premises in the manner provided by the City Charter or in any other manner authorized for the collection of debts owed the city. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-28. - All burning prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for a person to burn garbage, rubbish, refuse building materials, brush, leaves or any other waste material of any nature whatsoever in the city. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-29. - Service charges. 
(a)  The city may assess a monthly service charge, in an amount determined by resolution from time to time by the city commission and kept on file in the office of the city clerk, for the collection of garbage, rubbish, compostables, and recyclables by the city, to all properties receiving such collection services, including each single-family residence, each unit in a multifamily residence, apartment building or complex, condominium, townhouse, or cooperative, and each commercial, industrial, or business establishment. Service charges shall be prorated such that no fee is charged for periods of time when the premises are vacant and no collection is provided, as evidenced by the disconnection of the water meter to the premises. 
(b)  Service charges imposed pursuant to this section shall be included on bills rendered by the city for water and sewer services, and shall be payable together therewith and subject to the collection at the same time and in the same manner as such bills. All penalties, interest and charges provided for water and sewer charges shall apply also to service charges billed pursuant to this section, and procedures for collection thereof shall in all respects be the same as, and followed in conjunction with collection of water and sewer charges. 
(c)  Service charges billed pursuant to this section for collection services furnished by the city are hereby made a lien on the premises to which such services are furnished. The city treasurer shall, annually, on May 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on April 30 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months, for placement on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 30-30. - Municipal civil infractions. 
    A responsible party who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Each day that a violation continues is a separate municipal civil infraction violation. Sanctions for each violation of said sections shall include a fine of not more than $500.00, costs, damages and injunctive orders as authorized by the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Secs. 30-31-30-55. - Reserved. 
Chapter 31 - RESERVED 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City control of highways, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 29; city authority to acquire, own, establish and maintain boulevards, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 23; obstructions and encroachments on public highways, MCL 247.171 et seq.; closing of highway for repairs, MCL 247.291 et seq.; driveways, banners, events and parades, MCL 247.321 et seq.; liability of local government for injury from the result of not keeping highway in reasonable repair, MCL 691.1402. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
(Code 1988, § 4.1) 
Sec. 32-20. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 4.2) 
Sec. 32-21. - Permits. 
(a)  Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the director, upon such forms as the director shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge for each such permit, as provided by resolution of the city commission. Such permit shall be revocable by the director for failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and the lawful orders of the director or the director's duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall be in not less than the amounts as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(b)  A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit hereunder, such deposit shall be in such amount as may be prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution, except as otherwise specified in this article, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 4.3; Ord. No. 330, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Sec. 32-22. - Street openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the director. No permit shall be granted until the applicant posts a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 32-21. 
(Code 1988, § 4.4) 
Sec. 32-23. - Emergency openings. 
    The director may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency; provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this article shall be complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 4.5) 
Sec. 32-24. - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(Code 1988, § 4.6) 
Sec. 32-25. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the director shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the director. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the director shall from time to time direct. Utility cabinets shall only be placed in a street in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 38. 
(Code 1988, § 4.7; Ord. No. 508, § 4, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 32-26. - Maintenance of installations in street. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole, or any other excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of the owner's estate, shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on the owner's part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Code 1988, § 4.8) 
Sec. 32-27. - Additional regulations. 
    The city manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions, and housemoving, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city commission. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulation. 
(Code 1988, § 4.41) 
Sec. 32-28. - Removal of encroachment. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street or street right-of-way, including parking spaces, may be removed by the city and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting landowner, subject to section 32-277 below. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in the chapter for single lot assessment upon not less than seven days' notice to such landowner in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1988, § 4.42; Ord. No. 577, § 1, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-29. - Temporary street closings. 
    The director shall have authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when the director shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. The director shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on said street indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over said street, or park the same thereon, except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the director. 
(Code 1988, § 4.43) 
Sec. 32-30. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 4.44; Ord. No. 420, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Secs. 32-31-32-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURBS AND CURB CUTS 

Sec. 32-66. - Construction of curbs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or construct, or cause to be built or constructed, any curb or gutter, or curb and gutter, upon any street, alley or public highway, unless the same shall be built or constructed according to plans and specifications and of a material approved by the director. 
(Code 1988, § 4.17) 
Sec. 32-67. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the department. Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall exceed 22 feet nor be less than ten feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be five feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet. 
(Code 1988, § 4.18) 
Secs. 32-68-32-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 32-98. - Sidewalk obstructions. 
    No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to said street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the director and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by section 32-21. 
(Code 1988, § 4.26) 
Sec. 32-99. - Pedestrian passage. 
    At least six feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians and if the building operations are such that such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter built in accordance with chapter 6, shall be provided around such obstruction. 
(Code 1988, § 4.27) 
Secs. 32-100-32-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 32-127. - Safeguards. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions, shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with red warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not over 15 feet apart. 
(Code 1988, § 4.28) 
Sec. 32-128. - Shoring excavations. 
    All openings and excavations shall be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Code 1988, § 4.29) 
Secs. 32-129-32-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND LARGE VEHICLES 

Sec. 32-155. - Moving of buildings, etc. 
    No person shall move, transport, or convey any building, machinery, truck or trailer, more than eight feet eight inches wide or higher than 13 feet six inches, above the surface of the roadway, or longer than 50 feet, into, across, or along any street, or other public place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from the director. The applicant shall file the written clearances from the light, telephone, gas and water utilities, stating that all connections have been properly cut off and, where necessary, all obstructions along the proposed route of moving will be removed without delaying moving operations. In addition, clearance shall be obtained from the department of public safety approving the proposed route through the city and the time of moving, together with an estimated cost to the department due to the moving operations. The applicant shall deposit with the city the total estimated cost to the department of public safety and department of public services, and shall file with the city a liability insurance policy in the amount as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(Code 1988, § 4.34) 
Secs. 32-156-32-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 32-179. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sidewalk means the portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian travel. 
(Code 1988, § 4.61) 
Sec. 32-180. - Specifications and permits. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild, or repair any sidewalk except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established by the director nor without first obtaining a written permit from the director. The said written permit shall be prominently displayed on the construction site. The fee for said permit shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 4.62) 
Sec. 32-181. - Line and grade stakes. 
    The director shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the work, but this shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the director. Where it is necessary to replace engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city or its employees, a charge as determined by the commission shall be paid. 
(Code 1988, § 4.63) 
Sec. 32-182. - Permit revocation. 
    The director may suspend any permit issued under the terms of this article for incompetency or failure to comply with the terms of this article, or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established by the department of public services for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk. The city manager may cause work to be stopped under any permit granted for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk for any of the causes enumerated in this section, which stop order shall be effective until the next regular meeting of the city commission and if confirmed by the commission, at its next regular meeting, such stop order shall be permanent, and shall constitute a revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 4.64) 
Sec. 32-183. - Ordering construction. 
    The city commission may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises. When such resolution shall be adopted, the city clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with section 1-11, to the owner of such lot or premises requiring the owner to construct or rebuild such sidewalk within 20 days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1988, § 4.65) 
Sec. 32-184. - Construction by city. 
    If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular sidewalk as described in said notice, and within the time and in the manner required thereby, the director is hereby authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limited for the construction or rebuilding by the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the expense thereof shall be charged to such premises and the owner thereof, and collected as provided for single lot assessments in the Charter. 
(Code 1988, § 4.66) 
Sec. 32-185. - Sidewalk maintenance. 
    No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by that person to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. 
(Code 1988, § 4.67) 
Sec. 32-186. - Sidewalk replacement. 
    Whenever the director shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon said sidewalk of such determination which notice shall be given in accordance with section 1-10. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the owner to replace said sidewalk. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven days, within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence. If the owner wants to have their own contractor replace the sidewalk, the owner shall obtain a permit from the city, post a bond for the work to be completed and receive the express written permission of the city manager to proceed with the work. All work shall conform to standards set by the city. 
    If the owner of such lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to replace said sidewalk within the time limited therefor, or in a manner otherwise than in accordance with this article, the director shall have said sidewalk replaced. If the director determines that the condition of said sidewalk is such that immediate replacement is necessary to protect the public, the director may dispense with said notice. The cost of replacement hereunder shall be charged against the premises which said sidewalk adjoins and the owner of said premises, and shall be collected as provided for single lot assessments in the Charter. 
(Code 1988, § 4.68; Ord. No. 594, § 1, 8-15-2017; Ord. No. 605, § 1, 6-26-2018) 
Sec. 32-187. - Sidewalks to be cleared. 
    The occupant of every lot or premises adjoining any street, or the owner of such lot or premises, if the same are not occupied, shall clear all ice and snow from sidewalks adjoining such lot or premises within the time herein required. When any snow or ice shall cease to fall during the daylight hours, such snow or ice shall be cleared from the sidewalks within 12 hours after such cessation. When a fall of snow or ice shall have ceased during the night time, it shall be cleared from the sidewalks by 6:00 p.m. of the day following. 
(Code 1988, § 4.69) 
Sec. 32-188. - Failure to clear. 
    If any occupant or owner shall neglect or fail to clear ice or snow from the sidewalk adjoining their premises within the time limited, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on such sidewalk, that occupant or owner shall be guilty of a violation of this article and in addition, the director may cause the same to be cleared and the expense of removal shall become a debt to the city from the occupant or owner of such premises, and shall be collected as any other debt to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 4.70) 
Sec. 32-189. - Grading of driveways and approaches. 
    If, due to any cause, a driveway or approach has an elevation that does not meet the existing sidewalk grade, at the time of sidewalk construction, reconstruction, or repair, and the director shall determine that said driveway or approach thereby constitutes a hazard to the public safety and welfare, notice shall be given to the owner of said driveway or approach in accordance with section 1-11. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the owner of said driveway or approach to adjust the grade thereof to conform with the existing grade of the sidewalk with which it intersects. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven days, within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence, in any event not to exceed 30 days from date of commencement without written authorization from the director. If the owner of such driveway or approach shall refuse or neglect to adjust the grade of said driveway or approach in accordance with this section within the time specified therefor, or in the manner otherwise than in accordance with this article, the director shall cause such driveway or approach to be reconstructed to conform with the existing sidewalk grade. The cost of such reconstruction hereunder shall be charged against the premises on which said driveway or approach is located and the owner of said premises, and shall be collected as provided for single-lot assessments in the Charter. 
(Code 1988, § 4.71; Ord. No. 306, § 1, 5-19-1987) 
Sec. 32-190. - Violations. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction., subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $150.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines as provided by section 1-15, and each day that a violation continues shall be deemed an additional and distinct violation. 
(Code 1988, § 4.72; Ord. No. 421, § 1, 5-19-1998) 
Secs. 32-191-32-218. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGNATION OF STREET AND BUILDING NUMBERS 

Sec. 32-219. - Street names. 
    All streets shall be known and designated by the names applied thereto on the map of the city known as the street plan, filed with the city clerk. The naming of any new street or the changing of the name of any street shall be done by resolution, which resolution shall amend said map. After the introduction of such resolution and before its final adoption, the commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, and shall publish notice of such hearing at least one week prior thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 1.20) 
Sec. 32-220. - Vacating streets. 
    Vacated portions of streets and alleys shall be eliminated from said street plan map. The vacating of any street or alley shall be done by resolution, which resolution shall amend said map. The resolution shall declare the intent of the commission to vacate such street and shall provide for a public hearing to be held in accordance with chapter XIII, section 3 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1988, § 1.21) 
Sec. 32-221. - Street numbers. 
    All premises shall bear a distinctive street number on the front at or near the front entrance of said premises in accordance with and as designated upon the street plan map on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 1.22) 
Sec. 32-222. - Numbering buildings. 
    The owners and occupants of all buildings in the city shall cause the correct numbers to be placed thereon in accordance with said street plan map. Such numbers shall be facing the street and adjacent to the principal entrance, and in such position and such size as to be plainly visible from the street. 
(Code 1988, § 1.23) 
Secs. 32-223-32-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LAWN EXTENSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-251. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lawn extension means that portion of the street right-of-way located between the sidewalk, or in the absence of a sidewalk, the lot line parallel to the street, and the curb or street. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1(4.81), 6-17-2008) 
Sec. 32-252. - Maintenance. 
    On residential streets, the abutting property owner or occupant shall maintain a lawn or ground cover, not exceeding six inches in height in the lawn extension and may plant grass, flowers and trees therein in conformity with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1(4.82), 6-17-2008) 
Sec. 32-253. - Nonliving landscaping materials; reflectors. 
(a)  No more than ten percent of the lawn extension, excluding the driveway approach, shall be covered with nonliving landscaping materials such as gravel, brick, stone or concrete, nor shall any nonliving landscaping materials be placed in such a manner as to cause a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles. Nonliving landscaping materials shall be flat and at the same level as the surrounding ground. At no time shall reflectors, boulders, rocks, rope, string or any other material be used or placed in such a manner as to cause a hazard to pedestrians or to prevent parking of vehicles by obstructing or interfering with the opening of the vehicle's door. 
(b)  Reflectors or other suitable temporary markers may be used at the base of a driveway approach from October 15 through April 15 to define the driveway for the purpose of snow plowing. No more than two markers can be on each side of the driveway in the right-of-way area. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1(4.83), 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 553, § 1, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 32-254. - Destruction of property; parking prohibited. 
    No person shall willfully injure or destroy any grass, flower or tree upon any lawn extension or throw any papers, refuse or other debris thereon. No person shall drive or park an automobile, bicycle or other vehicle over or upon any lawn extension, excluding the driveway approach and approved right-of-way parking space, except as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1(4.84), 6-17-2008) 
Secs. 32-255-32-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RIGHT-OF-WAY PARKING SPACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 577, § 2, adopted July 21, 2015, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 32-271-32-273, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 524, §§ 1(4.91-4.93), adopted June 17, 2008. 

Sec. 32-271. - Purpose. 
    The city has absolute control of all the streets, highways and alleys within its limits and may use, regulate, control and improve the same and the space above and beneath them. Pursuant to subsection 40-394(a) of the City Code, right-of-way parking spaces are specifically prohibited. This prohibition is necessary to protect the public, health and safety of the residents, and to maintain the aesthetics of the city. However, the city recognizes that there may be unique circumstances under which the city commission, exercising its discretion, may determine that a waiver be granted for a particular property owner to permit a right-of-way parking space. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-272. - Prohibition of parking in right-of-way. 
    Parking spaces or parking in a right-of-way shall be specifically prohibited, unless a waiver has been granted by the city commission and permit fees paid as required in this division. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-273. - Written application; waiver for parking in right-of-way. 
    A property owner may submit a written application to the city commission for a waiver to permit a right-of-way parking space. If the applicant is not the property owner, the application shall include written authorization for the application from the property owner. The application shall include a description of the unique circumstances related to the property, and shall include a survey depicting the property lines, right-of-way line, and the location and dimensions of the proposed parking space. A waiver is to be granted only in those limited circumstances where the need for the waiver is based on unique circumstances related to the specific property for which the waiver is requested. Unique circumstances do not include in and of itself the ownership of more than two vehicles by the occupants of the property. 
    In order to determine whether a waiver may be granted, the city commission shall, in its discretion, consider the following factors: 
(1)  The specific location of the proposed right-of-way parking space. 
(2)  Whether the proposed right-of-way parking space is located on a street where parking is prohibited. 
(3)  The unique circumstances applicable to the property that might justify the grant of the waiver. 
(4)  Whether the right-of-way parking space would have a negative impact on surrounding properties. 
(5)  Whether the property is a corner lot and there is less than 20 feet of driveway length between the garage door and the property line and there is an inability to create an additional parking space on-site. 
(6)  Whether the property, due to the existing configuration of the house, is too narrow to allow for the construction of a two-car garage. 
(7)  Whether the plight of the property owner is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to general neighborhood conditions. 
(8)  Whether the waiver would alter the essential character of the area. 
(9)  Whether the need for the waiver is self-created. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-274. - Requirements for right-of-way parking space. 
    If a waiver for a right-of-way parking space is granted by the city commission, the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  The right-of-way parking space shall be parallel to the road. 
(2)  The right-of-way parking space may only be used by non-commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles of any nature, and noncommercial vehicles containing any form of signage are specifically prohibited. 
(3)  The right-of-way parking space shall not accommodate more than one vehicle parked parallel to the street, and shall be limited in size to eight feet by 22 feet. 
(4)  The right-of-way parking space shall not create a traffic hazard. 
(5)  The right-of-way parking space shall not obstruct access to any utility or fire hydrant. 
(6)  Installation of the right-of-way parking space shall not require the removal of any tree. 
(7)  The right-of-way parking space shall be constructed only of permeable/grass pavers, permitting the drainage of stormwater and allowing grass to grow through. Asphalt, concrete, gravel or any other paved surface is specifically prohibited. 
(8)  The right-of-way parking space shall be constructed and maintained at the sole cost and expense of the property owner. 
(9)  The boundaries of the right-of-way parking space shall be well-defined and shall not be located on either the sidewalk or the road. 
(10)  The property owner shall not damage any abutting city curbs and/or gutters. 
(11)  The property owner shall not have been previously issued violations for illegal parking on the property. 
(12)  Any vehicle parked in the right-of-way space shall be licensed. 
(13)  The right-of-way parking space is to be used for only vehicles that are used on a regular basis, and shall not be used for storage of infrequently used vehicles. 
(14)  The property owner shall execute a revocable license, in a form approved by the city attorney, which specifically states that the waiver is valid, only as long as the unique circumstances that formed the basis for the waiver exist on the property, and only as long as the property owner pays the annual permit fee as required in section 32-272 below. The waiver will be administratively reviewed annually at the time the annual permit fee is due and may be revoked if the unique circumstances cease to exist. The city may administratively approve a revocable license for a successor-in-interest (successor property owner) if the unique circumstances which justify the grant of the waiver continue to exist for the successor property owner; provided, however, that the successor property owner shall execute a revocable license and otherwise comply with the terms of this division. The revocable license shall contain a provision in which the property owner shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, employees, agents and consultants, from any liability, damages, costs or claims resulting from the construction or use of said right-of-way space, and further agrees to reimburse the city and pay for any and all damages to the street resulting from or caused by the construction, maintenance or use of the right-of-way parking space. The revocable license shall be recorded against the property. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-275. - Annual license fee. 
    A license fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and shall be paid in full prior to installation of the right-of-way parking space for which a waiver has been granted. The property owner shall thereafter pay an annual license fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission, which shall be paid no later than October 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-276. - Revocation of waiver/restoration. 
    In the event the property owner fails to pay the annual license fee as required by section 32-375, and after notice from the city, the property owner shall have 14 days in which to pay the required fee, or the waiver shall be automatically revoked without further action by the city commission. The property owner shall have 30 days after notice of revocation of the waiver to remove the grass pavers and restore the right-of-way parking space to a well-maintained condition with seed and/or sod. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-277. - Preexisting right-of-way parking spaces. 
    At the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this division, there are existing right-of-way parking spaces in the city for which the annual fees have been paid. Some of those right-of-way spaces were installed without any prior approval from the city, and others exist even though they were to have been removed upon the sale of the property under prior license agreements. It is the specific goal of this division to eliminate the existing right-of-way spaces. The existing right-of-way spaces upon which the annual fees are current at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this division will be permitted to be retained for a temporary period, conditioned upon the property owner continuing to pay the annual license fee, and subject to the following: 
(1)  The city is currently constructing road improvements throughout the city. Existing right-of-way spaces along roads where construction has not yet occurred shall be permitted to remain temporarily. However, as road work progresses, these existing right-of-way spaces shall be removed during road construction, at the expense of the city. Prior to removal, the property owner may apply to the city for a waiver. If a waiver is granted for an existing right-of-way space, the property owner shall comply with all other requirements of this division, including sections 32-274 and 32-275. 
(2)  Road construction has been completed in some areas of the city, and there are presently four right-of-way spaces that still exist along the improved roads. These four spaces will be allowed to remain so long as the property owners pay the annual license fee. However, upon sale or transfer of these four properties, and prior to closing on any sale or transfer of the properties, the property owner shall notify the city of any pending sale or transfer of the property, and the right-of-way will be removed at the cost of the city, the property owners shall cause the removal of the parking space as set forth below. These property owners shall execute a revocable license, in a form approved by the city attorney, which specifically states that the right-of-way space shall be removed prior to the sale or transfer of the property. The revocable license shall contain a provision in which the property owner shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, employees, agents and consultants, from any liability, damages, costs or claims resulting from the construction or use of said right-of-way space, and further agrees to reimburse the city and pay for any and all damages to the street resulting from or caused by the construction, maintenance or use of the right-of-way parking space. The revocable license shall be recorded against the property. In the event the property owners fail to notify the city of the sale or transfer of the property, or fail to execute the revocable license, the city may enter upon the property, remove, refill and seed the space, and the expense of such removal or refilling shall be charged to the abutting landowner as set forth in section 32-28. With respect to these four parking spaces, the property owner may apply to the city for a waiver. If a waiver is granted for an existing right-of-way space, the property owner shall comply with all other requirements of this division, including sections 32-274 and 32-275. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 32-278. - Violations and penalties. 
    Failure to restore the right-of-way parking space shall result in the city issuing a municipal civil infraction for each day that such violation continues. In addition, violation of this division is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and the city specifically reserves the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this division. Every day on which any violation of this division continues, constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Secs. 32-279-32-300. - Reserved. 
Chapter 33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Telecommunications Act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Right-of-Way Oversight Act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.; Michigan Broadband Development Authority Act, MCL 484.3201 et seq.; Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, MCL 484.3301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-19. - Legislative findings. 
    The city hereby finds and declares that the public rights-of-way within the city: 
(1)  Are used and useful for the travel of persons and the transport of goods and other tangibles in the business and social life of the community by all citizens; 
(2)  Can be partially occupied by utilities and other public service entities for facilities used in the delivery, conveyance, and transmission of utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well-being of the city and its citizens; 
(3)  Are physically limited so that proper management by the city is necessary to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses, to prevent foreclosure of future uses through premature exhaustion of available right-of-way capacity, and to minimize the inconvenience to the public from such facilities' construction, emplacement, relocation, and maintenance in the rights-of-way; 
(4)  That the right to occupy portions of such rights-of-way for limited times for the business of providing telecommunications services for hire is a valuable economic right, the economic benefit of which should be shared with all the taxpayers; and 
(5)  Represent a significant and valuable asset of the city and its citizens to which a significant amount has been invested. 
(Code 1988, § 2.400; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998) 
Sec. 34-20. - Purposes. 
    The city adopts the ordinance from which this article is derived to better: 
(1)  Manage a limited resource to the longterm benefit of the public; 
(2)  Regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers while protecting the public health, safety and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.) ("Act") and other applicable law; 
(3)  Minimize inconvenience of the public from the placement and maintenance of telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Recover the burden imposed on taxpayers by occupation of the public rights-of-way; 
(5)  Ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying fees charged to providers and complying with the Act; and 
(6)  Protect the assets from overuse and misuse and ensuring their availability for services for the public. 
(Code 1988, § 2.401; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 1, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-21. - Authority. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted pursuant to the city powers including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Article VII, Section 29, of the Michigan Constitution of 1963; 
(2)  Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2101 et seq.); 
(3)  Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.); 
(4)  The Home Rule Cities Act, Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.); and 
(5)  Section 253 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 USC 253. 
(Code 1988, § 2.402; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 2, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.). 
    Affiliate means when used in relation to any person, means another person who de facto or de jure owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such person. 
    Annual maintenance fee means the annual maintenance fee is an annual charge in an amount as set forth in the Act against the owner or operator of telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way which is paid to the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority, and distributed to the city in accordance with the Act. 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act (MCL 484.3103). 
    Construction permit means an authorization issued by the city to enter upon the public rights-of-way to erect, construct, or emplace telecommunications facilities. Construction permits are permits issued by the department of public services when authorized by the city manager allowing a person to erect, hang, lay, bury, draw, emplace, construct, relocate, or displace any telecommunications facility upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way in this city. It is a requirement of each construction permit, whether explicitly stated or not, that the permittee shall not damage any public property, except as specifically required to perform the work authorized by the permit, and will properly restore, to the city's standards, all areas affected by its work, at no cost or expense to the city. It is also a condition of each construction permit, whether explicitly stated or not, that the permittee will not damage, injure or interfere with, by its activities, the facilities or property of any other city authorized user of the right-of-way. 
    Federal Communications Commission (or FCC) means the Federal Communications Commission or its successor. 
    Lease means an agreement between the city and a telecommunications provider or the owner or operator of communications facilities under which the provider or owner or operator is permitted to occupy space on city-owned or controlled public rights-of-way or structures to emplace and maintain a radio frequency antenna. 
    MPSC means The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    Person means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, but not the city. 
    Public rights-of-way means the surface and space above, on, and below any public highway, avenue, street, lane, alley, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, public easement, right-of-way or any other public ground or water within or in which the city now or hereafter holds any property interest which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated or otherwise acquired, may be used for the purpose of constructing, operating, and maintaining a telecommunications facility. No reference herein, or in any permit agreement, to a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or warranty by the city that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a permittee shall be deemed to acquire only those rights of user as are properly in the city and as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services means those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2102). The term "telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
    Transfer means the transfer of an interest in a permit means the sale or transfer, directly or indirectly, of an existing or newly created equity interest in the permittee whether or not it may result in a transfer of control of the permittee. 
(Code 1988, § 2.404; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 3, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-23. - Required permits. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  No person shall erect, hang, lay, bury, draw, emplace, or construct any telecommunications facility upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way in this city without first obtaining a construction permit therefor from the city. 
(2)  No person shall enter upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way in this city to relocate or otherwise displace any telecommunications facility that is located upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit therefor from the city. 
(b)  Telecommunications. No person shall maintain or operate a telecommunications facility upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way in this city without obtaining a telecommunications permit as required by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.405; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 437, § 1, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 470, § 4, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-24. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager shall issue, or cause to be issued, all construction permits and inspect or cause inspection of the work under each permit to the extent the city manager or a designee deems appropriate. 
(b)  The city manager shall notify the MPSC when a telecommunications permit has been granted or denied, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which the permit was granted or denied. 
(c)  If an application for a telecommunications permit is approved, as provided herein, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form provided by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act (MCL 484.3106(1), (2), 484.3115). 
(d)  Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(4)), the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(e)  The city manager shall be responsible for the continuing enforcement of all terms and conditions of permits, leases, and other such instruments authorizing the use or employment of public rights-of-way for communications facilities and services. 
(Code 1988, § 2.406; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 5, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-25. - Application for telecommunications permit. 
(a)  An applicant for a telecommunications permit under this article must submit three copies of an application to the city clerk, on a form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(1)), and include at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's telecommunications facilities. 
(3)  Route maps showing the location of the applicant's existing and proposed facilities in the format prescribed in the Act. If the telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary or confidential information which is exempt under the freedom of information act (MCL 15.231 et seq.), pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(5)), the telecommunications provider shall prominently indicate this on the face of each map. 
(4)  The technical standards that the applicant proposes to follow in construction and operation of the telecommunications facilities. 
(5)  A description of the telecommunications services to be provided. 
(6)  The city may require any additional information it deems necessary because of the applicant's specific proposed use. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(c)  If the information in an application is incomplete or if the proposed use is inconsistent with the requirements of this article, the application may be returned as unacceptable for filing. 
(d)  If the information provided in an application is complete and meets all the requirements of this article, the city manager shall promptly review the application to determine compliance with the requirements of this article, including the technical and construction standards as set forth in section 34-27. 
(e)  In evaluating an application, the city manager must consider: 
(1)  The applicant's technical, financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate a telecommunications system; 
(2)  The nature of the proposed facilities, equipment, and services; 
(3)  The applicant's recent performance record of providing telecommunications services in other communities, if any; 
(4)  The ability of the applicant to provide a telecommunications service or services making efficient use of the public right-of-way and justifying any inconvenience of the public attendant thereon; 
(5)  The effects of a grant of a permit on the present and future use of the public rights-of-way, including any foreclosure of future uses of the public rights-of-way; 
(6)  The benefit or detriment to the public from the applicant's proposed use; and 
(7)  Any factors arising from the applicant's specific proposed use that affect the foregoing and the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(f)  Based upon the application and any other information relevant to the application, the city manager shall determine whether to recommend the grant, with or without conditions, or the denial of a permit and shall notify the applicant of the proposed recommendation. 
(g)  The city manager shall submit a recommendation to grant a telecommunications permit to the city commission or a recommendation not to grant a telecommunications permit. The city commission must approve or disapprove the proposed grant and permit, based on its weighing of the information submitted and on the applicant's ability to provide a telecommunications service or services making efficient use of the public rights-of-way and justifying any inconvenience of the public attendant thereon; provided, however, if the city commission does not act within 45 days from the date of receipt of a complete application by the city manager, the city manager shall be authorized to grant or deny the permit on or before the 45th day. 
(h)  Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(1)), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the state telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251) and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the state telecommunications act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(i)  Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(3)), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the state telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251), shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(3)), a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (b) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(4)). 
(Code 1988, § 2.407; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 426, § 1, 12-15-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 6, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-26. - Terms of telecommunications permits. 
(a)  No telecommunications permit under this article shall be issued for a term of longer than five years. 
(b)  The permittee of any permit under this article shall promptly commence to exercise its privileges thereunder. Each permittee within six months of the effective date of the permit shall file with the city manager, a report under oath describing the extent of operations and/or preparatory measures thereto since the effective date. On each anniversary of the effective date of grant, the permittee shall file with the city manager, a report under oath describing the extent of operations under the permit. If any such annual report shows nonuse in whole or in part, the city may issue to the permittee an order to show cause why such permit shall not be deemed abandoned, returnable in not less than 60 days. After a hearing, if requested in a timely manner by the permittee, the city may find that the permit has been abandoned and declare it forfeited. Thereupon, the city may either take possession of some or all of the permittee's facilities in the public rights-of-way or require the permittee or its bonding company to remove some or all of the permittee's facilities from the public rights-of-way and to restore the public rights-of-way to their prior condition. 
(Code 1988, § 2.408; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 7, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-27. - Technical and construction standards. 
(a)  Each permittee shall construct, install and maintain its telecommunications system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards established by the Federal Communications Commission or state agency. 
(b)  In any event, the telecommunications system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the city or other areas where the permittee may have equipment located. 
(c)  All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or occurring during construction of the system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(d)  Construction, installation and maintenance of a telecommunications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public and private utilities serving the city following accepted industry construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations. 
(e)  All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering consideration. Utility cabinets used to shelter telecommunication equipment or hardware shall be located and installed in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 38. 
(f)  Permittee shall mark its telecommunications system as follows: 
(1)  Aerial portions of the telecommunications system shall be marked with a marker on permittee's lines on alternate poles which shall state permittee's name and provide a toll-free number to call for assistance. 
(2)  Direct buried underground portions of the telecommunications system shall have: 
a.  A conducting wire placed in the ground at least several inches above permittee's cable if such cable is nonconductive; 
b.  At least several inches above that, a continuous colored tape with permittee's name and toll-free number and a statement to the effect that there is buried cable beneath; and 
c.  Stakes or other appropriate above-ground markers with permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that there is buried telephone cable below. Bored underground portions of the telecommunications system shall have a conducting wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be required to provide the continuous colored tape. 
Portions of the telecommunications system located in the conduit, including conduit of others used by permittee, shall be marked at its entrance into and exit from each manhole and handhole with permittee's name and a toll-free telephone number. 
(g)  Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3104(3)), obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this ordinance does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(h)  Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(7)), a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days of substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps shall be in a format as prescribed by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(8)). 
(Code 1988, § 2.409; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 8, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 508, § 2, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 34-28. - Conditions of permit. 
(a)  No permittee or holder of any construction permit for any telecommunications facility shall erect new aerial plant in or on a public right-of-way in which one or more public service providers of electricity, telephone, or cable television, has placed its lines underground or in an area where the city by ordinance has forbidden new aerial plant to be constructed or existing aerial plant to be maintained. 
(b)  Each permittee or holder of any construction permit for any telecommunications facility shall, upon written notice from the city, reasonably in advance, promptly relocate its lines at its own expense to accommodate realignment or construction of public streets, sidewalks, curbs, drains, sewers, and public improvements of any sort. 
(c)  No permittee or holder of any construction permit for any telecommunications facility shall dig, trench, or otherwise excavate in the public rights-of-way without complying with the "Miss Dig" program. 
(d)  Every permittee and holder of any construction permit shall make available to any permittee space on the poles of the permittee and holder to the extent practicable and at a reasonable charge, calculated in accordance with section 224 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 USC 224; and any permittee under this article may request another permittee to rearrange its facilities or charge out its poles to reasonably accommodate the requesting permittee's facilities at the reasonable expense of the requesting permittee. 
(e)  Every permittee or holder of any construction permit shall make available to other permittees any of its conduits that is excess, so long as it is excess, at a reasonable rental fee; provided, further, that the city may require as a condition of issuing any construction permit for underground conduit the installation of which requires excavation in or under or along or across any traveled way that the permittee or holder of the construction permit emplace conduit in excess of its present and reasonably foreseeable requirements for the purpose of accommodating other permittees for a reasonable charge. 
(f)  Every permittee that shall cease operating or maintaining any telecommunications facility in a public right-of-way shall, upon written request of the city within two years of the cessation or maintenance of such telecommunications facility, promptly remove it. Should the permittee neglect, refuse, or fail to remove such facility, the city may remove the facility at the expense of the permittee. The obligation to remove shall survive the termination of the permit for a period of two years and shall be bonded. 
(Code 1988, § 2.410; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 9, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-29. - Insurance; bond. 
(a)  Prior to beginning any construction in or installation of the telecommunications system in the public right-of-way, the permittee shall obtain the following insurance, and submit certificates evidencing the same: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance including completed operations liability, independent contractors liability, contractual liability coverage and XCU coverage in an amount not less than $5,000,000.00. 
(2)  Liability insurance for sudden and accidental environmental contamination. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(4)  Workers compensation and employer's liability coverage with statutory limits. 
(b)  The city shall be named additional insured on all policies, other than workers compensation and employer's liability, and all policies shall not be canceled, modified or not renewed unless the insurance carrier provides 30 days written notice to the city. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(3)), the city manager shall require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. Prior to and during construction of the telecommunications system, the telecommunications provider shall provide a cash bond to the city in an amount not less than $1,000.00 or greater than $20,000.00 to protect both public and private property, and to ensure that any damage to the street surface and all installations on, over, below, or within the public right-of-way will be repaired and restored to its preexisting condition. The amount of the cash bond shall be established by the city manager or the city manager's designee, based upon the size, scope and location of the telecommunications facility, and the potential disruption caused by the construction, installation or excavation. After the construction is complete, the amount of the bond shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(d)  Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(5)), a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way, and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(e)  As a condition of a permit, the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city as set forth in the permit at all times during the life of the permit, and will pay all damages and penalties which the city may be required to pay as a result of granting a permit to the permittee. 
(Code 1988, § 2.411; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 10, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-30. - Reservation of rights; police power. 
    No permit or construction permit shall stop or limit the city in the full exercise of its governmental powers to protect the health and safety of the public, and all other governmental powers may be fully exercised except as expressly provided herein. The city expressly reserves the right to amend the ordinance from which this article is derived from time to time in the exercise of its legislative powers. 
(Code 1988, § 2.412; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 11, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-31. - Transfers and assignments. 
(a)  A permit shall be deemed a privilege that is in the public trust and personal to the original permittee. Notwithstanding any provision of the permit, no transfer of a permit, no assignment of the permit and no delegation of the permittee's rights or duties under the permit to a person other than the permittee shall be effective or permitted during the time period from the date of issuance of the permit until the completion of construction of the telecommunications system without the prior notification to, and express approval by, the city, along with the filing and acceptance by the city, of an application in proper form. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permit may provide for assignments or transfers if the permittee notifies the city of the assignment or transfer within 30 days after it occurs and, at that time provides the agreements and warranties required by this section, describes the nature of the transfer, and submits complete information describing who will have direct and indirect ownership and control of the facility after the transfer; and the transferee or assignee: 
(1)  Warrants that it has read, accepts, and agrees to be bound by each and every term of the permit and related amendments, regulations, ordinances, and resolutions then in effect; 
(2)  Agrees to assume all responsibility for all liabilities, acts and omissions known and unknown of its predecessor permittees for all purposes, including renewal; 
(3)  Agrees that the transfer shall not permit it take any position or exercise any right which could not have been exercised by its predecessor; 
(4)  Warrants that the transfer will not substantially increase the financial burdens upon or substantially diminish the financial resources available to the permittee, the warranty to be based on comparing the burdens upon and resources that will be available to the transferee compared to its predecessors, or otherwise adversely affect the ability of the permittee to perform; 
(5)  Warrants that the transfer will not in any way adversely affect the city or subscribers including by increasing rates; and 
(6)  Supplies the city with all information required to comply with this article, and complies with any updated insurance and performance bond requirements. 
(Code 1988, § 2.413; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 12, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-32. - Revocation or termination of telecommunications permits. 
(a)  A telecommunications permit may be revoked by the city on the recommendation of the city manager and with the approval of the city commission, for failure to construct, emplace, reconstruct, replace, operate, or maintain the telecommunications facility as required by this article or the permit, or for any other material breach of this article. The city must give a permittee written notice that it is in material breach of this article or the permit. If the permittee does not correct the breach within 60 days or such shorter period of time if provided elsewhere in the telecommunications permit or the notice, or corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued and is not completed to the city's satisfaction within 90 days of the notice, the city must give written notice to the permittee of its intent to revoke the permit. The city must give the permittee written notice of the basis for a revocation, stating its reasons. Upon timely demand by the permittee, an administrative hearing must be held before the city may revoke a permit. The hearing procedures may be modified by the city manager by executive order where appropriate. 
(b)  The presiding officer must issue a recommended decision after the administrative hearing. The city manager may provide for the filing of written comments in response to the recommended decision. After the comment period, the city manager must submit written recommendations to the city commission. 
(c)  The city commission must give notice and hold a public hearing, unless waived by the permittee, and then determine by written resolution or other form of decision whether or not to revoke the permit based on the recommended decision, the recommendations of the city manager, information presented at the public hearing, and other evidence in the record. The resolution or other form of decision must include reasons for the city commission's decision. 
(d)  The city may revoke any permit 120 days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the permittee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding. The city must hold a public hearing before revoking a permit under this subsection upon timely demand of the permittee. The city may not revoke a permit under this subsection if, during the 120 day period: 
(1)  The assignment, receivership, or trusteeship is vacated; or 
(2)  The assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this article and the permit and has executed an agreement, approved by the court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms, and conditions of the permit, with any changes reasonably deemed necessary by the city. 
(e)  The city may revoke the permit if there is a foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a permittee, by serving notice on the permittee and the successful bidder. The permit and all rights and privileges of the permit will be revoked 30 days after the city serves notice under this subsection unless: 
(1)  The city has approved a transfer of the permit; and 
(2)  The successful bidder has agreed with the city to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the permit, with any changes reasonably deemed necessary by the city. 
(f)  If the city revokes a permit, or the permittee surrenders its permit, or if for any other reason a permittee abandons, terminates, or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers, the city may require the permittee to remove its facilities and equipment at the surety's or permittee's expense. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provision in this article or under the permit, a permit shall terminate automatically in the event any of the following occurs: 
(1)  Permittee fails to provide the telecommunications services, facilities, equipment, and capacity for use by the city and other public agencies required by the permit for a period exceeding three days; or 
(2)  Permittee fails within one year from the date of issuance of the telecommunications permit to start construction and installation of the telecommunications system, and/or has not completed within two years from the date of issuance of the telecommunications permit the construction and installation of the telecommunications system. 
(h)  In the event a permit is terminated by operation of subsection (g) of this section, ownership of the telecommunications system shall be deemed abandoned and forfeited to the city unless the city has, at any time prior or subsequent to the termination of the permit, notified the permittee that the permittee is required to remove its facilities and equipment, in which case the permittee shall remove the telecommunications system, telecommunications facilities and equipment at the permittee's or surety's expense. 
(i)  A lease under section 34-40 may be revoked by the city manager after notice of a material violation of the lease terms. 
(Code 1988, § 2.414; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 13, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-33. - Annual maintenance fee. 
(a)  In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in section 34-25(b), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act. 
(b)  In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(1)), the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(4)), the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the Act (MCL 484.3108). The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(4)). To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 13(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(5)), if section 8 of the Act (MCL 484.3108) is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under subsection (b) of this section shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(d)  Pursuant to section 9(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3109(4)), all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Public Act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651 et seq.). 
(e)  Pursuant to section 10(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3110(5)), the city manager may file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(f)  Pursuant to section 13(6) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(6)), the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Code 1988, § 2.415; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 14, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-34. - Future franchise right reserved. 
    The city reserves the right to require telecommunications providers to obtain a franchise and pay an applicable franchise fee in the future to occupy such rights-of-way if under applicable law, including but not limited to the following, a franchise and a franchise fee are authorized or permitted: 
(1)  The state telecommunications act of 1995 is amended to define telecommunications services as public utility services, and a franchise is required. 
(2)  The state telecommunications act of 1995 is either repealed or superseded by future federal or state law in such a way as to require telecommunications providers obtain a franchise from cities. 
(3)  The state telecommunications act of 1995 as presently in force defining telecommunications services as not constituting public utilities is found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a final, nonappealable determination, to be unconstitutional, unlawful, invalid, or otherwise unenforceable. 
(Code 1988, § 2.416; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 15, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-35. - Maps, records and reports. 
    A permittee shall provide the city with current maps of its existing and proposed installations in a standardized format for use with the city's data system within 30 days of the completion of the telecommunications system and of any extensions, additions or modifications to the telecommunications system. 
(Code 1988, § 2.417; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 16, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-36. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act (MCL 484.3104(2)), except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 2.418; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 17, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-37. - Public emergency. 
    The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig-up, or otherwise destroy facilities of permittee or lessee, without any prior notice, if such action is deemed necessary by the city manager, director of public safety, director of public works, county drain commission, or the managing director of the county road commission because of a public emergency. A public emergency as used in this section, shall be a condition which, in the opinion of any of the officials named, poses an immediate threat to lives or property of the citizens of the city, caused by any natural or manmade disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, major water main breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. The permittee or lessee shall be responsible for repair, at its sole expense, of any of its facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.419; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 18, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-38. - Interpretation and severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article, and the remainder of the article shall be construed in a way that will effect the city commission's purpose to the greatest extent possible. 
(Code 1988, § 2.420; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998; Ord. No. 470, § 19, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-39. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Misdemeanor. Any person who knowingly violates any prohibition in section 34-23 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be sentenced to not more than 90 days in jail and fined not more than $500.00, or both, for each and every violation. Each violation shall be a separate offense, and in the case of a continuing violation, each day shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Forfeiture of facilities. Any telecommunications facility constructed, maintained, or operated upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way in this city in violation of this article is hereby declared to be subject to forfeiture, and the city may seize, disable, remove, or destroy such facility upon 30 days' advance notice in writing to the owner or operator thereof; provided, however, that where the safety of any person or property lawfully within the right-of-way is endangered thereby, only such notice as is practicable under the circumstances need be given. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In addition to the foregoing remedies, the city may apply to the circuit court for an injunction to mitigate or terminate the violation. The city may also sue to recover its damages for the violation. 
(d)  Reduction of term. Where, after notice and after a hearing, if timely requested by the permittee, the city manager finds that the permit is being operated in substantial violation of its terms or this article, the city may make an appropriate reduction in the remaining term of the permit after a hearing, unless waived, at which the permittee shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Waiver. The failure of the city to insist on timely performance or compliance by any person holding a construction permit or telecommunications permit shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to later insist on timely performance or compliance by that person or any other person holding such a permit. 
(Code 1988, § 2.421; Ord. No. 470, § 20, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-40. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as provided in this article; 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with this article; 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with this article; 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with this article; 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with this article; 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with this article; 
(7)  Issuing a permit as provided in this article; 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with this article; 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with this article; 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with this article; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with this article; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with this article; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.422; Ord. No. 470, § 21, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 34-41. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Code 1988, § 2.423; Ord. No. 470, § 22, 10-15-2002) 
Secs. 34-42-34-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

Sec. 34-71. - Applicability. 
(a)  This division applies: 
(1)  To the erection, emplacement, construction or maintenance of telecommunications facilities upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-of-way, other than for the provision of cable services pursuant to franchise or telecommunications services pursuant to license or approval granted under division 1 of this chapter; and 
(2)  To leases for the erection, attachment, emplacement, or maintenance of antennas or other active or passive devices for the transmission or reception of radio or optical signals through transmission media not physically bounded, including towers and other manmade structures, other than for or in support of the provision of telecommunications or cable services under license. 
(b)  This division does not apply to communications circuits and lines installed in conjunction with the facilities of a public utility, where those circuits and lines are utilized solely for communications for and in connection with the internal conduct of the utility's own affairs. 
(Code 1988, § 2.440; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998) 
Sec. 34-72. - Private communications circuits. 
    Upon approval by the city manager of an application in proper form, the city shall issue a license to any person demonstrating a need in the course of its business to emplace or operate private communications lines in the public rights-of-way to facilitate communications between or among its places of business. Such license shall not authorize the provision of telecommunications services for hire. 
(Code 1988, § 2.441; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998) 
Sec. 34-73. - Tower leases. 
    Upon approval by the city manager, the city may enter into, with telecommunications providers and other radio users, leases for appropriate tower sites, antenna space on towers and other supporting structures, and for accessory buildings on city property. Such leases shall contain commercially reasonable provisions protecting the interests of the city and shall be for terms of not longer than five years. 
(Code 1988, § 2.442; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998) 
Sec. 34-74. - Aeronautical clearance. 
    The lessee shall be responsible for obtaining in a timely manner at its own expense any required approvals for its antenna or antenna structure from the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission, or the successors of either, any required zoning from the city, and any building or electrical permits and inspections from the city. On any antenna structure which is not occupied by a city-owned antenna already subject to the tower registration, lighting, and aeronautical painting requirements of the FAA or FCC, or the successors of either, the lessee shall be financially responsible for the tower registration, lighting, and aeronautical painting requirements applicable to its antenna and/or supporting structure. 
(Code 1988, § 2.443; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998) 
Sec. 34-75. - Existing facilities. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any existing facility, the operation of which is required to be licensed under this article, shall have three months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived to file one or more applications for a license under this article. Any operator filing such an application shall not be subject to a penalty under section 34-39 for failure to have such a license for that period during which said application remains pending. 
(b)  Any lessee under a lease from the city for an antenna site, valid and in force on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, may continue to occupy such antenna site to the conclusion of the term of the lease, but not any renewal or extension thereof, in accordance with the terms of such lease; provided, however, that such lessee may elect at any time to apply for a superseding lease under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.444; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 9-14-1998) 
Secs. 34-76-34-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CABLE COMMUNICATION STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-101. - Construction standards. 
    A cable operator or video service provider (both of which are referred to hereinafter as a "provider"), as defined in Public Act No. 480 of 2006, shall comply with the following regulations regarding use and occupation of public rights-of-way with the city: 
(1)  The provider shall not open or disturb the surface of any streets, or public property, without first obtaining a permit from the city for which permit the city may impose a reasonable fee to be paid by the provider. The lines, conduits, cables and other property placed in the streets, and public property pursuant to such permit shall be located in such part of the street or public property as shall be determined by the city. The provider shall, upon completion of any work requiring the opening of any streets or public property, restore the same including the pavement and its foundations to as good a condition as formerly and in a manner and quality approved by the city, and shall exercise reasonable care to maintain the same thereafter in good condition. Such work shall be performed with diligence, and due care and if the provider shall fail to perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and rubbish and to put the street or public property back into the condition required hereby, the city shall have the right to put the streets or public property back into the condition required hereby; the city shall have the right to put the streets or public property back into such condition at the expense of the provider. The provider shall, upon demand, pay to city the cost of such work done. 
(2)  All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of the provider shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic, and travel upon, or other use of, the streets and public property of the city. The provider shall keep and maintain all of its property in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. The city shall have the right to inspect and examine at all reasonable times and upon reasonable notice the property owned or used, in part or in whole, by the provider. The provider shall keep accurate maps and records of all of its wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities located, constructed and maintained in the city. Further, the provider shall furnish copies of such maps and records from time to time as requested by the city without charge. 
(3)  All wires, conduits, cables or other property and facilities of the provider shall be constructed and installed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All wires, conduits, and cables shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
(4)  The provider shall at all times comply with the following codes, rules, and regulations, as amended, and any others supplemental to or in substitution thereof: 
a.  National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards). 
b.  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters). 
c.  Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction. 
d.  Applicable FCC and other applicable federal, state and local regulations and ordinances. In any event, the installation, operation or maintenance of the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city. 
(5)  Whenever the city shall undertake any public improvement which affects the provider's equipment or facilities, the city may, with due regard to reasonable working conditions and with reasonable notice, direct the provider to remove or relocate its wires, conduits, cables and other property located in streets, or public property. The provider shall relocate or protect its wires, conduits, cables and other property at its own expense. 
(6)  The provider's plans for constructing its system, and the construction of the system, shall be in accordance with its proposal as modified by the franchise agreement. However, the provider shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The provider shall construct underground in any area where both the electrical and telephone lines have been installed underground. 
b.  The provider shall change from aerial to underground, at its own expense, in any area where both the telephone and electric utilities are hereafter changed from aerial to underground. 
c.  To enable the provider reasonable opportunity to change its wiring from aerial to underground, and also to allow it to pre-wire all new subdivisions or new development areas, the city shall provide the provider with written notice of the following but without liability for failure to provide such notice: 
1.  Any underground trenching that may be pending. 
2.  All ordinance changes affecting the wiring of the system. 
(7)  The provider shall, upon completion of any work on private property (or easements thereon), restore the same including any and all landscape features, plantings, turf, buildings, pipes, and wires (overhead and underground), pavements, sidewalks, foundations or other features whatsoever, to as good a condition as existed before construction. 
(8)  The provider shall prior to construction make a clear videotape record of all underground construction and other specially designated areas. Such tapes are to be preserved for three years after completion of the applicable construction. 
(Code 1988, § 2.234; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-17-1997) 
Sec. 34-102. - Conditions on use. 
    A cable operator or video service provider shall comply with the following regulations regarding use and occupation of public rights-of-way: 
(1)  The provider shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main. 
(2)  The provider, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit and with not less than five days' advance notice, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires, conduits and cables. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires, conduits and cables shall be paid by person requesting the same, and the provider shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. 
(3)  The provider shall have the authority, to the extent the city has authority to grant the same, to trim trees upon or overhanging any street or public property so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, conduit and cables of the provider. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of the provider. 
(4)  Utility cabinets used to shelter cable communications equipment or hardware shall be located and installed in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 24. 
(Code 1988, § 2.235; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-17-1997; Ord. No. 508, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 34-103-34-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CABLE OPERATORS AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS 

Sec. 34-131. - Consumer protection standards. 
    Cable operators and video service providers shall conform to the following consumer protection standards: 
(1)  The following standards are stated in section 10 of the Michigan Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act (the "Act"), MCL 484.3310: 
a.  A video service provider shall not, in connection with the providing of video services to its subscribers, do any of the following: 
1.  Make a statement or representation, including the omission of material information, regarding the rates, terms or conditions of providing video service that is false, misleading or deceptive. As used in this subsection, the term "material information" includes, but is not limited to, all applicable fees, taxes and charges that will be billed to the subscriber, regardless of whether the fees, taxes or charges are authorized by state or federal law. 
2.  Charge a customer for a subscribed service for which the customer did not make an initial affirmative order. Failure to refuse an offered or proposed subscribed service is not an affirmative order for the service. 
3.  If a customer has canceled a service, charge the customer for service provided after the effective date the service was canceled. 
4.  Cause a probability of confusion or a misunderstanding as to the legal rights, obligations or remedies of a party to a transaction by making a false, deceptive or misleading statement or by failing to inform the customer of a material fact, the omission of which is deceptive or misleading. 
5.  Represent or imply that the subject of a transaction will be provided promptly, or at a specified time, or within a reasonable time, if the provider knows or has reason to know that it will not be so provided. 
6.  Cause coercion and duress as a result of the time and nature of a sales presentation. 
b.  Each video service provider shall establish a dispute resolution process for its customers. Each provider shall maintain a local or toll-free telephone number for customer service contact. 
c.  Each provider shall notify its customers of the dispute resolution process created by the legislature found under the Act. 
(2)  The following customer service standards are stated in the rules of the Federal Communications Commission found at 47 CFR 76.309: 
a.  Cable system office hours and telephone availability. 
1.  The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(i)  Trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
(ii)  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
2.  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
3.  The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards of subsection (2)a.2 of this section unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
4.  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
5.  Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. 
b.  Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
1.  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
2.  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the cable operator will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
3.  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The operator may schedule service call and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.) 
4.  An operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
5.  If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
c.  Communications between cable operators and cable subscribers. 
1.  Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either: 
(i)  The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
(ii)  The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
2.  Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
d.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (2)d., except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, the term "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
    Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
    Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
(3)  The applicable customer service standards are in the Michigan Consumers Protection Act, Public Act No. 331 of 1976 (MCL 445.901 et seq.). 
Secs. 34-132-34-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WCFs) 

Sec. 34-161. - Purpose. 
    Wireless communication technologies are changing the way information is exchanged in our everyday lives. To access this wireless technology, a network of antennas must be strategically placed within and outside of the community. The purpose of the following regulations is to encourage and promote wireless communications coverage for all areas of the city while retaining the integrity of its neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community as a whole. To that end, the goals of this article are: 
(1)  To permit wireless communications facilities (WCFs) on certain public properties and street rights-of-way within the city; 
(2)  To protect residential districts and land uses from the potential adverse impact of WCFs; 
(3)  To strongly encourage the joint use of existing WCF sites, buildings or towers rather than the construction of new WCFs; 
(4)  To minimize the total number of WCFs throughout the community; 
(5)  To consider the public health, safety and welfare of the community; 
(6)  To provide for the disclosure of adequate information about plans for WCFs in order to allow the city to effectively plan for the location of such facilities; 
(7)  To avoid potential damage to adjacent and nearby properties from WCF failure through engineering and careful siting of towers; and 
(8)  To encourage configuration of WCFs in a way that minimizes the negative visual impact of towers and antennas on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historical sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and cultural landscapes through careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques. This includes consideration of alternative technologies that do not require the use of towers and the avoidance of unsightly structures such as lattice towers, out-of-scale imitation trees and flag poles. 
    In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city's master plan, zoning ordinance and map, existing land uses and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-162. - Reservation of rights to require franchise. 
    The city is not, at this time, requiring a franchise for the siting of a wireless communications facility (WCF) within the city's boundaries. The city reserves the right however, in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws, to require such a franchise in the future to the extent such a siting may be deemed to constitute the transacting of local business within the city. Neither the issuance of permits or licenses to operate a WCF shall constitute a waiver of or otherwise adversely affect this reservation of rights. In addition, WCFs shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-163. - Historic preservation. 
    No provision in this article shall modify, supercede, or nullify the provisions in article VIII Historic Preservation of chapter 6 of the City Code. In the event that any provision of this article conflicts with a provision in article VIII of chapter 6, the provision in article VIII of chapter 6 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-164. - Definitions. 
    Antenna: An exterior transmission or reception device mounted on a tower or building and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals or other communication signals. 
    City: The City of Huntington Woods. 
    City commission: The Commission of the City of Huntington Woods. 
    Co-location: The location by two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities (WCFs) on a common tower or building with the intent of reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the community. 
    Planning commission: The Planning Commission of the City of Huntington Woods. 
    Tower: A structure used to support wireless communication antennas. A tower within this definition, includes but shall not be limited to, a monopole, lattice tower, light pole, utility pole, flag pole, artificial tree or other structure which supports WCF antennas. Buildings, equipment compounds and cabinets, and structures principally used for purposes other than supporting antennas shall not be considered as towers. 
    Tower height: The vertical distance measured from the lowest point of the natural ground level around the base of the tower to the highest point on the tower including any antenna. 
    Wireless communication facility (WCF): A facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, including over-the-air broadcasting signals, usually consisting of antennas, equipment, an equipment cabinet or equipment compound, a tower or other support structure, and/or other transmission and reception devices. The term "wireless communication facility" includes wireless telecommunications, but does not include licensed amateur radio stations, receive-only antennas, and towers and antennas utilized by the City of Huntington Woods in connection with performing its municipal functions. 
    Wireless communication provider: A person, company, or entity providing or intending to provide wireless communication services of any kind, including telecommunications services. 
    Wireless equipment cabinet: An upright, stand-alone cupboard-like enclosure for wireless communications equipment. 
    Wireless equipment compound: An area, covered by a roof, supported by a foundation and enclosed by walls on a minimum of 80 percent of the perimeter, adjacent to the base of a building or tower and within which wireless communications equipment is located. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-165. - Type and location. 
    All WCFs are classified as one of the following three types and are permitted in Zones R-1A through R-1E One-Family Residential, Zone 4 - Parks and Recreation District and certain rights-of-way subject to the conditions set forth in this article. No WCF shall be permitted on privately owned property. 
    Type 1 WCFs are located within or attached to existing buildings or structures such as bell towers, water towers, municipal buildings, and schools. They generally have the least impact on the surrounding environment. Type 1 WCFs are permitted on public property in Zones R-1A through R-1E One-Family Districts, and in Zone 4 - Parks and Recreation District provided that: 
(1)  All WCF equipment, including power generators, service panels and service connections shall be housed in one of the following: within an existing building, within an addition to the existing building, within a wireless equipment compound, or completely underground. An addition to the existing building or a wireless equipment compound shall be architecturally compatible with the existing building or structure in terms of scale, form, texture, materials, and color. A wireless equipment cabinet shall not be permitted in conjunction with Type 1 WCFs; 
(2)  WCF antennas shall be fully concealed within an existing building or structure, or be snug-mounted; 
(3)  WCF antennas, mounting hardware, and cabling shall be covered or painted to match the color and texture of the building on which it is mounted; 
(4)  Rooftop appurtenances shall not exceed five feet in height and shall not occupy more than ten percent of the roof area; 
(5)  WCFs shall comply with the height and area requirements of the zone district in which it is located; and 
(6)  A WCF shall not exceed a noise level of 65 dB(A). 
    Type 2 WCFs are located on utility poles, traffic signal poles, sports or field light poles and parking lot light poles. They are commonly referred to as a distributed antenna systems. Type 2 WCFs are permitted on public property in Zones R-1A through R-1E One-Family Districts, in Zone 4 - Parks and Recreation District, and in the public right-of-way of Woodward Avenue, Coolidge Highway, Eleven Mile Road, and the Ten Mile/I-696 service drive provided that: 
(1)  Antennas shall not be located on poles planned for removal by the city, county or a utility; 
(2)  Pole size, diameter and height shall be no larger than the city, county or utility would use for its intended purpose without a WCF, as determined by said entities; 
(3)  Antennas shall be limited to snug-mount, canister-mount and concealed antennas; 
(4)  Antennas shall not increase the pole height by more than three feet per WCF and shall not exceed 18 inches in diameter; 
(5)  There shall be no more than two separate WCFs on each pole; 
(6)  A WCF shall not exceed a noise level of 65 dB(A); 
(7)  All cables shall be located inside the pole or within an encasement colored to match the pole and oriented to a side with the least visual impact; 
(8)  Antennas, mounting hardware, and cabling shall be covered or painted to match the color and texture of the pole on which it is mounted; 
(9)  All WCF equipment, including power generators, service panels and service connections shall be housed in one of the following: within a building, within a wireless equipment compound, within a wireless equipment cabinet, or completely underground. The wireless equipment cabinet shall not exceed four feet in height and 80 cubic feet. The building, wireless equipment compound or wireless equipment cabinet shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding area in terms of scale, form, texture, materials and color. If located in the public right-of-way, the wireless communications equipment shall be buried underground. 
    Type 3 WCFs are stand-alone towers and antennas such as monopoles and lattice towers but also includes towers designed as flagpoles, artificial trees and other similar structures. They generally have the greatest impact on the surrounding environment. Type 3 WCFs are permitted on public property in Zones R-1A through R-1E One-Family Districts, and in Zone 4 - Parks and Recreation District, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Height. The tower shall not exceed 100 feet in height including the antennas; 
(2)  Cables. All cables shall be located inside the tower; 
(3)  Engineering. The tower shall be designed by a state-licensed structural engineer and shall include a soil report from a state-licensed geotechnical engineer (see subsection 34-168(11)); 
(4)  Setbacks. The setback from the base of the tower to any lot line or public right-of-way shall be the maximum distance that debris from a collapsed tower would spread as determined by a structural engineer but not less than 100 feet from any residential lot line; 
(5)  Lighting. Any exterior lighting for WCF shall be shielded so the source of the light is not visible from any neighboring residential property nor does it cause glare for any motorist, bicyclist or pedestrian; 
(6)  Noise. A WCF shall not exceed a noise level of 65 dB(A); 
(7)  Appearance. WCF antennas, mounting hardware, and cabling shall be covered or painted to match the color and texture of the tower on which it is mounted; 
(8)  A new tower and antenna shall not be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the planning commission that no existing WCF or alternative technology is available which would otherwise accommodate the applicant's proposed WCF or need, or the planning commission determines that any co-location of the proposed WCF would have a greater impact on the community than the proposed WCF. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's WCF or need, may consist of factors such as the following: 
a.  No existing tower is located within the geographic area which meets the applicant's engineering requirements; 
b.  Existing towers are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements and cannot be reasonably modified to accomplish same; 
c.  Existing towers do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment, and cannot be reasonably modified to accomplish applicant's needs; 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with antenna(s) on the existing tower or vice-versa; and 
e.  The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology (such as cable or microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, etc.) that does not require the use of towers, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology, which exceed the costs of new tower or antenna development, shall not be presumed to render alternative technology unsuitable. 
(9)  Anti-climbing. Towers shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; 
(10)  Wireless equipment. All WCF equipment including cabinets, power generators, service panels, and service connections shall be housed in one of the following: within a building, within a wireless equipment compound or completely underground. The building or wireless equipment compound shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding area in terms scale, form, texture, materials and color. A wireless equipment cabinet shall not be permitted in conjunction with Type 3WCFs. WCFs shall be concealed as much as possible by blending into the natural and/or physical environment; 
(11)  Co-location capability. All new towers over 40 feet in height including antennas, shall allow for co-location by other wireless communications providers. The applicant shall demonstrate that the engineering of the tower, and the size and placement of the equipment building or shelter, will accommodate other providers' WCF. The owner of the tower and the owner of the property on which it is located, must certify that the tower is available for use by other wireless communications service providers on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis. If a WCF provider fails or refuses to permit co-location on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where co-location is feasible, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect. For example, charging fees in excess of what is customary in the industry shall be deemed to be a refusal to permit co-location; 
(12)  Temporary WCF. No temporary WCF shall be permitted except in conjunction with a special event or be in response to an emergency or disaster as determined by the city manager. 
    In reviewing WCF applications, the planning commission has the authority to waive enforcement of particular restrictions, but only to the extent necessary to avoid denial of an application that would effectively prohibit the provision of wireless services. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-166. - Required approvals and exceptions. 
(a)  New and modified wireless communication facilities (WCFs) are permitted subject to: 
(1)  Approval of the special land use and site plan by the planning commission as outlined in the regulations of sections 40-356 and 40-357 of chapter 40 and this article; 
(2)  Approval of any required variances by the zoning board of appeals; 
(3)  Approval of the application for a WCF by the city commission; 
(4)  Compliance with all applicable building codes; and 
(5)  Obtaining all required permits, paying required fees, and posting required security. 
Modifications made to an existing WCF shall be treated for purposes of this article as a new WCF, which requires the submission of a new application, new permitting procedure and compliance with this article as if the WCF was a new WCF, and the entire WCF, as modified, shall be subject to all of the provisions of this article, except as outlined in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Co-location of a WCF on/in an existing tower and equipment compound shall not require special land use and site plan approval by the planning commission, or approval of the application by the city commission, provided that all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The existing tower or existing equipment compound is in compliance with the zoning ordinance or was approved by the city. 
(2)  The proposed co-location will not do any of the following: 
a.  Increase the overall tower height by more than 20 feet or ten percent of its original height, whichever is greater. 
b.  Increase the tower width by more than the minimum necessary to permit co-location. 
c.  Increase the area of the existing equipment compound to greater than 2,500 square feet. Any addition to the existing equipment compound shall match the existing equipment compound in terms of scale, form, texture, materials, and color. 
(3)  The proposed co-location complies with the terms and conditions of any previous final approval of the existing tower or equipment compound by the city. 
(4)  All equipment including service panels, service connections, and power generators proposed by the applicant will be housed within the equipment compound. 
(5)  All other applicable requirements and regulations of this article and chapter 40 are met, required permits are obtained, and required fees are paid. 
A WCF that meets all of the above requirements except for subsections (b)(2) or (b)(3) is permitted provided it receives special land use approval in accordance with section 40-357 of the City Code. 
(c)  Amateur radio stations, receive-only antennas, city towers and antennas. This article shall not govern any tower or antenna that is under 20 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna, nor shall it govern any tower or antenna utilized by the City of Huntington Woods in connection with performing its municipal functions. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-167. - Application, procedure, authorization. 
(a)  An application, required for authorization to construct, operate, expand, extend or modify a WCF, shall be submitted to the building department at the city offices. The application shall include: 
(1)  A completed WCF application form; 
(2)  A special land use application prepared in accordance with the provisions of section 40-357 of chapter 40, if required; 
(3)  A site plan, prepared by an architect and engineer, both licensed in the State of Michigan, and prepared in accordance with the provisions of section 40-356 of chapter 40, if required; and 
(4)  An application fee as established by resolution of the city commission. The fee will be based on an amount necessary to adequately and thoroughly investigate and review the application for compliance with this article and to provide for the city having the application reviewed by technical consultants, when necessary, to ensure that all current technological considerations have been properly taken into account. 
(b)  After the application has been determined to be complete, the city manager or his or her designee shall review the application and where applicable, refer the application to other city departments and/or consultants for review. The city administration reserves the right to require additional information as needed or waive requirements for information determined unnecessary for complete review of the project. 
(c)  If the WCF is to be located on school property and public meetings other than those conducted by the city are held, the dates, times and places of those public meetings, lists of attendees and minutes of the meetings shall be submitted to the city prior to the city commission's review of the WCF application. 
(d)  If required, the special land use application and site plan shall forwarded to the planning commission for review in accordance with regulations of sections 40-356 and 40-357 of chapter 40. If the special land use and site plan are approved, the planning commission's actions and recommendations shall be submitted, in writing, to the city commission. 
(e)  Following approval of the special land use and site plan by the planning commission, the city commission shall make a final determination regarding the application. 
(f)  If the city commission authorizes construction of the WCF, the commission shall then determine the appropriate amount of cash, irrevocable surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit to be kept on file with the city to ensure that adequate funds will be available to maintain, repair or remove the WCF if abandoned or in need of repair. It shall be a continuing requirement of any permission given to operate a WCF in the city that the applicant keep in force such cash deposit, irrevocable surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit as required by the city. 
(g)  Prior to installing, constructing, expanding, extending or modifying the WCF, the applicant shall obtain all necessary building permits. 
(h)  Authorization by the city commission to construct a WCF shall be effective for a period of six months. If the applicant has not applied for a building permit and commenced construction by that date, the authorization for the WCF is terminated, and any permits issued shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-168. - Application, required information. 
    It is the intent of this section to require sufficient information and plans to allow the city to make educated and informed decisions regarding the location and placement of a proposed WCF. To that end, the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  A written report verifying that, at its maximum load, including the cumulative effects of multiple facilities, the WCF meets or exceeds the Federal Communication Commission's radio frequency safety standards. The form of technology that is proposed and the signal power expressed in effective radiated power (ERP) that is proposed upon the planned service area shall be included in the report. Submission of this report is required before the city commission authorizes construction of the WCF, before improvements or upgrades on an existing WCF have begun and before any extension periods are granted. 
(2)  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location, size and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, signs, lighting, outdoor equipment, and a detailed landscape plan, all of which shall be designed to conform to applicable zoning and building codes. 
(3)  As-built drawings and photographs of at least three similar existing WCFs. 
(4)  The reason or purpose for the WCF with specific reference to the provider's coverage, capacity and/or quality needs and goals. 
(5)  A map that shows the planned service area of the proposed facility. 
(6)  A map that shows other existing and planned WCF that will be used by the WCF provider who is making the application. Describe the height, mounting style, and number of antennas on each WCF. 
(7)  A map that shows all existing WCFs within the city, and those WCFs within neighboring cities which are relevant in terms of potential co-location or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. For each location identified on the map, the following information shall be provided: 
a.  The structural capacity of the WCF and whether it can accommodate the applicant's facility, as proposed or modified; 
b.  Whether property owner approvals have been requested or obtained; and 
c.  If the location cannot be used, a disclosure of the technological considerations involved, with specific reference as to why and how the location would prohibit the applicant/provider from co-locating on the WCF. 
(8)  Other factual evidence supporting the need for the WCF, and if applicable, justification for its height and an evaluation of alternative designs which could result in lower heights or less visible structures. 
(9)  Photo documentation of existing conditions. 
(10)  A photo simulation with the proposed WCF (except for Type 1 WCF). 
(11)  A soil report from a state-licensed geotechnical engineer if the application involves a proposed Type 2 or Type 3 WCF. The soil report shall include soil boring results and statements confirming the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed WCF. 
(12)  A report from a state-licensed professional engineer which certifies the maximum number of shared users the existing or proposed tower is physically capable of supporting. The report shall include the manner in which the existing or proposed tower would fall under catastrophic conditions. The engineer's notes, drawings, and calculations shall be included with the signed certification. The certification will be utilized, along with other criteria, to determine the appropriate setbacks to be required. 
(13)  The nature and extent of the provider/applicant's ownership or lease interest in the land, buildings, structures and tower upon and within which the WCF is proposed for placement, construction or modification. 
(14)  A signed and notarized removal agreement executed by both the owner of the property and the applicant which states they promise to be bound by the removal requirements of this article. 
(15)  Proof of liability insurance of the type and amount established by the city manager. 
(16)  A description of the form of security to be posted with the city to ensure maintenance, repair and removal of the WCF. 
(17)  Copies of the following agreements: 
a.  An agreement between the land owner or duly authorized representative(s) of all persons with an ownership interest in the property and the applicant, giving the applicant the right to construct and operate the WCF on the property, including certification by all such parties that the applicant has been granted the appropriate legally recordable property rights; 
b.  An agreement between the landowner and applicant permitting future co-location at the proposed WCF, as required by the city; 
c.  An agreement to provide information about the WCF to persons interested in co-locating on the WCF and to charge market rates for co-location on the WCF; 
d.  Any other agreements the city may deem necessary to permit future co-location; 
e.  A copy of all other executed agreements between the owner of the WCF and the applicant; 
f.  A copy of all other executed agreements between the applicant and any other party whose permission or license the applicant needs in order to operate or use the WCF. 
(18)  Identity and contact information for the following: 
a.  The WCF applicant; 
b.  The owner(s) or duly authorized representative(s) of the owner(s) of the land, buildings, structures and tower upon and within which the WCF is proposed for placement, construction, or modification; 
c.  All other persons with an ownership interest in the land, buildings, structures and tower upon and within which the WCF is proposed for placement, construction, or modification; 
d.  The person to contact for engineering, maintenance and emergency purposes. 
(19)  A certification by the owner of the proposed WCF and applicant that the WCF complies with all federal and state statutes, regulations and rules, and all city ordinances. 
(20)  A certification signed by the owners of the WCF and applicant that all franchises and licenses required by federal, state or local law for the construction and/or operation of a WCF in the city have been obtained and they shall file a copy of all required franchises and licenses with the city. 
(21)  The application must be signed by the applicant, and the owner(s), or the duly authorized representative(s) of all persons with an ownership interest in the land on which the WCF is proposed to be located. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-169. - Permit and security. 
    Building permits are required to proceed with the installation, construction, expansion, extension or modification of all WCFs. Such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the approved plans, conditions imposed by the planning commission under special land use and site plan review, the authorization granted by the city commission, the permits issued, all applicable federal regulations such as the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA), and all state and local regulations. 
    Each WCF shall be identified by a permanently installed plaque or marker, no larger than four inches by six inches, clearly identifying the wireless communications provider's name, address and contact information; and the name, address, e-mail address, and emergency phone number for the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and emergency purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the WCF is on the premises. Such information shall also be posted and clearly visible on the WCF. 
    Security to ensure maintenance, repair and removal of a WCF shall be posted with the city at the time the building permit is issued. The security shall, at the election of the city, be in the form of cash, an irrevocable surety bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-170. - Maintenance and repair. 
    The owner(s) of the land, buildings, structures and tower, and the wireless communications providers, hereinafter referred to as the owners and providers, shall be jointly responsible for maintaining the property, buildings, structures and tower, landscaping, and antennas in a neat, safe and orderly condition, both during and after construction of the facility. 
(1)  Property, buildings, structures and landscaping. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and providers to maintain the property, buildings and other structures, and landscaping in a condition that complies with chapter 6, article VI Property Maintenance Code and chapter 14, Environment, and other applicable state and local codes. Failure to do so shall result in the issuance of a violation and penalties as described in the applicable code, or as contained in this article III. 
(2)  Towers and antennas. To ensure the structural integrity of towers and antennas, such towers and antennas shall be maintained by the owners and providers in compliance with standards contained in applicable state and local building codes and the applicable standards for towers and antennas that are published by the electronics industries association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a building, structure, tower or antenna fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owners and providers, said owners and providers shall have 30 days to bring the building, structure, tower or antenna into compliance. Failure to do so shall constitute grounds for the removal of the building, structure, tower or antenna at the owners and providers' expense. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-171. - Removal of facilities. 
(a)  Authorization given by the city commission for a WCF shall terminate and the WCF shall be removed upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
(1)  Abandonment. The WCF has not been used for six months or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations, including transmission and/or reception of radio signals, shall be considered as the beginning of a period of non-use. 
(2)  Maintenance. The WCF is not maintained in accordance with the standards and regulations set forth in this article and in chapter 40 of the City Code, and written notice of the deficiencies has been delivered to the wireless communication provider and the wireless communication provider failed to correct the deficiencies within 30 days thereafter. 
(3)  Noise. The WCF is being operated at noise levels above 65 dB(A) and written notice of the violation has been delivered to the wireless communication provider and the wireless communication provider failed to correct the violation within 30 days thereafter. 
(4)  False information. The WCF applicant; the owner(s) or duly authorized representative(s) of the owner(s) of the land, buildings, structures or tower; or any other persons with an ownership interest in the land, buildings, structures or tower upon which the WCF is proposed for placement, construction, or modification provides false information in the application or other required documents. 
(5)  Noncompliance. The WCF fails to comply with applicable federal, state or local regulations, including the regulations contained in this article III. 
(b)  The wireless communication provider shall immediately notify the building official in writing as soon as the use of a WCF ceases. 
(c)  Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events specified in subsection (a) of this section, the owner(s) of the land, buildings, structures and tower; and the wireless communication providers shall immediately apply for and obtain a demolition permit, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition, restoring the premises to the condition of the property prior to the construction of the WCF, as determined by the building official. 
(d)  If the removal of the WCF has not been lawfully completed within 60 days from date that authorization for the WCF was terminated, and the city has given at least 30 days' written notice to the wireless provider, the city may remove or procure the removal of the facility, or portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge, plus attorney fees, to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time the building permit was issued. Notwithstanding the potential or actual recovery costs from the bond or other security, the provider remains liable for the actual costs and administrative charges of demolition, removal and restoration. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 34-172. - Violations; penalties. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and the penalty prescribed in section 2-736 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 8, 8-21-2012) 
Secs. 34-173-34-195. - Reserved. 
Chapter 35 - RESERVED 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - TRAFFIC CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section and the Michigan Vehicle Code, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; 
    Alley means any minor thoroughfare, opened to public use, for purpose of ingress and egress to service adjacent buildings. 
    Bus means a motor vehicle designed for carrying 16 or more passengers, including the driver. Bus does not include a school bus. 
    Bus stand means a fixed area in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb to be occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for passengers. 
    Center or centerline means a continuous or broken line marked upon the surface of a roadway by paint or otherwise to indicate each portion of the roadway allocated to traffic proceeding in the two opposite directions, and if the line is not so painted or otherwise marked, it is an imaginary line in the roadway equally distant from the edges or curbs of the roadway. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles licensed as commercial vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
    Electric personal assistive mobility device means a self-balancing nontandem two-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person at a time, having an electrical propulsion system with average power of 750 watts or one horsepower and a maximum speed on a paved level surface of not more than 15 miles per hour. 
    Holidays means, where used in this chapter, or on official signs erected by authorized official agencies, in addition to Sundays, the following legal holidays, to wit: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
    Low-speed vehicle means a self-propelled motor vehicle to which both of the following apply: 
(1)  The vehicle conforms to the definition of low-speed vehicle under 49 CFR 571.3(b). 
(2)  The vehicle meets the standard for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.500. 
    Official time standard (whenever certain hours are named herein), shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
    Parking means the placing, standing or storing of a vehicle, unattended by an operator, on a roadway, alley, parking lot or other place. 
    Stop, stopping or standing , when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, other than the temporary stopping of a passenger vehicle for the purpose of and while actually engaged in picking up and discharging passengers, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle licensed as such. 
    Taxicab stand means a fixed area in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers. 
(Code 1988, § 10.1; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.1) 
Secs. 36-2, 36-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-4. - Prime facie evidence. 
    In any proceeding for violation of the parking provisions of this chapter the registration plate displayed on such motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at the point where such violation occurred. 
(Code 1988, § 10.4; Ord. No. 305, §§ 1, 2, 12-16-1986; Ord. No. 323, § 1, 10-18-1988; Ord. No. 347, § 1, 7-25-1989; Ord. No. 353, § 1, 6-19-1990; Ord. No. 356, § 1, 2-18-1992; Ord. No. 364, § 1, 12-15-1992; Ord. No. 376, § 1, 12-13-1994; Ord. No. 447, § 4, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-5. - Cancellation of complaint. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any valid traffic citation or complaint issued to an alleged violator of this chapter, city ordinance or the motor vehicle laws of this state. 
(Code 1988, § 10.5; Ord. No. 447, § 5, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-6-36-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create, MCL 600.8395. 

Sec. 36-51. - Bureau established. 
    The parking violations bureau heretofore established is hereby continued. Said bureau shall be in the charge of the director of public safety, who shall account for money paid into said bureau to the city treasurer. The bureau shall accept violation payments as provided in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10.51) 
Sec. 36-52. - Violation payments. 
    Any person who shall be charged with violating any provision of this Code corresponding to an offense listed in the schedule contained in this article, may, if such person is a first offender, within the past 12 months, in lieu of being required to attend court as a respondent in a criminal case, make the payments to the violations bureau for the offense so charged, in the amount scheduled for such offense. 
(Code 1988, § 10.52) 
Sec. 36-53. - Schedule. 
    The following amounts shall be paid for the following parking violations: 
(1)  Abandoned car: ..... $50.00 
(2)  Handicap parking: ..... $150.00 
(3)  No parking 3:00 a.m. - 5:00 a.m.: ..... $10.00 
(3)  All other parking: ..... $25.00 
(Code 1988, § 10.53; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 4-10-2018) 
Secs. 36-54-36-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Motor carrier safety act of 1963, MCL 480.11 et seq. 

Sec. 36-80. - Motor carrier safety act adopted. 
    The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.), including regulations adopted thereby, is hereby adopted by reference as an ordinance for the city. 
(Code 1988, § 10.80; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 12-15-1992) 
Sec. 36-81. - Modifications. 
(a)  The following provisions of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations as of February 28, 1990, and adopted by the state in section 5 of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (MCL 480.15), with modifications, are hereby further modified as stated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 CFR 387, 390 through 393, 395 through 397 and 399, including appendices C, D, E, and G, shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  Where the term "United States Department of Transportation," "Federal Highway Administration," "director," or "Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety" appear, it shall be construed to refer to the city or the city department of public safety. 
(2)  Where the term "interstate" appears, it shall mean intrastate or interstate, or both, as applicable. 
(3)  Where the term "special agent of the Federal Highway Administration" or "administration personnel" appear, it shall be construed to mean a peace officer or an enforcement member or vehicle inspector of the city department of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 10.81; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 12-15-1992) 
Sec. 36-82. - Copies on file. 
    The city clerk shall maintain copies of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 and Federal Regulations adopted by reference in this article on file in the city clerk's office at all times for inspection or review by the public. 
(Code 1988, § 10.82; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 12-15-1992) 
Sec. 36-83. - Violations. 
    Any driver or operator who violates this article or an act, rule or regulation adopted by reference in this article, or any owner or user of any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles or any officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court which is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or drive any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles in violation of this article or an act, rule or regulation adopted by reference in this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor for each violation. 
(Code 1988, § 10.83; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 12-15-1992) 
Secs. 36-84-36-214. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION, CERTIFICATE OF TITLE AND ANTI-THEFT 

Sec. 36-215. - Registration of vehicle. 
    No person shall drive or move and no owner shall knowingly permit to be driven or moved upon any street any vehicle of a type required to be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code which has not been so registered. 
(Code 1988, § 10.215; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-216-36-222. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-223. - Certificate of registration. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle on any street without having the registration certificate signed by the owner of the vehicle to which it refers and carried in such vehicle or by the person driving or in control of the vehicle, or fail to display the same upon demand of any peace officer who shall identify himself as such. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.223; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-224. - License plates. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle on any street displaying a registration plate other than the registration plate issued for the vehicle by the secretary of state except as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10.224; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-225. - Improper display of license plates. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle without a registration plate issued for such vehicle attached and displayed in the manner required by the Michigan Vehicle Code. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.225; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-226-36-251a. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-251b. - Motorcycles; furnishing to unlicensed persons. 
    No dealer shall rent, lease, or furnish a motorcycle for use on any street to a person who is not licensed to operate a motorcycle by the state, if a resident, and by the state of which the person is a resident, if a nonresident. 
(Code 1988, § 10.251b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-251c. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-251d. - Permitting unlicensed person to use motorcycle. 
    No person to whom a motorcycle is rented, leased, or furnished shall rent, sublease, or otherwise authorize the use of the motorcycle on public streets and highways to a person who is not licensed to operate a motorcycle in this state, if a resident, and by the state of which the person is a resident, if a nonresident. 
(Code 1988, § 10.251d; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-252-36-254. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-255. - Operation without valid registration certificate and plates. 
(a)  No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated, upon any street a vehicle required to be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code unless a valid registration plate issued for the vehicle for the current registration year is attached to and displayed on the vehicle as required by the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. However, if the vehicle is a commercial vehicle required to be registered according to the schedule of elected gross vehicle weights under section 801(l)(k) of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.801(1)(k)), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 10.255; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 36-256. - Unlawful lending or use of certificate of title, registration certificate, plates or permit. 
    No person shall lend to another person, or knowingly permit the use of, any certificate of title, registration certificate, registration plate, special plate, or permit issued to such person if the person receiving or using the certificate of title, registration certificate, registration plate, special plate, or permit would not be entitled to the use thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 10.256; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-257-36-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATOR'S AND CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE 

Sec. 36-301. - License required. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a street unless such person has a valid operator's or chauffeur's license and the appropriate endorsement for the type and class of vehicle being driven or towed as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10.301; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-302-36-305. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-306. - Temporary instruction permit; operation of motor vehicle without operator's license or permit; temporary driver education certificates. 
(a)  The secretary of state, upon receiving from a person who is 18 years of age or older an application for a temporary instruction permit, may issue that permit entitling the applicant, while carrying the permit, to drive a motor vehicle other than a motor vehicle requiring an endorsement under section 312a of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.312a) or a vehicle group designation under section 312e of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.312e) upon the highways for a period of 180 days when accompanied by a licensed adult operator or chauffeur who is actually occupying a seat beside the driver. 
(b)  A student enrolled in a driver education program or a motorcycle safety course approved by the department of the state may operate a motor vehicle without holding an operator's license or permit while under the direct supervision of the program instructor. 
(c)  A student enrolled in an approved driver education program and who has successfully completed ten hours of classroom instruction and the equivalent of two hours of behind-the-wheel training may be issued a temporary driver education certificate furnished by the department of state which authorizes a student to drive a motor vehicle, other than a motor vehicle requiring an endorsement pursuant to section 312a of the Michigan Vehicle Code or a vehicle group designation pursuant to section 312e of the Michigan Vehicle Code when accompanied by a licensed parent or guardian, or when accompanied by a nonlicensed parent or guardian and a licensed adult for the purpose of receiving additional instruction until the end of the student's driver education course. 
(d)  The secretary of state, upon receiving proper application from a person 16 or 17 years of age who is enrolled in or has successfully completed an approved motorcycle safety course under section 811a of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.811a), or a person who is 18 years of age or older and who holds a valid operator's or chauffeur's license, may issue a motorcycle temporary instruction permit, entitling the applicant, while carrying the permit, to operate a motorcycle upon the public streets and highways for a period of 180 days, but only when under the constant visual supervision of a licensed motorcycle operator at least 18 years of age. The applicant shall not operate the motorcycle at night or with a passenger. 
(e)  Except as prohibited under federal law, the secretary of state, upon receiving proper application from a person who is 18 years of age or older, who holds a valid operator's or chauffeur's license other than a restricted license, and who has passed the knowledge test for an original vehicle group designation or endorsement, may issue a temporary instruction permit entitling the person while carrying the permit to drive a vehicle requiring a vehicle group designation or vehicle group endorsement under section 312e of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.312e) upon the streets and highways, for a period of 180 days, but only when accompanied by a licensed adult operator or chauffeur who is licensed with the appropriate vehicle group designation and endorsement for the vehicle group being driven and who is actually occupying a seat beside the driver, or behind the driver if the permittee is driving a bus or school bus. In addition, if a permittee is enrolled in a driver training program for drivers of motor vehicles requiring a vehicle group designation or vehicle group endorsement under section 312e of the Michigan Vehicle Code, which program is conducted by a college; university; commercial driver training school licensed by the department pursuant to Public Act No. 369 of 1974 (MCL 256.601 to 256.612); or a local or intermediate school district, the permittee may drive a vehicle requiring a vehicle group designation or vehicle group endorsement on the streets and highways of this state for a period of 180 days when accompanied by an instructor licensed with the appropriate vehicle group designation and endorsement for the vehicle being driven who is either occupying the seat beside the driver or in direct visual and audio communication with the permittee. A person issued a temporary instruction permit under this section shall not operate a vehicle designed to carry 16 or more passengers that is transporting passengers except with an instructor licensed with the appropriate vehicle group designation and endorsement for the vehicle being driven or a driver skills test examiner. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an operator holding an instruction permit or a driver education certificate to operate a motor vehicle unless accompanied by a licensed adult operator or chauffeur who is actually occupying a seat beside the driver. 
(Code 1988, § 10.306; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.306) 
Secs. 36-307-36-310. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-311. - Presentation of license. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle without his operator's or chauffeur's license, or the receipt described in section 311a of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL257.811a), in his immediate possession at all times, or fail to display the same upon demand of any public safety officer who shall identify himself as such. 
(Code 1988, § 10.311; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-312. - Restrictions. 
    No person shall violate a restriction imposed in a restricted license. 
(Code 1988, § 10.312; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-313-36-319c. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-319d. - Prohibition on operation of commercial vehicle with certain blood alcohol level. 
(a)  A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this state with an alcohol content of 0.015 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(b)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a commercial motor vehicle within the state with an alcohol content of 0.015 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, as measured by a preliminary chemical breath analysis or a chemical test provided under section 36-625a, shall order the person out-of-service immediately for 24 hours, which shall begin upon issuance of the order. 
(c)  A peace officer shall immediately order a person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis requested or a chemical test provided under section 36-625a out-of-service for 24 hours, which shall begin when the order is issued. 
(d)  A person ordered out-of-service under this section, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section, or a law or local ordinance of another state substantially corresponding to this section shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this state during the 24-hour out-of-service period. 
(e)  A peace officer who issues an out-of-service order under this section shall provide for the safe and expeditious disposition of a product carried by a commercial motor vehicle that is hazardous or would result in damage to the vehicle, human health, or the environment. 
(f)  Failure to comply with subsection (a) of this section is not a civil infraction or criminal violation of this act. 
(g)  A person who violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 10.319d; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-320, 36-321. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-321a. - Failure to answer citation or notice. 
    No person shall fail to answer a citation or a notice to appear in court for a violation of this chapter or for any matter pending, or fail to comply with an order or judgment of the court, including, but not limited to, paying all fines, costs, fees, and assessments. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 10.321a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-322, 36-323. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-324. - False or canceled license; presentation of fictitious name or information. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to do any of the following: 
(1)  Operate any motor vehicle when such person's operator's or chauffeur's license is then canceled, revoked, suspended, altered or denied. 
(2)  Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or have in his possession any operator's or chauffeur's license knowing such operator's or chauffeur's license to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended, or altered. 
(3)  Lend to or knowingly permit use of, by one not entitled to its use, the operator's or chauffeur's license issued to the person lending or permitting the use of such operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(4)  Display or represent as his own any operator's or chauffeur's license not issued to the person displaying the operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(5)  Fail or refuse to surrender to a public safety officer for forwarding to the department of state, upon demand, any operator's or chauffeur's license which has been suspended, canceled or revoked as provided by law. 
(6)  Alter or otherwise cause to be altered any operator's or chauffeur's license so as to knowingly make a false statement or knowingly conceal a material fact in order to misrepresent as one's own the operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(7)  Use or have in possession in committing a crime an operator's or chauffeur's license that has been altered or that is used to knowingly make a false statement or to knowingly conceal a material fact in order to misrepresent as one's own the operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(8)  Furnish to a peace officer false, forged, fictitious, or misleading verbal or written information identifying the person as another person, if the person is detained for a violation of this chapter or the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10.324; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-325. - Permitting unlicensed driver to drive. 
    No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor vehicle upon a street as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a license to drive a motor vehicle under the provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code or is otherwise qualified to operate a motor vehicle under the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10.325; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-326. - Unlawful to permit violations of act. 
    No person shall knowingly authorize or permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven by any person in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10.326; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-327. - Unlawful to employ unlicensed chauffeur. 
    No person shall knowingly employ any chauffeur to operate a motor vehicle who is not licensed as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10.327; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-328. - Evidence of vehicle insurance; production on request of police officer. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle who operates or permits the operation of the motor vehicle within the city or the operator of the motor vehicle shall produce, pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, upon the request of a public safety officer, evidence that the motor vehicle is insured under Public Act No. 218 of 1956 (MCL 500.3101 to 500.3179). An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who fails to produce evidence under this subsection when requested to produce that evidence is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(b)  A certificate of insurance, if issued by an insurance company, which certificate states that security which meets the requirements of sections 3101 and 3102 of Public Act No. 218 of 1956 (MCL 500.3101 and 500.3102) is in force, shall be accepted as prima facie evidence that insurance is in force for the motor vehicle described in the certificate of insurance until the expiration date shown on the certificate. The certificate, in addition to describing the motor vehicle for which insurance is in effect, shall state the name of each person named on the policy, policy declaration, or declaration certificate whose operation of the vehicle would cause the liability coverage of that insurance to become void. 
(c)  If an owner of a motor vehicle is determined to be responsible for a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the court in which the civil infraction is entered may require the person to surrender his operator's or chauffeur's license unless proof that the vehicle has insurance meeting the requirements of sections 3101 and 3102 of Public Act No. 218 (MCL 500.3101 and 500.3102) is submitted to the court. If the court requires the license to be surrendered, the court shall immediately destroy the license and shall forward to the secretary of state an abstract of the court record as required by section 732 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.732). 
(d)  If, before the appearance date on the citation, the person submits proof to the court that the motor vehicle had insurance meeting the requirements of sections 3101 and 3102 of the Insurance Code of 1956, Public Act No. 218 of (MCL 500.3101 and 500.3102), at the time the violation of subsection (a) of this section occurred, all of the following apply: 
(1)  The court shall not assess a fine or costs. 
(2)  The court shall not cause an abstract of the court record to be forwarded to the secretary of state. 
(3)  The court may assess a fee of not more than $25.00, which shall be paid to the court funding unit. 
(e)  An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who knowingly produces false evidence under this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  This section does not apply to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that is registered in a state other than this state or a foreign country or province. 
(g)  A nonresident owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle not registered in this state shall not operate or permit the motor vehicle or motorcycle to be operated in this state for an aggregate of more than 30 days in any calendar year unless he continuously maintains security for the payment of benefits pursuant to this article. 
(h)  An owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle with respect to which security is required, who operates the motor vehicle or motorcycle or permits it to be operated upon a public highway in this state, without having in full force and effect security complying with this section or section 3101 or 3103 of the insurance code of the state (MCL 500.3101 or 500.3103) is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who operates a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon a public highway in this state, with the knowledge that the owner or registrant does not have security in full force and effect, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person convicted of a misdemeanor under this section shall be fined not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00, imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 10.328; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.328) 
Secs. 36-329-36-601. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - OBEDIENCE AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS 

Sec. 36-602. - Obedience required. 
    No person shall refuse to comply with a lawful order or direction of a public safety officer, crossing guard, or other authorized governmental employee or officer when that person, for public interest and safety, is guiding, directing, controlling or regulating traffic on a street. 
(Code 1988, § 10.602; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-602a. - Failure to obey public safety officer's signal. 
    No person operating a motor vehicle shall willfully fail to obey a direction given by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren, a visual or audible signal by a public safety officer acting in the lawful performance of his duty, directing the person to bring his motor vehicle to a stop. This section does not apply unless the public safety officer giving the signal is in uniform and the officer's vehicle is identified as an official police or public safety vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 10.602a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.602a) 
Sec. 36-603. - Emergency vehicle privileges. 
(a)  The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call, but not while returning therefrom, or when pursuing or apprehending a person who has violated or is violating the law or is charged with or suspected of violating the law may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the following: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in a specified direction. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, air horn or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from 500 feet in a 360-degree arc unless it is not advisable to equip a police vehicle operating as an authorized emergency vehicle with a flashing, oscillating or rotating light visible in a 360-degree arc. In those cases, a police vehicle shall display a flashing, oscillating, or rotating red or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle. Only police vehicles that are publicly owned shall be equipped with a flashing, oscillating, or rotating blue light that when activated is visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet in a 360-degree arc. 
(d)  A police vehicle shall retain the exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle without sounding an audible signal if the police vehicle is engaged in an emergency run where silence is required. 
(Code 1988, § 10.603; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.603) 
Sec. 36-604. - Application to animal-drawn vehicles. 
    A person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the duties, criminal penalties and civil sanctions applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this division and the Michigan Vehicle Code, except as to special regulations of this division or those provisions of this division which by their very nature may not have application. 
(Code 1988, § 10.604; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-605. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES 

Sec. 36-606. - Traffic control orders. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations concerning stopping or yielding right-of-way at intersections; restrictions on stopping, standing or parking; designation of one-way streets, roadways or alleys; establishment of crosswalks, turn restrictions; through streets; play streets; angle parking; all night parking; curb loading zones; public carrier stands; parking meter zones and spaces; weight restrictions; establishment of no passing zones; increasing or decreasing prima facie lawful speed limits; and the establishment, maintenance and removal of traffic control signs, signals and devices, in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such rules and regulations shall be issued as traffic control orders and shall become effective upon being filed with the city clerk and upon erection of adequate signs or signals giving notice of the existence of such regulation if such signs or signals are required by the provisions of this chapter pertaining to such regulation. Traffic control orders may be issued by the city manager, on his own authority, but when so issued shall be known as temporary traffic control orders and shall not be effective after the expiration of 90 days from the date of filing. Permanent traffic control orders shall be issued by the city manager and shall be approved by the city commission. Temporary orders shall become permanent orders upon approval by the city commission but notice of such approval shall be filed with the city clerk as in the case of an original traffic control order. All such orders and any action modifying or repealing such orders shall be kept in a separate book by the city clerk to be known as the traffic control order book. 
(b)  A person who fails to observe and obey the instructions of any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.606; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-607. - Current regulations. 
    All intersection stops and yield right-of-way requirements, regulations on stopping, standing or parking, one-way streets, roadways and alleys, crosswalks, restricted turns, through streets, play streets, angle parking zones, all night parking restrictions, curb loading zones, public carrier stands, parking meter zones and spaces, weight restrictions, no-passing zones and traffic control devices heretofore established and effective on the effective date of this Code, shall be deemed established under permanent traffic control orders and shall remain effective until rescinded or modified by a traffic control order. 
(Code 1988, § 10.607; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-608-36-610. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-611. - Instructions of traffic control device not to be disobeyed. 
(a)  No person shall disobey the instructions of a traffic control device placed in accordance with an effective traffic control order. Traffic control devices shall have the meanings and indicate and apply to the actions of persons and vehicles as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code and this division. 
(b)  No person shall drive upon or through private property, or upon or through public property which is not a street for the purpose of avoiding obedience to a traffic control device placed in accordance with an effective control order. 
(c)  A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.611; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-612. - Traffic control signals. 
(a)  When traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, not less than one signal shall be located over the traveled portion of the roadway so as to give drivers a clear indication of the right-of-way assignment from their normal positions approaching the intersection. The vehicle signals shall exhibit different colored lights successively, one at a time, or with arrows. Red arrow and yellow arrow indications have the same meaning as the corresponding circular indications, except that they apply only to drivers of vehicles intending to make the movement indicated by the arrow. The following colors shall be used and the terms and lights shall indicate and shall apply to drivers of vehicles as follows: 
(1)  If the signal exhibits a green indication, vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at that place prohibits either turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians and bicyclists lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited. 
(2)  If the signal exhibits a steady yellow indication, vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection or at a limit line when marked, but if the stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection. 
(3)  If the signal exhibits a steady red indication, the following shall apply: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if there is no crosswalk or limit line, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown, except as provided in subsection (a)(3)b of this section. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal, after stopping before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if there is no crosswalk or limit line, before entering the intersection, may make a right turn from a one-way or two-way street into a two-way street or into a one-way street carrying traffic in the direction of the right turn or a left turn from a one-way or two-way street into a one-way roadway carrying traffic in the direction of the left turn unless prohibited by sign, signal, marking, light, or other traffic control device. The vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and bicyclists lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(4)  If the signal exhibits a steady green arrow indication, vehicular traffic facing the green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow, or other movement permitted by other indications shown at the same time. The vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and bicyclists lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(b)  If a traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature cannot have application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made but, in the absence of a sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(c)  A person who violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(d)  A driver of a vehicle who approaches a person using a wheelchair or a device to aid the person to walk at a crosswalk or any other pedestrian crossing shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person using the wheelchair or device. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  A sign prohibiting a turn on a red signal as provided in subsection (a)(3)b of this section shall be located above or adjacent to the traffic control signal or as close as possible to the point where the turn is made, or at both locations, so that one or more of the signs are visible to a vehicle operator intending to turn, at the point where the turn is made. An additional sign may be used at the far side of the intersection in the direct line of vision of the turning vehicle operator. 
(Code 1988, § 10.612; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.612) 
Sec. 36-613. - Application of traffic control signals to pedestrians in absence of pedestrian control signals; special pedestrian control signals. 
(a)  If special pedestrian control signals are not utilized, the regular traffic control signals as indicated in section 36-612 shall apply to pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within a marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication. Pedestrians facing the signal are advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway and a pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(3)  Steady red indication. Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter the highway unless they can do so safely and without interfering with vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Red with arrow. Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter the highway unless they can do so safely without interfering with vehicular traffic. 
(b)  If special pedestrian control signals are installed, they shall be placed at the far end of each crosswalk and shall indicate a "walk" or "don't walk" interval. These special signals shall apply to pedestrians only to the exclusion of a regular traffic control signal or signals which may be present at the same location, as follows: 
(1)  Walk interval. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Don't walk (steady burning or flashing) interval. A pedestrian shall not start to cross the highway in the direction of the signals, but a pedestrian who has partially completed crossing on the walk interval of the signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the don't walk interval of the signal is showing. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.613; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-613a-36-613c. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-613d. - Failure to stop on signal of school crossing guard. 
(a)  A driver of a motor vehicle who fails to stop when a school crossing guard is in a school crossing and is holding a stop sign in an upright position visible to approaching vehicular traffic is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In a proceeding for a violation of this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation complaint or warrant was the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(Code 1988, § 10.613d; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-614. - Flashing red or yellow signals. 
(a)  If flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past the signal only with caution. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.614; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-615. - Unauthorized display of signs. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain, or display along any street or upon any structure in or over any street any sign, signal, marking, device, blinking, oscillating or rotating light, decoration or banner which is or purports to be or is in imitation or resembles or which can be mistaken for a traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal unless authorized by law or a duly authorized public body or official. No person shall place or maintain on any street any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(b)  No person shall place, maintain or display along any street any blinking, oscillating or rotating light sufficiently similar in color and design that may be mistaken for the distinguishing lights authorized by law for emergency vehicles or that creates a hazard for the safety of drivers using said streets. 
(c)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the director of public safety is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property, adjacent to streets, of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic signs or signals. 
(d)  Decorations or banners which may be placed over the traveled portion of any street or highway shall be placed no closer than ten feet on either side of traffic lights or signals and shall be so placed as to not obstruct a clear view of such traffic lights or signals. 
(Code 1988, § 10.615; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.615) 
Sec. 36-616. - Damaging traffic control device or sign or signal. 
    No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any traffic control device or any sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereof, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 10.616; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-616a. - Possession of portable signal preemption device. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a person shall not possess a portable signal preemption device. 
(b)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A law enforcement agency in the course of providing law enforcement services. 
(2)  A fire station or a firefighter in the course of providing fire prevention or fire extinguishing services. 
(3)  An emergency medical service or ambulance in the course of providing emergency medical transportation or ambulance services. 
(4)  An operator, passenger, or owner of an authorized emergency vehicle in the course of his emergency duties. 
(c)  This section does not apply to the following: 
(1)  A mail or package delivery service or employee or agent of a mail or package delivery service in the course of shipping or delivering a portable signal preemption device. 
(2)  An employee or agent of a portable signal preemption device manufacturer or retailer in the course of his employment in providing, selling, manufacturing, or transporting a portable signal preemption device to an individual or agency described in this subsection. 
(d)  A person who violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(e)  As used in this section, the term "portable signal preemption device" means a device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic control signal to green out of sequence. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.616a) 
Sec. 36-617. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 36-617a. - Stop at scene. 
    The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he has been involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall then forthwith return to and in every event remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 36-619, or the driver may immediately report the accident to the nearest or most convenient police agency or officer to fulfill the requirements of section 36-619 if there is a reasonable and honest belief that remaining at the scene will result in further harm. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 10.617a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.617a) 
Sec. 36-618. - Stopping at scene of accident resulting in damage to vehicle; penalty. 
    The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he has been involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and shall remain there until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 36-619, or the driver may immediately report the accident to the nearest or most convenient police agency or officer to fulfill the requirements of section 36-619 if there is a reasonable and honest belief that remaining at the scene will result in further harm. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 10.618; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.618) 
Sec. 36-619. - Give information and render aid. 
    The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he has been involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his name, address, and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving, also the name and address of the owner, and exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to a public safety officer or the person struck or the driver of, or occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided with and where practical shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance in securing medical aid or transportation of injured persons. 
(Code 1988, § 10.619; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-620. - Duty of driver colliding with vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides upon either public or private property with any vehicle which is attended or unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the vehicle or, if such owner cannot be located, shall forthwith report it to the nearest or most convenient police officer. 
(Code 1988, § 10.620; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-621. - Duty upon striking fixtures on a street or roadway. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to personal property or fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a street shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall upon request exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and, if such owner cannot be found, shall make a report of such accident to the nearest and most convenient public safety officer. 
(Code 1988, § 10.621; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-622. - Report accidents. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle involved in an accident that injures or kills any person, or that damages property to an apparent extent totaling $1,000.00 or more, shall immediately report that accident at the nearest or most convenient police station, or to the nearest or most convenient public safety officer. The officer receiving the report, or his commanding officer, shall immediately forward each report to the director of state police on forms prescribed by the director of state police. The forms shall be completed in full by the investigating officer. 
(Code 1988, § 10.622; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.622) 
Sec. 36-622a. - When passenger to report. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be made said report. 
(Code 1988, § 10.622a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-623. - Garages to report. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident, or struck by any bullet, shall report to the public safety department immediately after such vehicle is received and before any repairs are made to such vehicle, giving the engine number, registration number and the name and address of the owner and operator of such vehicle, together with any other discernible information. 
(Code 1988, § 10.623; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-623a. - Removing glass from street. 
    Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 10.623a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-624. - Accident reports confidential. 
    All accident reports shall be without prejudice to the individual reporting, and shall be for the confidential use of the public safety department and the commissioner of state police, except that the public safety department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. No such report shall be used as evidence in any court action arising out of an accident, except that the public safety department shall furnish, upon demand of any person who has or claims to have made such a report or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the public safety department solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a report be made to the department. 
(Code 1988, § 10.624; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 9. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-624a. - Possession of alcoholic liquor in passenger compartment; prohibition. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person who is an operator or occupant, other than a passenger in a chartered vehicle authorized to operate by the state department of transportation, shall transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a street, or within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle in any place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, in this state. 
(b)  A person may transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of the vehicle upon a street or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, included in an area designated for the parking of vehicles in the state, if the vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, the container is enclosed or encased, and the container is not readily accessible to the occupants of the vehicle. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. As part of the sentence, the person may be ordered to perform community service and undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense as described in section 703(1) of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, 1998 Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1703(1)). A court shall not accept a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for a violation of this Section from a person charged solely with a violation of section 36-625(d). 
(Code 1988, § 10.624a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-625. - Operating while under the influence; impaired driving due to alcohol or drugs; penalties. 
(a)  A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state if either of the following applies: 
(1)  The person is under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance. 
(2)  The person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(b)  The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within this state by a person who is under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, or who has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or whose ability to operate the motor vehicle is visibly impaired due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance. 
(c)  A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles within this state when, due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, the person's ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired. If a person is charged with violating subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section, a finding of guilty under this subsection may be rendered. 
(d)  A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state if the person has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection, the term "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(1)  An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(2)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. The defendant bears the burden of proving that the consumption of alcoholic liquor was a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(e)  A person, whether licensed or not, is subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  He shall not operate a vehicle in violation of subsection (a) or (c) of this section, while another person who is less than 16 years of age is occupying the vehicle. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 and to one or more of the following: 
a.  Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than 90 days. Not less than 48 hours of this imprisonment shall be served consecutively. This term of imprisonment shall not be suspended. 
b.  Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days. 
(2)  He shall not operate a vehicle in violation of subsection (d) of this section while another person who is less than 16 years of age is occupying the vehicle. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (e)(2)b of this section, a person who violates this subsection may be sentenced to one or more of the following: 
1.  Community service for not more than 60 days. 
2.  A fine of not more than $500.00. 
3.  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
b.  If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction or after two or more prior convictions regardless of the number of years that have elapsed since any prior conviction, a person who violates this subsection shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 and to one or more of the following: 
1.  Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than 90 days. Not less than 48 hours of this imprisonment shall be served consecutively. This term of imprisonment shall not be suspended. 
2.  Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days. 
3.  In the judgment of sentence under subsection (e)(2)b.1 or (e)(2)b.2 of this section, the court may order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 904d of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.904(d)). 
(f)  If a person is convicted of violating subsection (a) or (m) of this section, all of the following apply: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
a.  Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
b.  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
c.  A fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
(2)  If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 and one or more of the following: 
a.  Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days. 
b.  Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than 90 days, and not less than 48 hours of the term of imprisonment imposed under this subsection shall be served consecutively. 
(3)  A term of imprisonment imposed under subsection (f)(2)b of this section shall not be suspended. 
(4)  In the judgment of sentence under subsection (f)(1) or (2) of this section, the court may order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 904d of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.904d). In the judgment of a sentence under subsection (f)(2) of this section, the court shall, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section 625n of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.625n), order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 904d of the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(g)  A person who is convicted of violating subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, or both. 
(h)  If a person is convicted of violating subsection (c) of this section, all of the following apply: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
a.  Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
b.  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
c.  A fine of not more than $300.00. 
(2)  If the violation occurs within seven years of one prior conviction, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 and one or more of the following: 
a.  Community service for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days. 
b.  Imprisonment for not less than five days or more than 90 days. Not less than 48 hours of the term of imprisonment imposed under this subsection shall be served consecutively. 
(3)  A term of imprisonment imposed under subsection (h)(2) of this section shall not be suspended. 
(4)  In the judgment of sentence under subsection (h)(1) or (2) of this section, the court may order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 904d of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.904d). In the judgment of a sentence under subsection (h)(2) of this section, the court shall, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section 625n of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.625n), order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 904d of the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(i)  If a person is convicted of violating subsection (d) of this section, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i)(2) of this section, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or both of the following: 
a.  Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
b.  A fine of not more than $250.00. 
(2)  If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or more of the following: 
a.  Community service for not more than 60 days. 
b.  A fine of not more than $500.00. 
c.  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(j)  Subject to subsection (l) of this section, as used in this section, the term "prior conviction" means a conviction for any of the following, whether under an ordinance violation of this article, a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (k) of this section, a violation or attempted violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7), section 625m, former section 625(b)(1) or (2), or former section 625b of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7); MCL 257.625m; MCL 257.625b) or subsection (a), (c), (d) or (e) of this section. 
(2)  Negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the operation of a vehicle or an attempt to commit any of those crimes. 
(k)  Except for purposes of enforcement described in subsection (i)(2) of this section, only one violation or attempted violation of section 625(6) of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.625(6)), subsection (d) of this section, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(6) of the Michigan Vehicle Code or subsection (d) of this section, or the law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(6) of the Michigan Vehicle Code or subsection (d) of this section may be used as a prior conviction. 
(l)  If two or more convictions described in subsection (j) of this section are convictions for violations arising out of the same transaction, only one conviction shall be used to determine whether the person has a prior conviction. 
(m)  A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state if the person has in his body any amount of a controlled substance listed in schedule 1 under section 7212 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7212), or a rule promulgated under that section, or of a controlled substance described in section 7214(a)(iv) of the public health code, MCL 333.7214(a)(iv). 
(n)  The court may order as a condition of probation that a person convicted of violating subsection (a) or (m) of this section shall not operate a motor vehicle unless that vehicle is equipped with an ignition interlock device approved, certified, and installed as required under sections 625k and 625l of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.625k, 257.625l). 
(Code 1988, § 10.625; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 8-19-2003; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.625) 
Sec. 36-625a. - Refusal to submit to preliminary chemical breath analysis. 
(a)  No person shall refuse to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(b)  A person who is operating a commercial motor vehicle and who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon lawful request by a peace officer is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 10.625a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36.625b. - Super drunk driving. 
    Pursuant to Act 1909, PA 279, as amended by Act 2012, PA 7, Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.625, is hereby adopted by reference. A violation of this provision is punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than 180 days. 
(3)  A fine of not less than $200.00, or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Secs. 36-625c-36-625k. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-625l. - Ignition interlock device. 
    No person required to use an ignition interlock device shall tamper with or circumvent the device or request or solicit any other person to blow into the device or to start a vehicle equipped with the device, nor shall any person blow into an ignition interlock device or start a vehicle equipped with the device for the purpose of providing an operable vehicle to a person required to use the device. 
(Code 1988, § 10.625l; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-625m. - Prohibition of operation of commercial motor vehicle with certain percentage of alcohol in blood. 
(a)  A person, whether licensed or not, who has an alcohol content of 0.04 grams or more but not more than 0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or, beginning October 1, 2013, an alcohol content of 0.04 grams or more but less than 0.10 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this state. 
(b)  A person who is convicted of violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $300.00, or both, together with costs of the prosecution. 
(Code 1988, § 10.625m; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 480, § 2, 8-19-2003; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.625m) 
Sec. 36-626. - Reckless driving. 
    Any person who drives any vehicle upon a street, frozen public lake, stream or pond or other place open to the general public, including any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. 
(Code 1988, § 10.626; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-626a. - Competitive use of a vehicle; prohibition. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle, or render assistance in any manner to the competitive use of a vehicle, upon any street, or any other place open to the general public, including any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, in a speed or acceleration contest or for the purpose of making a speed record, whether from a standing start or otherwise over a measured or unmeasured distance, or in a drag race as herein defined. The term "drag racing" means the operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other over a common selected course or where timing is involved or where timing devices are used in competitive accelerations of speeds by participating vehicles. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as participants. The operation of two or more vehicles either at speeds in excess of prima facie lawfully established speeds or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful speed is prima facie evidence of drag racing and is unlawful. 
(Code 1988, § 10.626a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-626b. - Careless or negligent driving. 
    Any person who operates a vehicle upon a street, frozen public lake, stream or pond or other place open to the general public, including any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, in a careless or negligent manner likely to endanger any person or property, but without wantonness or recklessness, is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.626b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-626c. - Drivers to exercise due care. 
(a)  Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian or vehicle upon any street or highway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.626c; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 10. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 36-627. - General speed restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle at a speed which is other than a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the street and of any other condition then existing. No person shall operate a vehicle at a speed greater than that which will permit a stop within the assured, clear distance ahead. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (a) of this section and except in those instances where a lower speed is specified in this division, it is prima facie lawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive at a speed not exceeding the following, except when this speed would be unsafe: 
(1)  Twenty-five miles an hour on all streets in a business or residence district. 
(2)  Twenty-five miles an hour in public parks unless a different speed is fixed and duly posted. 
(3)  Twenty-five miles per hour on all highways or parts of highways within the boundaries of land platted under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 to 560.293), or the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 to 559.276), unless a different speed is fixed and posted. 
(c)  It is prima facie unlawful for a person to exceed the speed limits prescribed in subsection (b) of this section, except as provided in section 629 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.629). 
(d)  No person shall operate a vehicle at a speed greater than that fixed and posted with respect to any street, or greater than any applicable prima facie speed limit established pursuant to the Michigan Vehicle Code if no speed limit be otherwise posted. 
(e)  A person driving a passenger vehicle drawing another vehicle or trailer shall not exceed a speed of 55 miles per hour, unless the vehicle or trailer has two wheels or less and does not exceed the combined weight of 750 pounds for the vehicle or trailer and load, or a trailer coach of not more than 26 feet in length with brakes on each wheel and attached to the passenger vehicle with an equalizing or stabilizing coupling unit. 
(f)  A truck with a gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more, a truck-tractor with a trailer, or a combination of these vehicles shall not exceed a speed of 55 miles per hour on highways, streets, or freeways, and shall not exceed a speed of 35 miles per hour on highways, streets, or freeways, during the period when reduced loadings are being enforced in accordance with this division. 
(g)  A person driving a school bus shall not exceed the speed of 50 miles per hour. 
(h)  The maximum rates of speeds allowed pursuant to this section are subject to the maximum rate established pursuant to section 629b of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.629b). 
(i)  A person operating a vehicle on a highway, when entering and passing through a designated work area where a normal lane or part of the lane of traffic has been closed due to highway construction, maintenance, or surveying activities, shall not exceed a speed of 45 miles per hour unless otherwise determined and posted by the state transportation department, a county road commission, or a local authority. The state transportation department, a county road commission, or a local authority, based on accepted engineering practice, shall post speed limit signs in each work zone described in section 79d(a) of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.79d(a)) that indicate the speed limit in that work zone and shall identify that work zone with any other traffic control devices necessary to conform to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. A person shall not exceed a speed limit established under this Section or a speed limit established pursuant to section 628 or 629 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.628 or 257.629). 
(j)  Subject to subsections (a) and (b)(3) of this section, speed limits established pursuant to this section are not valid unless properly posted. In the absence of a properly posted sign, the speed limit in effect shall be the general speed limit pursuant to section 628(1) of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.628(1)). 
(k)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.627; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.627) 
Secs. 36-628-36-630. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-631. - Bridges, causeways or viaducts; speed and load restrictions. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle upon a public bridge, causeway, or viaduct at a speed or with a load which is greater than the maximum speed or load which can be maintained with safety to the structure, when the structure is signposted as provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.631; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-632. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-633. - Specification of speeding violation in complaint. 
    In every charge of a violation of a speed regulation in this division, the complaint or citation and the summons or notice to appear shall specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven and the speed applicable within the district or at the location. 
(Code 1988, § 10.633; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 11. - DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, OVERTAKING AND PASSING 

Sec. 36-634. - Driving on right side of roadway; two or more lane roadway for travel in same direction. 
(a)  Upon each roadway of sufficient width, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the vehicle upon the right-half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing that movement. 
(2)  When the right-half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair or when an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway. A driver who is driving on the left half of a roadway under this subdivision shall yield the right-of-way to an oncoming vehicle traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway. 
(3)  When a vehicle operated by a state agency or a local authority or an agent of a state agency or local authority is engaged in work on the roadway. 
(4)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable on the roadway. 
(b)  Upon a roadway having two or more lanes for travel in one direction, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the vehicle in the extreme right-hand lane available for travel except as otherwise provided in this section. However, the driver of a vehicle may drive the vehicle in any lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction of travel when the lanes are occupied by vehicles moving in substantially continuous lanes of traffic and in any left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction of travel for a reasonable distance before making a left turn. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.634; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-635. - Passing of oncoming vehicles. 
(a)  Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other not less than one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.635; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-636. - Overtaking and passing of vehicles. 
(a)  The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and special rules stated in sections 36-637 through 36-643a: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left of that vehicle, and when safely clear of the overtaken vehicle shall take up a position as near the right-hand edge of the main traveled portion of the highway as is practicable. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.636; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-637. - Overtaking and passing on right of another vehicle. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving vehicles in each direction and when the vehicles are moving in substantially continuous lanes of traffic. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon a roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving vehicles and when the vehicles are moving in substantially continuous lanes of traffic. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting the overtaking and passing in safety. The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.637; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-638. - Passing on left; visibility; oncoming traffic. 
(a)  A vehicle shall not be driven to the left side of the center of a two-lane highway or in the center lane of a three-lane highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the left side or center lane is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made without interference with the safe operation of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or the vehicle overtaken. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.638; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-639. - Vehicles prohibited from driving on left side of roadway under certain conditions. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle on the left side of a two-way street when approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the street where the person's view is obstructed within a distance as to create a hazard to possible on-coming traffic or, when the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of a bridge, viaduct, or tunnel. 
(b)  The limitations of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.639; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-640. - No-passing zone. 
(a)  No driver of any vehicle shall overtake or pass any vehicle in a designated no-passing zone. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.640; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-640a. - Passing vehicle at intersection. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.640a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-641. - Designation of roadway for one-way traffic. 
(a)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(b)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of that island. 
(c)  A person who violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.641; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-642. - Driving on roadways divided into two or more marked lanes. 
(a)  When a roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent with this act shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety. Upon a roadway with four or more lanes which provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall be driven within the extreme right-hand lane except when overtaking and passing, but shall not cross the centerline of the roadway except where making a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction, when the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction the vehicle is proceeding and the allocation is designated by official traffic control devices. 
(3)  Official traffic control devices may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the traffic control device. 
(4)  Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the traffic control devices. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.642; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-643. - Tailgating prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle following another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles and the traffic upon, and the condition of, the street. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.643; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-643a. - Leaving space between trucks or truck tractors; passing. 
(a)  No driver of a truck or truck tractor, when traveling upon a street outside of a business or residence district, when conditions permit, shall fail to leave sufficient space between the vehicle and another truck or truck tractor so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the space without danger, except that this shall not prevent the driver of a truck or truck tractor from overtaking and passing another truck, truck tractor or other vehicle in a lawful manner. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.643a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-644. - Driving on divided highway. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle other than on the right-hand roadway of a street divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section constructed to impede vehicular traffic, or park or drive over, across, or within the dividing space, barrier or section of such street, except through an opening in the physical barrier, dividing section, or space or at a crossover or intersection established by public authority on a street which has been divided into two roadways. 
(b)  No person shall operate any vehicle upon any crossover on a limited access highway except an authorized emergency vehicle, a road service vehicle going to or returning from servicing a disabled vehicle, or vehicles actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.644; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-645. - Limited access roadways, entering and exiting. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from a limited access roadway except at entrances and exits established by public authority. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.645; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-646. - Operation only on property normally open to vehicular traffic. 
    No person shall operate, or cause to be driven, any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, go-cart, or any other driven vehicle on any property owned by the city not normally open to vehicular traffic, or on any property owned by the School District of the City of Berkley, not normally open to vehicular traffic, except as authorized by the city manager or the director of public safety. Property owned by the city shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, city parks and playgrounds. Property owned by the School District of the City of Berkley shall be construed to include, but shall not be limited to, school playgrounds and athletic fields. The violation of this section is punishable as a violation of the city Code. 
(Code 1988, § 10.646; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 12. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 36-647. - Turning at intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. 
(3)  Approach for a left turn from a two-way roadway into a one-way roadway shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline and clear of existing car tracks in use, and bypassing to the right of the centerline where it enters the intersection. Approach for a left turn from a one-way roadway into a two-way roadway shall be made as close as practicable to the left curb or edge of the roadway and bypassing to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. 
(4)  Where both streets and roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(5)  Where markers, signs, or signals have been placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, a driver of a vehicle shall not turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by those markers, signs, or signals. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.647; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-648. - Signals on stopping or turning required. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle or bicycle upon a highway, before stopping or turning from a direct line, shall first see that the stopping or turning can be made in safety and shall give a signal as required in this section. 
(b)  A signal required in this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm in the manner specified in this section or by a mechanical or electrical signal device which conveys an intelligible signal or warning to other highway traffic, except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section. When a signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate his intention to stop or turn by extending his hand and arm from and beyond the left side of the vehicle and signal as follows: 
(1)  Left turn-Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn-Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed-Hand and arm extended downward. 
(c)  A commercial motor vehicle, other than those in transit from a manufacturer to a dealer, in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, a signal lamp or mechanical signal device when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab, or load of the commercial motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load of the commercial vehicle exceeds 14 feet. The measurement from steering post to rear limit shall apply to a single vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
(d)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.648; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 13. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 36-649. - Yielding to vehicle with right-of-way required. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, in obedience to the sign, shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver would be moving across or within the intersection. However, if required for safety to stop, the driver shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is not a crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is not a crosswalk or a clearly marked stop line, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit a right-of-way which the driver might otherwise have under this section. 
(f)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, the driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is not a crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; or if there is not a crosswalk or a clearly marked stop line, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver would be moving across or within the intersection. 
(g)  When a vehicle approaches the intersection of a highway from an intersecting highway or street which is intended to be, and is constructed as, a merging highway or street, and is plainly marked at the intersection with appropriate merge signs, the vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle so close as to constitute an immediate hazard on the highway about to be entered and shall adjust its speed so as to enable it to merge safely with the through traffic. 
(h)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.649; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-650. - Right-of-way; vehicles turning left at intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard; but the driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this division, may make the left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way. At an intersection at which a traffic signal is located, a driver intending to make a left turn shall permit vehicles bound straight through in the opposite direction which are waiting a go signal to pass through the intersection before making the turn. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.650; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-651. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-652. - Emerging from alley or private way. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall enter or cross a street from an alley, private road, or driveway without coming to a full stop before entering the street and shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles and pedestrians approaching on the street. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.652; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-653. - Approach of emergency vehicles; required response. 
    Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted flashing, rotating or oscillating lamp exhibiting red or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicles, and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, and without regard to emergency run where silence is required in giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the roadway, or left edge of one-way street, clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a public safety officer. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.653; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-653a. - Approaching and passing stationary emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon approaching and passing a stationary authorized emergency vehicle that is giving a visual signal by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating red, blue, or white lights, the driver of an approaching vehicle shall exhibit due care and caution, as required under the following: 
(1)  On any public roadway with at least two adjacent lanes proceeding in the same direction of the stationary authorized emergency vehicle, the driver of the approaching vehicle shall proceed with caution and yield the right-of-way by moving into a lane at least one moving lane or two vehicle widths apart from the stationary authorized emergency vehicle, unless directed otherwise by a public safety officer. If movement to an adjacent lane or two vehicle widths apart is not possible due to weather, road conditions, or the immediate presence of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in parallel moving lanes, the driver of the approaching vehicle shall proceed as required in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(2)  On any public roadway that does not have at least two adjacent lanes proceeding in the same direction as the stationary authorized emergency vehicle, or if the movement by the driver of the vehicle into an adjacent lane or two vehicle widths apart is not possible as described in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the approaching vehicle shall reduce and maintain a safe speed for weather, road conditions, and vehicular or pedestrian traffic and proceed with due care and caution, or as directed by a public safety officer. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(c)  The term "authorized emergency vehicle" means vehicles of the public safety department, fire department, police department, ambulances, privately owned motor vehicles of volunteer or paid firemen, or privately owned motor vehicles of volunteer ambulance drivers or licensed ambulance drivers or attendants as are authorized by the department of state police. 
(Code 1988, § 10.653a; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 4-9-2001) 
Sec. 36-654. - Driving through funeral procession. 
(a)  A motor vehicle forming part of a funeral procession, when going to a place of burial, shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles except fire apparatus, ambulances, and public safety patrol vehicles at a street or highway intersection within this state if the vehicle in the funeral procession displays a flag which shall be fluorescent orange in color, and upon which shall be printed, stamped, or stained a black cross, the Star of David, or the crescent and star. The lead vehicle and the last vehicle in the funeral procession may carry an additional flag. The flag shall not contain a name embossed or printed on the flag, except the term "funeral." 
(b)  A person passing through a funeral procession of motor vehicles, designated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, with a vehicle of any kind, is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.654; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 14. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 36-655. - Pedestrians on streets. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall walk upon the main traveled portion of a street where sidewalks are provided, or, if sidewalks are not provided, other than on the left side of the street facing traffic which passes nearest when practicable. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.655; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-655a. - Obstructing roadway. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.655a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-655b. - Yield right-of-way generally. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.655b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-655c. - Yield to emergency vehicles. 
(a)  A pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle under the conditions prescribed in section 36-653. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.655c; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-655d. - Sleds, coasting wagons, roller skates restricted. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any sled, coasting wagon, skis, toboggan, skateboard, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such persons shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all the duties of pedestrians. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.655d; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-655e. - Manner of crossing roadway. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall, except in a marked crosswalk, cross a roadway at any other place than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.655e; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-655f. - White canes. 
    Any driver of a vehicle who approaches within ten feet of a person wholly or partially blind, carrying a cane or walking stick which is white or white-tipped with red, or being led by a guide dog wearing a harness and walking on either side of or slightly in front of said blind person, shall immediately come to a full stop and take such precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person wholly or partially blind. 
(Code 1988, § 10.655f; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 15. - MOTORCYCLES, MOPEDS, AND BICYCLES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 36-656. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement, all of which are over 14 inches in diameter. 
    Moped means a two- or three-wheeled vehicle which is equipped with a motor that does not exceed 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement, produces 2.0 brake horsepower or less, and cannot propel the vehicle at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour on a level surface. The power drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of a rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
(Code 1988, § 10.656; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-656a. - Violations permitted by parent or guardian prohibited. 
    No parent of a child or guardian of a ward shall authorize or knowingly permit the child or ward to violate any provision of this division respecting operation or use of bicycles, mopeds, motorcycles, autocycles, coasters, roller skates, sleds, or toy vehicles. 
(Code 1988, § 10.656a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-657. - Riding on roadway; rights and duties. 
(a)  A person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, or moped or operating a low-speed vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this division, except as to special regulations of this division which by their very nature may not have application. 
(b)  The regulations applicable to motorcycles in this division shall be supplementary to other provisions of this division governing motorcycles. 
(Code 1988, § 10.657; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.657) 
Sec. 36-658. - Riding restrictions. 
(a)  No person propelling a bicycle or operating a motorcycle or moped shall ride other than upon and astride a permanent and regular seat attached to such bicycle or vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall use a bicycle or motorcycle to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(c)  No person shall use a moped or an electric personal assistive mobility device to carry more than one person at a time. 
(d)  No person operating or riding on a motorcycle and no person less than 19 years of age operating a moped on a street shall fail to wear a crash helmet, as approved by the department of state police, on his head. 
(e)  No person shall operate or ride in an autocycle on a street without wearing seat belts. 
(f)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.658; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.658) 
Sec. 36-658a. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-658b. - Low-speed vehicles; crash helmets. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person operating or riding in a low-speed vehicle shall wear a crash helmet on his head. The crash helmet shall meet the requirements of the rules promulgated by the department of state police under section 36-658. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a person operating or riding in a low-speed vehicle equipped with a roof that meets or exceeds the standards for roof-crush resistance, provided under 49 CFR 571.500. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.658b) 
Sec. 36-659. - Clinging to vehicles. 
(a)  No person riding upon a bicycle, moped or motorcycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to a vehicle upon a roadway. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.659; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-660. - Operation generally. 
(a)  No person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device, low-speed vehicle, or moped upon a roadway shall ride other than as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable and with the exercise of due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  No person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device, motorcycle, or moped upon a street shall ride more than two abreast except on a path or part of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of those vehicles. 
(c)  No person shall operate a bicycle on a roadway where a usable and designated path for bicycles is provided adjacent to a roadway. 
(d)  No person operating a motorcycle, moped, a low-speed vehicle, or electric personal assistive mobility shall pass between lines of traffic, but may pass on the left of traffic moving in that persons direction in the case of a two-way street, or on the left or right of traffic in the case of a one-way street in an unoccupied lane. 
(e)  No person shall: 
(1)  Operate a bicycle on a sidewalk constructed for the use of pedestrians and overtake and pass a pedestrian without first giving an audible signal and yielding the right-of-way to such pedestrian; 
(2)  Ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district; and 
(3)  Disobey any sign erected on any sidewalk or street which prohibits the riding of bicycles thereon. 
(f)  No person shall operate a moped on a sidewalk constructed for the use of pedestrians. 
(g)  A motorcycle or moped shall not be operated within any city park, unless permitted by traffic control order, nor operated upon property of any school or religious corporation within the city the controlling body of which has prohibited such operation by resolution adopted as a traffic control order by the department of public safety. 
(h)  No bicycle rider who is less than 16 years of age shall fail to use a designated path for bicycles if provided adjacent to a roadway, unless accompanied by an adult. 
(i)  The hands of the operator of a bicycle shall be on the handlebars at all times except when he is in the act of signaling. 
(j)  A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device on a sidewalk constructed for the use of pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(k)  A low-speed vehicle shall be operated at a speed of not to exceed 25 miles per hour and shall not be operated on a highway or street with a speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour except for the purpose of crossing that highway or street. The state transportation department may prohibit the operation of a low-speed vehicle on any highway or street under its jurisdiction if it determines that the prohibition is necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(l)  This section does not apply to a police officer in the performance of his official duties. 
(m)  An electric personal assistive mobility device shall be operated at a speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour and shall not be operated on a highway or street with a speed limit of more than 25 miles per hour except to cross that highway or street. 
(n)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.660; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.660) 
Sec. 36-660a. - Operating bicycles upon highways or streets at less than existing speed; riding as close as possible to right hand curb or edge required; exceptions. 
    A person operating a bicycle upon a highway or street at less than the existing speed of traffic shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another bicycle or any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(2)  When preparing to turn left. 
(3)  When conditions make the right-hand edge of the roadway unsafe or reasonably unusable by bicycles, including, but not limited to, surface hazards, an uneven roadway surface, drain openings, debris, parked or moving vehicles or bicycles, pedestrians, animals, or other obstacles, or if the lane is too narrow to permit a vehicle to safely overtake and pass a bicycle. 
(4)  When operating a bicycle in a lane in which the traffic is turning right but the individual intends to go straight through the intersection. 
(5)  When operating a bicycle upon a one-way highway or street that has two or more marked traffic lanes, in which case the individual may ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of that roadway as practicable. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.660a) 
Sec. 36-660b. - Operating bicycles on streets or highways abreast. 
    Two or more individuals operating bicycles upon a highway or street shall not ride more than two abreast except upon a path or portion of the highway or street set aside for the use of bicycles. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.660b) 
Sec. 36-660c. - Operating bicycles upon sidewalks or pedestrian crosswalks. 
(a)  An individual operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk or a pedestrian crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian. 
(b)  An individual shall not operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk or a pedestrian crosswalk if that operation is prohibited by an official traffic control device. 
(c)  An individual lawfully operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk or a pedestrian crosswalk has all of the rights and responsibilities applicable to a pedestrian using that sidewalk or crosswalk. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.660c) 
Sec. 36-661. - Carrying packages, bundles, etc. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, moped, or motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle, or division which prevents the driver from keeping both hands upon the handlebars of the vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.661; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.661) 
Sec. 36-661a. - Position of handlebars. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bicycle, moped, or motorcycle on a public highway if it is equipped with handlebars higher than 15 inches from the lowest point of the undepressed saddle to the highest point of the handle grip of the operator. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.661a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-662. - Required equipment for bicycles. 
(a)  Every bicycle or electric personal assistive mobility device being operated on a roadway between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear which shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving an audible signal, except that such bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon such bicycle, any siren or whistle. 
(c)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(d)  An electric personal assistive mobility device shall enable the operator to bring it to a controlled stop. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.662; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.662) 
Sec. 36-662a. - Required equipment for motorcycles and mopeds. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorcycle or moped within the city unless said vehicle is equipped with all safety devices required by state law, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Adequate headlamps; 
(2)  Red tail lamps; 
(3)  Rear stop lamps; 
(4)  A horn, but no siren, whistle, or bell; and 
(5)  Adequate brakes. 
(b)  When a motorcycle operated on a street or highway in the city in excess of 35 miles per hour is not equipped with a windshield, the operator shall wear goggles with transparent lenses or a transparent face shield or eyeglasses in accordance with state law. 
(c)  A motorcycle or moped shall not be equipped with more than one spot lamp, and every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the beam will be directed into the eyes of the approaching driver. Spotlights may not emit other than a white or amber light. 
(d)  A motorcycle or moped shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. A person shall not remove, destroy, or damage any of the baffles contained in the muffler nor shall a person use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motorcycle or moped on a highway or street. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.662a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-663. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-664. - Parking. 
(a)  An individual may park a bicycle on a sidewalk except as prohibited by an official traffic control device. 
(b)  An individual shall not park a bicycle on a sidewalk in such a manner that the bicycle impedes the lawful movement of pedestrians or other traffic. 
(c)  An individual may park a bicycle on a highway or street at any location where parking is allowed for motor vehicles, may park at any angle to the curb or the edge of the highway, and may park abreast of another bicycle. 
(d)  An individual shall not park a bicycle on a highway or street in such a manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.664; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.664) 
Sec. 36-665. - Required license. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motorcycle or moped within the city unless such person is licensed to do so as required by state law. 
(b)  No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or alley unless such bicycle has been registered and licensed with the public safety department. The public safety department shall issue a suitable license tag with each license issued bearing a distinctive number. Each license or tag pertaining to a registered bicycle shall be firmly affixed to the bicycle in such place or manner as prescribed by the public safety department. 
(Code 1988, § 10.665; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-666. - Regulations. 
    The city commission shall have the authority from time to time to promulgate and issue traffic control orders as is elsewhere authorized in this Code with respect to the control of the operation and use of motorcycles and mopeds in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 10.666; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-667. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-668. - Impoundment for violation of division. 
    It shall be the duty of all members of the public safety department to impound any and all bicycles operated in violation of any of the provisions of this division. All bicycles impounded shall be held for a period of 24 hours. After such period any bicycle so impounded shall be released upon application of the owner thereof, upon compliance with the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the owner shall have arrived at the age of 18 years; otherwise, upon application of the owner, accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1988, § 10.668; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Subdivision II. - Registration of Bicycles 

Sec. 36-669. - Registration; records. 
(a)  The director of public safety shall cause all applications for registering of bicycles to be filed in the director of public safety's office and keep a complete and accurate record of the facts appearing therein, together with a numerical list of the bicycle numbers assigned to registered bicycles. Each license so issued shall be valid for the life of said bicycle and shall be transferred as an incident to the transfer of ownership thereof. 
(b)  Fees for the registration and licensing, transfer of registration and license, and duplication of lost, mutilated, or destroyed license plates or tags for bicycles shall be in the amounts prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution. 
(c)  Upon payment of a sum as determined by the city commission to the public safety department, it shall assign a number to each bicycle so registered and shall issue and deliver to the owner thereof a registration card, which card shall contain the number assigned and the words "Bicycle Registration Certificate, Huntington Woods Department of Public Safety," in such style and arrangement as the public safety director may elect. There shall be issued also to the owner, a numbered license in such style and material as the public safety director may elect. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the bicycle to attach the license in the proper location on the bicycle, as instructed by the public safety department. The license shall remain attached to the bicycle as long as the bicycle is operated by the owner or others authorized by the owner to operate the bicycle. Licenses shall not be covered, obscured, altered or defaced in any manner, and they shall be kept free from dirt or any other substance likely to destroy their legibility. No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate, alter, or counterfeit any license or use any forged or counterfeit license. 
(e)  No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the serial number of any bicycle registered pursuant to this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate or alter any registration card during the time which such card is operative; provided, however, that nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the public safety department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the public safety department, the registration issued to such person, together with the name and address of the person to whom said bicycle was sold or transferred. It shall be the duty of the purchaser, or transferee of the bicycle to apply for a transfer of the registration within seven days of the sale or transfer. The transfer shall be made upon payment of the specified fee. 
(g)  No bicycle shall be registered unless it is in safe operating condition. 
(h)  The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 10.669; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-670, 36-671. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING 

Sec. 36-672. - Stopping or parking on highway. 
(a)  No person shall stop, park, or leave a vehicle standing, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or unpaved part of a limited access highway, or in a moving lane of traffic of any street, except in an emergency or case of mechanical difficulty. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.672; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-673. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-674. - Parking prohibitions generally. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle in any manner prohibited by the state vehicle code except if necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk, across a sidewalk or in any way that impedes a pedestrian's use of the sidewalk as a walkway. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if there is not a crosswalk, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of highways. 
(7)  Within 30 feet of the approach to a flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the highway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by an official sign or marking. 
(9)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to a fire station within 75 feet of the entrance if properly marked by an official sign. 
(10)  Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction, if the stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(11)  On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(12)  Upon a bridge or other elevated highway structure or within a highway tunnel. 
(13)  At a place where an official sign prohibits stopping or parking. 
(14)  Within 500 feet of an accident at which a police officer is in attendance. 
(15)  In front of a theater. 
(16)  In a place or in a manner which blocks immediate egress from an emergency exit conspicuously marked as an emergency exit of a building. 
(17)  In a place or in a manner which blocks or hampers the immediate use of an immediate egress from a fire escape conspicuously marked as a fire escape providing an emergency means of egress from a building. 
(18)  In a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as being reserved for use by disabled persons which is on public property or private property available for public use, unless a person is a disabled person as defined in section 19a of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.19a) or unless the person is parking the vehicle for the benefit of a disabled person. In order for the vehicle to be parked in the parking space the vehicle shall display one of the following: 
a.  A certificate of identification or windshield placard issued by the secretary of state under section 675 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.675) to a disabled person. 
b.  A special registration plate issued by the secretary of state under section 803d of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.803d) to a disabled person. 
c.  A similar certificate of identification or windshield placard issued by another state to a disabled person. 
d.  A similar special registration plate issued by another state to a disabled person. 
e.  A special registration plate to which a tab for persons with disabilities is attached issued under this Act. 
(19)  In a clearly identified access aisle or access lane immediately adjacent to a space designated for parking by persons with disabilities. 
(20)  On a street or other area open to the parking of vehicles that results in the vehicle interfering with the use of a curb cut or ramp by persons with disabilities. 
(21)  Within 500 feet of a fire at which fire apparatus is in attendance. However, volunteer firefighters responding to the fire may park within 500 feet of the fire in a manner not to interfere with fire apparatus at the scene. A vehicle parked legally previous to the fire is exempt from this subsection. 
(22)  In violation of an official sign restricting the period of time for or manner of parking. 
(23)  On a street or highway in such a way as to obstruct the delivery of mail to a rural mailbox by a carrier of the United States Postal Service. 
(24)  In a place or in a manner which blocks the use of an alley. 
(b)  A person shall not move a vehicle not owned by the person into a prohibited area or away from a curb a distance which makes the parking unlawful. 
(c)  A bus, for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers, may be stopped at a place described in subsections (a)(2), (4) or (6) of this section or on the roadway side of a vehicle illegally parked in a legally designated bus loading zone. A bus, for the purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger, may be stopped at a place described in subsection (a) of this section if the place is posted by an appropriate bus stop sign, except that a bus shall not stop at such a place if the stopping is specifically prohibited by the local authority, the state transportation department or the director of the department of state police. 
(d)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.674; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 478, § 1, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 450, § 1, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 543, § 1, 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 36-674a. - Clear vision areas, prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person shall conduct vending or other commercial enterprises on any street except as licensed or permitted by applicable authority and no person, whether licensed or not, shall conduct vending or other commercial enterprises in a clear vision area. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.674a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-675a. - Curb parking generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a highway or off-street parking facility where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb; except that where there is no right-hand curb, every vehicle stopped or parked upon such highway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand edge of the roadway. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675b. - One-way street parking. 
(a)  Vehicles may park with the left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of properly signed one-way streets or off-street parking facilities. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675c. - Angle parking. 
(a)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb, or edge or the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675c; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675d. - Compliance with markings. 
(a)  Whenever parallel or angle spaces are marked upon any street, alley or off-street parking facility for the parking of vehicles, the operator or driver of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle except within such markings. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675d; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675e. - Prohibitions for certain purposes. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or highway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, polishing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Displaying advertising; 
(4)  Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place, or when so authorized or licensed under chapter 8; 
(5)  Storage for more than 48 continuous hours; provided that when any vehicle shall have been parked for more than 48 continuous hours, it shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle, and impounded as provided in sections 36-852 and 36-853. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675e; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675f. - Parking in alley. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle in a public alley, except when authorized by a current traffic control order, nor shall any person stop or stand a vehicle in a public alley except while actually in the process of loading or unloading such vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675f; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675g. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a public safety officer, in violation of any legally established parking restriction or prohibition; provided that signs stating such restrictions or prohibitions are duly posted in accordance with this article, except that a driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in such restricted or prohibited parking zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with traffic. 
(b)  A person shall not park a vehicle upon a street between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except: 
(1)  When necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, 
(2)  In compliance with the law or the directions of a public safety officer, or 
(3)  Residents who obtain an annual permit to park on a public street between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. For purposes of determining whether the department of public safety will issue a permit, the resident must meet the following criteria: 
a.  A two-car garage counts as one parking space and a one-car garage counts as one parking space. 
b.  The number of registered vehicles must exceed the parking capacity on the resident's property. 
c.  Parking capacity will be determined by public safety measuring the length and width of the driveway between the garage door and the property line. A parking space is defined as an area that is eight feet in width and 20 feet in length. For corner lots, driveways less than 18 feet in length will not count as a parking space. 
d.  All vehicles must be registered to the address of the resident requesting the permit. 
e.  Vehicle registration must be presented at the time of application. 
f.  The parking permit shall be displayed in the lower left corner of the rear window of the vehicle. 
g.  There shall be only one parking permit issued for a residence. 
h.  The fee for the parking permit shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675g; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 12-17-2002; Ord. No. 526, § 1, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 583, § 1, 7-19-2016; Ord. No. 587, § 1, 10-10-2016) 
Sec. 36-675h. - Parking on private property or on public property. 
(a)  No person shall leave a vehicle unattended on private property owned by another person without the express or implied consent of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property. 
(b)  No person shall leave a vehicle unattended off the street on public property without the express or implied consent of the duly constituted public authority. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a misdemeanor, and any such vehicle may be removed to the city vehicle pound by any public safety officer. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675h; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675i. - Commercial vehicle parking. 
(a)  No person shall park any commercial vehicle on any public street, highway, alley or other public right-of-way in the city for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, goods or merchandise. 
(b)  A person shall not park a commercial vehicle on residentially zoned property except in a driveway and to the rear of the front line of the residence, except while actually in the process of loading or unloading such vehicle. 
(c)  A person shall not park a commercial vehicle which weighs more than 6,000 pounds on any residentially zoned property, except that "recreational equipment" as defined in section 40-311 may be parked pursuant to the provisions of section 40-311. 
(d)  In the event a provision enacted by this section would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or undue hardship upon the owner of a commercial vehicle, the owner may submit an application for a variance from the provisions of this section to the zoning board of appeals which is empowered to grant such a variance pursuant to section 40-52. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" shall include any motor vehicle which: 
(1)  Displays any form of commercial advertising other than the make and model of the vehicle which exceeds six square feet in total area; 
(2)  Has more than two axles; 
(3)  Exceeds a three-quarter ton load carrying capacity; or 
(4)  By virtue of any equipment such as ladders, roof tarring equipment, grass cutting equipment, snow plows, or otherwise attached to the vehicle or exposed within any exterior bed of the vehicle, appears to be for use in carrying on a trade or business. 
(f)  Traffic control orders may be issued to modify or further regulate the parking of commercial vehicles in the city; provided that signs stating such modifications and regulations are duly posted in accordance with this Code. 
(g)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675i; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 473, § 2, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 36-675j. - Curb loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle other than a commercially licensed vehicle in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect except as permitted in section 36-675g. No person shall stop, stand or park any commercially licensed vehicle in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, goods or merchandise. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675j; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675k. - Stopping and standing of buses, taxicabs. 
(a)  The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand, or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping, standing or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while engaged in the expeditious unloading or loading of passengers. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675k; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675l. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except as permitted in section 36-675g. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675l; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675m. - Traffic control regulations within parking areas; signs and devices to conform to state manual; violation of order. 
(a)  Upon the request, or with the consent, of the owner or person in charge of the general operation and control of any parking area, as defined herein, traffic control orders regulating the operation of vehicles within the parking area and/or the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in the parking area, as may be necessary for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of the parking area, may be adopted as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "parking area" means an area used by the public as a means of access to and egress from, and for the free parking of motor vehicles by patrons of a shopping center, business, factory, hospital, institution, or similar building or location. 
(c)  Signs or other traffic control devices required to give notice of traffic control orders issued pursuant to this section shall be duly erected, and shall conform to the requirements of the state manual of uniform traffic control devices. 
(d)  A person who violates a traffic control order established pursuant to this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675m; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-675n. - Parking on streets during snow and ice conditions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the director of services, or, in the director's absence, the duly designated and acting representative. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(b)  The parking restrictions of this section may be invoked as follows: 
(1)  Whenever the finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the director shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all city streets by declaring it in a manner prescribed in this section. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, a parking prohibition shall automatically go into effect on any street on which there has been an accumulation of snow and ice of four inches or more for any one hour or more. 
(3)  Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the director in accordance with this section, except that any street area which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of a city street to which it applies. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law. 
(c)  Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this section, on any city street on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway. No person shall abandon or leave the person's vehicle in the roadway regardless of whether such person indicates, by raising the hood or otherwise, that the vehicle is stalled, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and return without delay. 
(d)  The director shall cause each declaration made by the director pursuant to this section to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts and/or telecasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the city, and the director may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall generally describe the action taken by the director, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. The director shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and date when any declaration is announced to the public in accordance with this section. 
(e)  Whenever the director shall find that some or all of the conditions which give rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to this section no longer exist, the director may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, in any manner prescribed by subsection (b)(3) of this section, effective immediately upon announcement. 
(f)  Any provision of this section which becomes effective by declaration of the director or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. 
(g)  Members of the public safety department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a street to a place of safety or to a location designated by the public safety department, or otherwise maintained by this city, when the vehicle is parked in violation of any parking ordinance or provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with snow removal operations. This section shall be supplemental to any other provisions of law granting members of the public safety department authority to remove vehicles. 
(h)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed responsible for a civil infraction for which a civil fine may be ordered. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1988, § 10.675n; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 17. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 

Sec. 36-676. - Motor vehicle left unattended; brakes to be set and motor stopped. 
(a)  A person shall not allow a motor vehicle to stand on a street unattended without engaging the parking brake or placing the vehicle in park and stopping the motor of the vehicle. If the vehicle is standing upon a grade, the front wheels of the vehicle shall be turned to the curb or side of the street. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.676; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 487, § 1, 11-18-2003) 
Sec. 36-676a. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-676b. - Obstruction of traffic; obstruction of intersection. 
(a)  No person, without authority, shall block, obstruct, impede, or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public street or highway, by means of a barricade, object or device, or with the person. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street or in an off-street parking facility in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available insufficient width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication or other right to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the drivers vehicle without obstructing or blocking the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians. 
(d)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.676b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-676c. - Starting from parked position. 
(a)  A vehicle starting from a parked position shall give moving vehicles the right-of-way and the operator of such vehicle shall give a timely and visible warning signal before so starting. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.676c; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-676d. - Limitation on backing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.676d; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-676e. - Vehicles driven on sidewalk. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway, unless he shall first obtain the written permission of the director of public safety or the city engineer. 
(Code 1988, § 10.676e; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-676f. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 10.676f; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-676g. - Improper riding. 
(a)  No person shall ride in, on, or operate any motor vehicle unless such person's body is within that portion of the vehicle designated for the carrying of passengers or merchandise, or as otherwise permitted by this chapter; provided, however, that this section does not apply to any person whose employment makes it necessary to ride otherwise. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.676g; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-677. - Obstruction to driver's view or control. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control of the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle with a window so damaged or with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, side or rear windows of such vehicle, as to obstruct the driver's view, other than a certificate or other paper required to be so displayed by law. 
(c)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any ornament or other object before the front windshield, side wings, side or rear windows of such vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct or be likely to obstruct the driver's view. 
(d)  No person shall ride in a vehicle so as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.677; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-677a. - Removal or deposit of snow, ice, or slush resulting in obstruction of vision; deposit on roadway, prohibition. 
(a)  A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice, or slush onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other than off-road vehicles. 
(b)  A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice, or slush onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  The term "person" shall not include the state or a political subdivision of the state or an employee of the state or a political subdivision of the state operating within the scope of such person's duties. 
(2)  The term "safety vision" means an unobstructed line of sight enabling a driver to travel upon, enter, or exit a roadway in a safe manner. 
(d)  A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice, or slush on any roadway or highway. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.677a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-678. - Coasting prohibited. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the gears of the vehicle in neutral. 
(b)  The driver of a commercial motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.678; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-678a. - Parades. 
    No procession or parade containing 100 or more persons or ten or more vehicles, excepting funeral processions, the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state and the forces of the public safety department, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 10.678a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-678b. - Manner of driving in processions. 
(a)  Each driver in a funeral or other authorized processions shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.678b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-679. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle other than a vehicle on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park the vehicle within 500 feet where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.679; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-679a. - Traffic not permitted on limited access highway. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a motorcycle with less than a 125 cubic centimeter engine, moped, farm tractor, or other self-propelled farm implement, nor shall a pedestrian, bicycle, except as provided in this section, or other nonmotorized traffic be permitted on a limited access highway. Bicycles shall be permitted on paths constructed separately from the roadway and designated for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.679a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-679b. - Leaking or spilling. 
(a)  A vehicle, except a commercial vehicle carrying logs or tubular products, shall not be driven or moved on a street or highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing off, or otherwise escaping therefrom. The tailgate, faucets and taps shall be securely closed to prevent spillage during transportation, whether loaded or empty, and the body of the vehicle shall not have any holes or cracks through which material can escape. Any highway maintenance vehicle engaged in either ice or snow removal shall be exempt from this section. 
(b)  Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage is not necessary to prove a violation of this section. 
(c)  A commercial vehicle carrying a load, other than logs or tubular products, which is not completely enclosed shall either: 
(1)  Be loaded so that no part of the load making contact with any sideboard or side panel or rear part of the enclosure shall be within six inches of the top of the part of the enclosure contacted, unless the load is covered with firmly secured canvas or similar type covering. 
(2)  Have the load securely fastened to the body or the frame of the vehicle with binders of adequate number and of adequate breaking strength to prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load. 
(d)  A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle or causes it to be loaded or unloaded, with knowledge that it is to be driven on a public street or highway, in a manner as to cause a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be prima facie liable for a violation of this section. 
(e)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle carrying logs or tubular products on a highway unless the following conditions are complied with: 
(1)  If the logs or tubular products are loaded crosswise or at right angles to the side of the vehicle, the logs or tubular products shall be securely fastened to the body or frame of the vehicle with not less than two binders which are secured to the frame at each end of the load and pass over the load so that the frame and binders completely encircle the load. 
(2)  If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle, obliquely or parallel to the sides, the logs or tubular products shall be securely fastened to the body or frame of the vehicle with not less than two toggle binders which are secured to the frame at each end of the load and one wrapping binder which completely encircles the load. 
(3)  The toggle and wrapping binders shall be made of steel chain or a combination of steel chain and wire rope, which shall not be less than three-eighths of an inch in diameter and have a breaking strength of not less than 12,000 pounds. 
(f)  Subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to a motor vehicle transporting items of a load which because of their weight will not fall off the moving vehicle and which have their centers of gravity located at least six inches below the top of the enclosure. 
(Code 1988, § 10.679b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-679c. - Splashing. 
(a)  No person shall recklessly, willfully, wantonly, or carelessly operate any vehicle in such a manner as to splash snow, rain, water, mud, dirt or debris on any person then upon a sidewalk or crosswalk. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.679c; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-680. - Driving over fire hose. 
(a)  A vehicle shall not be driven over an unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on a street or private driveway to be used at a fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.680; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-681. - Stopping for passengers generally. 
    The driver of a school bus, when using the alternately flashing overhead red lights, shall not stop the bus on any highway or roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils under the following conditions: 
(1)  If the lawful speed limit is more than 35 miles per hour and the stopped bus is not clearly and continuously visible to approaching vehicles on that highway or roadway for at least 400 feet. When the distance from the stopped bus to the end of the highway or roadway is less than 400 feet, clear and continuous visibility must be available from the bus to the end of the highway or roadway. 
(2)  If the lawful speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less and the stopped bus is not clearly and continuously visible to approaching vehicles on that highway or roadway for at least 200 feet. When the distance from the stopped bus to the end of the highway or roadway is less than 200 feet, clear and continuous visibility must be available from the bus to the end of the highway or roadway. 
(3)  Within 50 feet of an intersection if the intersection is controlled by a traffic stop and go signal. 
(Code 1988, § 10.681; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-682. - Overtaking or meeting stopped bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting a school bus, which has stopped and is displaying two alternately flashing red lights located at the same level shall bring the vehicle to a full stop not less than 20 feet from the school bus and shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the visual signals are no longer actuated. The driver of the school bus, before resuming motion, shall deactivate the vehicle's flashing lights and permit stopped traffic to proceed and shall, when resuming motion, proceed in a manner which will allow congested traffic to disperse by keeping the bus as near to the right side of the road as can be done with safety. At an intersection where traffic is controlled by an officer or a traffic stop-and-go signal, a vehicle need not be brought to a full stop before passing a school bus, but may proceed past the school bus at a speed not greater than is reasonable and proper but not greater than ten miles per hour and with due caution for the safety of the passengers being received or discharged from the school bus. The driver of a vehicle who fails to stop for a school bus as required by this subsection, or who passes a school bus in violation of this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway which has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing sections so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, need not stop upon meeting a school bus which has stopped across the dividing space, barrier, or section. 
(c)  In a proceeding for a violation of subsection (a) of this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was in violation of subsection (a) of this section, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation was, at the time of the violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(d)  In addition to the civil fine and costs provided for a civil infraction under section 36-907, the judge, district court referee, or district court magistrate may order a person who violates this section to perform up to, but not exceeding 100 hours of community service at a school. 
(Code 1988, § 10.682; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
DIVISION 18. - EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 36-682a. - Flame or smoke emitting device on motor vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall install, sell, distribute, or use a device for the purpose of causing flame or smoke to be emitted from a motor vehicle, except highway maintenance vehicles. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.682a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-682b. - Riding in open bed of pickup trucks; age limitations; violations. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, an operator shall not permit a person less than 18 years of age to ride in the open bed of a pickup truck on a highway, road, or street in a city, village, or township at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to the operator of any of the following: 
(1)  A motor vehicle operated as part of a parade pursuant to a permit issued by the governmental unit with jurisdiction over the highway or street. 
(2)  A military motor vehicle. 
(3)  An authorized emergency vehicle. 
(4)  A motor vehicle controlled or operated by an employer or an employee of a farm operation, construction business, or similar enterprise during the course of work activities. 
(5)  A motor vehicle used to transport a search and rescue team to and from the site of an emergency. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.682b) 
Sec. 36-683. - Driving unsafe or improperly equipped vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle which is not equipped as required by the Michigan Vehicle Code or allow the operation of a vehicle owned by such person when it is not so equipped, nor shall any person fail to use or maintain such equipment as required by the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(b)  Any public safety officer is hereby authorized, on reasonable grounds shown, to stop any motor vehicle, and to inspect the same, and if any defects in equipment are found, to issue citations for violation of any requirement of this Code. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.683; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-684. - Lights. 
(a)  Every vehicle upon a street within this city shall be equipped with lights which shall be lighted in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.684; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-684a. - Oscillating lights. 
    The use or possession of flashing, oscillating, or rotating red, blue, or amber lights is prohibited, except as provided by state law. 
(Code 1988, § 10.684a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-685. - Headlamps; number, height; auxiliary or spot lamps. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, a motor vehicle shall be equipped with at least two headlamps with at least one headlamp on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, in compliance with this division. An implement of husbandry manufactured on or after January 1, 2007, shall comply with section 36-684a. 
(b)  A motorcycle or moped shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlamps that comply with this division. 
(c)  A motorcycle or moped headlamp may be wired or equipped to allow either its upper beam or its lower beam, but not both, to modulate from a higher intensity to a lower intensity. A headlamp modulator installed on a motorcycle or moped with two headlamps shall be wired in a manner to prevent the headlamps from modulating at different rates or not in synchronization with each other. A headlamp modulator installed on a motorcycle or moped shall meet the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.108. 
(d)  Every headlamp upon a motor vehicle shall be located at a height measured from the center of the headlamp of not more than 54 inches nor less than 24 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands. 
(e)  When a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as required in this section is also equipped with auxiliary lamps or a spot lamp or any other lamp on the front of the motor vehicle projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a total of four of those lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at a time when upon a highway. 
(f)  A motor vehicle licensed as a historic vehicle is exempt from the requirements of this section if the vehicle as originally equipped failed to meet these requirements. An historic vehicle shall not be operated in violation of section 36-684. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.685) 
Sec. 36-686. - Rear lamps; visibility of registration plates. 
(a)  A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or vehicle which is being drawn in a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at least one rear lamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as required by this section, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
(b)  Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be constructed and placed so as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. A tail lamp, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be wired so as to be lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. 
(c)  A motor vehicle licensed as an historic vehicle is exempt from the requirements of this section if the vehicle as originally equipped failed to meet these requirements. 
(d)  A pickup camper shall be attached to the motor vehicle in a manner so that the registration plate of the motor vehicle is clearly visible. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.686) 
Secs. 36-687-36-692. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-693. - Lamp or flag on projecting load. 
(a)  Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least five 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.693; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-694-36-695. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-696. - Spotlights. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two spot lamps, and every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the beam will be directed into the eyes of the approaching driver. Spot lamps may not emit other than either a white or amber light. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.696; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-697. - Turn signals. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, when required by the Michigan Vehicle Code, shall be equipped with, and required turn signals shall be given by, a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.697; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-698-36-704. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-705. - Brakes. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles when operated upon a street within this city shall be equipped with brakes of the construction and stopping capabilities required by state law. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.705; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-706. - Horns. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, including a motorcycle or moped, when operated upon a street within this city shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to insure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a street. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.706; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-707. - Mufflers. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, including a motorcycle or moped, shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall remove, destroy or damage any or all of the baffles contained in such muffler, nor shall any person use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle on any street in this city. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.707; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-707a. - Excessive fumes. 
(a)  The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.707a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-707b. - Backfiring devices. 
(a)  No person shall introduce any gasoline, foreign material or obstruction into the muffler or exhaust pipe which causes or is capable of causing exhaust gases to ignite, burn, or flash in any manner or form. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.707b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-708. - View to rear, mirrors. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a street which motor vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the street to the rear by looking backward from the driver's position, unless such vehicle is equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street to the rear of such vehicle. Every commercial vehicle of one-half ton capacity or more, operating upon the street shall be equipped with two mirrors, one on each side, so adjusted that the operator shall have a clear view of the street behind such commercial vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.708; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-708a. - Windshields; goggles. 
    A motor vehicle shall not be operated on the streets or highways unless it is equipped with a windshield of sufficient dimensions to protect the driver and occupants from insects, other airborne objects, and highway surface water and debris, when the motor vehicle is moving forward. A farm tractor, other implement of husbandry, and historic vehicles as defined in section 803a of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.803a) are exempt from this section. When a motorcycle operated on the public highways of this state in excess of 35 miles per hour is not equipped with a windshield, the operator shall wear goggles with transparent lenses or a transparent face shield or eyeglasses, which goggles, eyeglasses, or face shield shall be of shatter resistant material and of sufficient size to protect his eyes against insects, other airborne material, and highway surface water and debris. 
(Code 1988, § 10.708a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-708b. - Television viewable by driver prohibited in motor vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall equip or operate a motor vehicle that is to be used upon any street in this governmental unit with a television viewer, screen, or other means of visually receiving a television or video broadcast which can be viewed by or reflected to the driver. 
(b)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  A radio, heating and air conditioning, or other accessory controls in the motor vehicle. 
(2)  Driver, passenger, and vehicle information and navigation systems displaying information pertaining to vehicle location, available routes and destinations, road layouts, weather conditions, traffic and road conditions, and vehicle conditions. 
(3)  Research vehicles if the test plan for the vehicle has been approved by a process meeting federal guidelines for the protection of human beings and the vehicle has been issued a special registration permit by the secretary of state. 
(4)  A commercial motor vehicle equipped with a video display to monitor the rear view of the vehicle if the monitor is only activated when the vehicle is motionless or in reverse gear and is deactivated within 15 seconds after the motor vehicle's transmission is shifted out of reverse gear. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.708b; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.708b) 
Sec. 36-709. - Windshield. 
(a)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by a driver of a vehicle. 
(b)  Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. 
(c)  No commercial vehicle licensed as such shall be operated on the highways at any time between December 15 and March 15, both dates inclusive, unless it is equipped with a hot air windshield defroster or an electrically heated windshield or such other scientific method that may be devised so long as same is heated and maintained in operable condition at all times. 
(d)  No motor vehicle licensed as such, and manufactured after January 1, 1956, shall be operated on the highways unless it is equipped with a windshield washer maintained in operable condition at all times and capable of cleaning the windshield in such a fashion as to leave the driver with a clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.709; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-710. - Tires. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle operated on the streets, alleys and public ways of this city shall be equipped with tires meeting the requirements of state law. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.710; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-710a-36-710c. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-710d. - Child restraint systems. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, or as otherwise provided by law, a rule promulgated pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969, (MCL 24.201 to 24.328), or federal regulation, each driver transporting a child less than four years of age in a motor vehicle shall properly secure that child in a child restraint system that meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213. 
(b)  This section does not apply to any child being nursed. 
(c)  This section does not apply if the motor vehicle being driven is a bus, school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law or regulations. 
(d)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.710d; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-710e. - Seatbelts. 
(a)  This section does not apply to a driver or passenger of any of the following: 
(1)  A motor vehicle manufactured before January 1, 1965. 
(2)  A bus. 
(3)  A motorcycle. 
(4)  A moped. 
(5)  A motor vehicle if the driver or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician that the driver or passenger is unable to wear a safety belt for physical or medical reasons. 
(6)  A motor vehicle that is not required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law. 
(7)  A commercial or United States Postal Service vehicle that makes frequent stops for the purpose of pickup or delivery of goods or services. 
(8)  A motor vehicle operated by a rural carrier of the United States Postal Service while serving his rural postal route. 
(b)  This section does not apply to a passenger of a school bus. 
(c)  Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a street or highway shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt, except that a child less than four years of age shall be protected as required in section 36-710d. If there are more passengers than safety belts available for use, and all the safety belts in the motor vehicle are being utilized in compliance with this section, the driver of the motor vehicle is in compliance with this section. 
(d)  Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more but less than 16 years of age in a motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. If the motor vehicle is transporting more children than there are safety belts available for use, all safety belts available in the motor vehicle are being utilized in compliance with this section, and the driver and all front seat passengers comply with subsection (c) of this section, then the driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more but less than 16 years of age for which there is not an available safety belt is in compliance with this subsection, if that child is seated in other than the front seat of the motor vehicle. However, if that motor vehicle is a pickup truck without an extended cab or jump seats, and all safety belts in the front seat are being used, the driver may transport such a child in the front seat without a safety belt. 
(e)  If, after December 31, 2005, the Office of Highway Safety Planning certifies that there has been less than 80 percent compliance with the safety belt requirements of this section during the preceding year, then enforcement of this section by state or local law enforcement agencies shall be accomplished only as a secondary action when a driver of a motor vehicle has been detained for a suspected violation of another section of this act. 
(f)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.710e; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-711-36-714. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-714a. - Commercial vehicles; wheel flaps, requirement, exception. 
    A commercial vehicle, except a truck tractor traversing between terminals at a speed of not to exceed 25 miles per hour, and a combination of a commercial vehicle and trailer or semitrailer, when used on a highway, shall be so constructed or equipped, or so operated, as to prevent water or other road surface substances from being thrown from the rear wheels of the vehicle or combination at tangents exceeding 221/2 degrees measured from the road surface. If a flap type device is used, it shall not have attached any type of lamp, breakable reflective material, or reflecting buttons; nor may the device extend beyond the 96-inch maximum width of the vehicle or combination. 
(Code 1988, § 10.714a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-715. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-716. - Size, weight and load. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move or cause or permit any vehicle of a size, configuration, or weight exceeding the limitations stated in the Michigan Vehicle Code or otherwise constructed or loaded in violation of the Michigan Vehicle Code upon any street except as specifically exempted from such limitations by the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.716; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-717-36-720. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-721. - Limitation on trailers. 
(a)  No person shall operate a passenger vehicle or pickup truck drawing or having attached more than one vehicle or trailer, or tow any vehicle or trailer other than as permitted by the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.721; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-722, 36-723. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-724. - Weight restrictions. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate or stop, stand, or park any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified thereon at any time upon any of the streets or highways on which such signs have been posted. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.724; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-725-36-850. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - STOLEN, ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 36-851. - Reports regarding stolen vehicles. 
    Any member of the department of public safety, upon receiving reliable information that any vehicle registered under state law has been stolen, shall immediately report the theft through the law enforcement information network. Upon receiving information that a vehicle previously reported as stolen has been recovered, a member of the department of public safety shall immediately report the fact of the recovery through the law enforcement information network. 
(Code 1988, § 10.851; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-851) 
Sec. 36-852. - Abandoned vehicles generally. 
(a)  A person shall not abandon a vehicle in this state. It is presumed that the last titled owner of the vehicle is responsible for abandoning the vehicle unless the person provides a record of sale as that term is defined in section 240 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.240). A person who violates this subsection and who fails to redeem the vehicle before disposition of the vehicle under this section is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of $50.00. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "abandoned vehicle" means either of the following: 
(1)  A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner. 
(2)  A vehicle that has remained on public property for a period of not less than 48 hours. 
(c)  If a vehicle has remained on public property for the period of time described in subsection (b)(2) of this section so that it qualifies as abandoned, the department of public safety shall determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen and may affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and time the notice was affixed. 
(2)  The name and address of the department of public safety. 
(3)  The name and badge number of the public safety officer affixing the notice. 
(4)  The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and stored at the owner's expense or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed. 
(5)  The year, make and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
(d)  If the vehicle is an abandoned vehicle, the department of public safety may have the vehicle taken into custody. 
(e)  When the department of public safety has taken the vehicle into custody as abandoned, it shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(2)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement information network, and notify the secretary of state through the law enforcement information network that the vehicle has been taken into custody as abandoned. Each notification shall contain the following information: 
a.  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, if available. 
b.  The address or approximate location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
c.  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
d.  The name and address of the police agency that had the vehicle taken into custody. 
e.  The name and address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
f.  The name of the court that has jurisdiction over the case. 
(3)  Within seven days after receiving notice under subsection (e)(2) of this section that the vehicle has been taken into custody, the secretary of state shall send to the last title owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle is considered abandoned. The form of the notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  The year, make and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
b.  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
c.  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
d.  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. 
e.  The business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
f.  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
g.  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees. 
h.  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the 45B district court which requests a hearing on the action by the department of public safety. 
i.  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale. 
(4)  Enter the information described in subsection (e)(3) of this section on a website maintained by the department for public use in locating vehicles that are removed under this section as abandoned. The department shall maintain the data on the website for one year or until the vehicle is disposed of under this act, whichever occurs first. 
(f)  The owner may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. The request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the district court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.252e, 257.252f). An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to $40.00 plus the accrued towing and storage fees with the court. If the owner fails to pay the accrued towing and storage fees, the towing and storage bond posted with the court to obtain release of the vehicle shall be used to pay the towing and storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain a release of a vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 to the court and the accrued towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees. 
(g)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 and the accrued towing and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian of the vehicle shall forward $25.00 of the fee to the secretary of state within 30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the secretary of state. 
(h)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a $40.00 fee plus the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian of the vehicle shall forward $25.00 of the fee to the secretary of state. 
(i)  If a vehicle has remained on private property without the consent of the property owner, the owner of the private property may have the vehicle taken into custody as an abandoned vehicle by contacting a local towing agency. 
(j)  Before removing the vehicle from private property, the towing agency shall notify a police agency having jurisdiction over the vehicle that the vehicle is being removed. The police agency shall determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen and have the vehicle entered into the law enforcement information network as an abandoned vehicle. 
(k)  Within 24 hours after taking the abandoned vehicle into custody, the police agency shall notify the secretary of state through the law enforcement information network that the vehicle has been taken into custody as abandoned. Each notification shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
(2)  The address or approximate location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(3)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(4)  The name and address of the police agency that had the vehicle taken into custody. 
(5)  The name and business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
(6)  The name of the court that has jurisdiction over the case. 
(l)  Within seven days after being notified under subsection (k) of this section, the secretary of state shall do both of the following: 
(1)  Send to the owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle is considered abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following information: 
a.  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
b.  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
c.  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
d.  The name of the towing agency that had the vehicle taken into custody. 
e.  The business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
f.  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
g.  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle is considered abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees. 
h.  A form petition that the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court that requests a hearing on the custodian's action. 
i.  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale. 
(2)  Enter the information described in subsection (l)(1) of this section on a website maintained by the department for public use in locating vehicles that are removed under this section as abandoned. 
(m)  The owner may contest the fact that the vehicle is abandoned or, unless the towing fees and daily storage fees are established by contract with the local governmental unit or local law enforcement agency and comply with section 252i of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.252i), the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted under section 252f of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.252f). An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting with the court a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to $40.00 plus the accrued towing and storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 to the court plus the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. 
(n)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 plus the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward $25.00 of the fee collected under this subsection to the secretary of state within 30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the secretary of state. 
(o)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 and the accrued towing and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward $25.00 of the fee collected under this subsection to the secretary of state within 30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the secretary of state. 
(p)  Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (f) of this section or, if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice, the department of public safety if the abandoned vehicle is found on public property, or the custodian of the vehicle if the vehicle is found on private property, shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale under section 36-856. 
(Code 1988, § 10.852; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-852) 
Sec. 36-853. - Sale of abandoned vehicles. 
    If the ownership of or the existence of a security interest in a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under this division cannot be determined either because of the condition of the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the secretary of state does not reveal ownership or the existence of a secured party, the department may sell the vehicle at a public sale pursuant to section 36-856 not less than 30 days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
(Code 1988, § 10.853; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-853) 
Sec. 36-854. - Abandoned scrap vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Registered abandoned scrap vehicle means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Is on public or private property. 
(2)  Is seven or more years old. 
(3)  Is apparently inoperable, or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by section 683 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.683) would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle. 
(4)  Is currently registered in the state or displays current year registration plates from another state. 
    Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Is on public or private property. 
(2)  Is seven or more years old. 
(3)  Is apparently inoperable, or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by section 683 of the state vehicle code would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle. 
(4)  Is not currently registered in this state and does not display current year registration plates from another state. 
(b)  Authority to place unregistered vehicle into custody. The department of public safety or, if the vehicle is on private property, the property owner may have an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the department shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(2)  Take two photographs of the vehicle. 
(3)  Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information: 
a.  The year, make and vehicle identification number if available. 
b.  The date of abandonment. 
c.  The location of abandonment. 
d.  A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment. 
e.  The reporting officer's name and title. 
f.  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(4)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(c)  Release of vehicle; issuance of certificate of title or scrapping. Within 24 hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays, after taking the vehicle into custody, the department of public safety shall complete a release form and release the vehicle to the towing service or a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who shall then transmit that release form to the secretary of state and apply for a certificate of the title or a certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the release form and application, the secretary of state shall issue a certificate of title or a certificate of scrapping. 
(d)  Release certification of department of public safety compliance. The release form described in subsection (c) of this section shall be furnished by the secretary of state and shall include a certification executed by the department of public safety when the abandoned scrap vehicle is released. The certification shall state that the department of public safety has complied with all the requirements of subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section. 
(e)  Maintenance of records. The secretary of state shall retain the records relating to an abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than two years. The two photographs taken pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be retained by the department of public safety for not less than two years. After the certificate of scrapping has been issued, a certificate of title for the vehicle shall not be issued again. 
(f)  Authority to place registered vehicle into custody. The department of public safety or, if the vehicle is on private property, the property owner may have a registered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the department of public safety or the towing service shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Determine if the vehicle has been stolen. 
(2)  Take two photographs of the vehicle. 
(3)  Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as a registered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information: 
a.  The year, make and vehicle identification number if available. 
b.  The date of abandonment. 
c.  The location of abandonment. 
d.  A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment. 
e.  The reporting individual's name and title. 
f.  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(4)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(g)  Abandoned vehicle notice. Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, the secretary of state shall send to the last titled owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle is considered abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The year, make and vehicle identification number if available. 
(2)  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(3)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(4)  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. If the vehicle was towed from private property, the notice shall contain the name and address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
(5)  The business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
(6)  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
(7)  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle is abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees. 
(8)  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the 45B district court which requests a hearing on the action by the department of public safety. 
(9)  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle. 
(10)  The name of the court that has jurisdiction of the case. 
(h)  Contesting abandonment status or towing and storage fees; hearing; posting bond. The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap vehicle may contest the fact that the vehicle is abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the district court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.252e, 257.252f). An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond equal to the $40.00 plus the accrued towing and storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying $40.00 plus the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. 
(i)  Payment and collection of fee and charges to redeem vehicle by customer. If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 plus the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward $25.00 of the fee collected under this subsection to the secretary of state within 30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the secretary of state. 
(j)  Payment and collection of fee and charges to redeem vehicle by secured party. If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying a fee of $40.00 plus the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. The custodian shall forward $25.00 of the fee collected under this subsection to the secretary of state within 30 days after receipt in a manner prescribed by the secretary of state. 
(k)  Procedures to be followed less than 20 days after hearing or notification. Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (h) of this section or, if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice described in subsection (g) of this section, the police agency shall follow the procedures established in subsections (c) through (e) of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 10.862; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-854) 
Sec. 36-855. - Removal of vehicles from public or private property. 
(a)  The department of public safety may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from public or private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the registered owner of the vehicle under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the vehicle is in such a condition that the continued operation of the vehicle upon the streets or highways would constitute an immediate hazard to the public. 
(2)  If the vehicle is parked or standing upon a street or highway in such a manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic. 
(3)  If a vehicle is parked in a posted towaway zone. 
(4)  If there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any part of the vehicle is stolen. 
(5)  If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence of a crime, or if there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the commission of a crime. 
(6)  If removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or manmade disaster or other emergency. 
(7)  If the vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which impedes the movement of another vehicle. 
(8)  If the vehicle is stopped, standing or parked in a space designated as parking for persons with disabilities and is not permitted by law to be stopped, standing, or parked in a space designated as parking for persons with disabilities. 
(9)  If the vehicle is located in a clearly identified access aisle or access lane immediately adjacent to a space designated as parking for persons with disabilities. 
(10)  If the vehicle is interfering with the use of a ramp or a curb cut by persons with disabilities. 
(b)  If the owner or other person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle arrives at the location where a vehicle is located before the actual towing or removal of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the tow truck, and the owner or other person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle may take possession of the vehicle and remove it without interference upon the payment of the reasonable service fee, for which a receipt shall be provided. 
(c)  A police agency that authorizes the removal of a vehicle under subsection (a) of this section shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(2)  Follow the procedures set forth in section 36-852. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-855) 
Sec. 36-856. - Conduct of public sales. 
(a)  A public sale for a vehicle held under the provisions of this division shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  It shall be under the control of the department of public safety or the custodian of the vehicle. 
(2)  It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction bidding or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the person submitting the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the department of public safety, or the custodian of the vehicle. 
(3)  Except as provided by sections 36-853 and 36-854(g), it shall be held not less than five days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
(4)  The public notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle was abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the vehicle for sale and shall state the time, date and location of the sale. 
(b)  The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be applied in the following order of priority: 
(1)  Towing and storage charges. 
(2)  Expenses incurred by the department of public safety or the custodian of the vehicle. 
(3)  Payment of the $40.00 abandoned vehicle fee described in MCL 257.252f(3)(a). 
(4)  Any extra money shall be sent to the department of treasury's unclaimed property division to be disbursed as follows: 
(i)  To the secured party, if any, in the amount of the debt outstanding on the vehicle. 
(ii)  Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall be made to mail the remainder to the last titled owner. If delivery of the remainder cannot be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the department of public safety or the custodian of the vehicle may do one of the following: 
(1)  Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm or the custodian of the vehicle to satisfy charges against the vehicle. However, if the value of the vehicle does not satisfy the towing fees and accrued daily storage fees, the custodian of the vehicle may collect the balance of those unpaid fees from the last titled owner, subject to section 252i of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.252i). 
(2)  Obtain title to the vehicle for the department of public safety or the city by doing the following: 
a.  Paying the towing and storage charges. 
b.  Applying for title to the vehicle. 
(3)  Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (a). 
(d)  A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under subsection (a) or (c) of this section, which vehicle has been designated as a distressed vehicle, shall make application for a salvage certificate of title within 15 days after obtaining the vehicle. 
(e)  Upon disposition of the vehicle, the department of public safety shall provide the secretary of state with the vehicle's disposition and the name of the agency that disposed of it and shall cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-856) 
Sec. 36-857. - Towing of vehicle on private property without consent of owner or person in lawful possession-Notice. 
    Except as otherwise provided in section 36-858, an owner or lessor of private real property shall post a notice that meets all of the following requirements before authorizing the towing or removal of a vehicle from the real property without the consent of the owner or other person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle: 
(1)  The notice shall be prominently displayed at a point of entry for vehicular access to the real property. If the real property lacks curbs or access barriers, not less than one notice shall be posted for each 100 feet of road frontage. 
(2)  The notice clearly indicates in letters not less than two inches high on a contrasting background that unauthorized vehicles will be towed away at the owner's expense. 
(3)  The notice provides the name and telephone number of the towing service responsible for towing or removing vehicles from that property. 
(4)  The notice is permanently installed with the bottom of the notice located not less than four feet from the ground and is continuously maintained on the property for not less than 24 hours before a vehicle is towed or removed. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-857) 
Sec. 36-858. - Same-Exemption of notice requirements. 
    Section 36-857 does not apply to either of the following: 
(1)  Real property that is appurtenant to and obviously part of a single-family or dual-family residence. 
(2)  An instance when notice is personally given to the owner or other legally entitled person in control of a vehicle that the area where the vehicle is parked is reserved or otherwise unavailable to unauthorized vehicles and that the vehicle is subject to towing or removal from the private real property without the consent of the owner or other legally entitled person in control of the vehicle. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 36-858) 
Secs. 36-859-36-860. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-861. - Abandonment in garage. 
    Any vehicle left in a garage for more than ten days, where the same has not been left by the registered owner under a contract of service, storage or repair, shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle, and shall be reported by the garagekeeper to the department of public safety. Any garagekeeper who fails to report the possession of such a vehicle at the end of ten days, or who fails to report the possession of such a vehicle, within ten days of the date he learns that it was not left by the registered owner, shall forfeit all claims for servicing, storage or repair of the vehicle. All abandoned vehicles left in garages shall be turned over to the department of public safety to be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 10.861; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-862-36-900. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 36-901. - Violation a misdemeanor unless declared a civil infraction. 
    A violation of any section of this article which is not a civil infraction shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine and/or incarceration for a period not in excess of such amounts or periods as prescribed by the Michigan Vehicle Code for punishment of offenses which substantially correspond to such section, provided that no fine shall exceed $500.00 and no period of incarceration shall exceed 90 days unless authorized by law. 
(Code 1988, § 10.901; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-901a. - Failure to have driver's license in possession when driving; waiver of fine. 
    If a person has received a citation for a violation of section 36-311, the court shall waive any fine and costs, upon receipt of certification by a law enforcement agency that the person, before the appearance date on the citation, has produced his operator's or chauffeur's license and that the license was valid on the date the violation of section 36-311 occurred. 
(Code 1988, § 10.901a; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-902, 36-903. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-904. - Penalty for driving without license; exception. 
(a)  A person whose operator's or chauffeur's license or registration certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in section 212 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.212) of that suspension or revocation, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles within this state. 
(b)  A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles within this state by a person whose license or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, except as permitted under this section 
(c)  A person who violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(d)  If a person has a second or subsequent suspension or revocation under this section within seven years as indicated on the person's state driving record, the court may proceed with vehicle immobilization as provided in section 904d of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.904d). 
(e)  This section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle solely for the purpose of protecting human life or property, if the life or property is endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential. 
(f)  A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in section 212 of the Michigan Vehicle Code of that suspension or revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group designation has been denied as provided in this section, or who has never applied for a vehicle group designation and who operates a commercial motor vehicle within this state, except as permitted under this division, while any of those conditions exist, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable, except as otherwise provided in this section, by imprisonment for not less than three days or more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 10.904; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-904a-36-904d. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-904e. - Violation of vehicle immobilization order. 
(a)  A defendant who is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle by vehicle immobilization shall not purchase, lease, or otherwise obtain a motor vehicle during the immobilization period. 
(b)  A person shall not remove, tamper with, or bypass or attempt to remove, tamper with, or bypass a device that he knows or has reason to know has been installed on a vehicle by court order for vehicle immobilization or operate or attempt to operate a vehicle that he knows or has reason to know has been ordered immobilized. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 10.904e; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-905, 36-906. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-907. - Civil infraction penalty. 
(a)  A person who is determined to be responsible or responsible with explanation for a civil infraction under this article may be required to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00. 
(b)  If a person is determined to be responsible or responsible with explanation for a civil infraction under this article while driving a commercial motor vehicle, such person shall be ordered to pay costs as provided in section 907 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.907) and a civil fine of not more than $250.00. 
(Code 1988, § 10.907; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 36-908, 36-909. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-910. - Reimbursement of expenses for emergency response and prosecution. 
(a)  As part of the sentence for a conviction of section 36-625(a), (c), (d) section 36-625m or section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7) or section 625m of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7), 257.625m), in addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the court may order the person convicted to reimburse the local unit of government for expenses incurred in relation to that incident, including, but not limited to, expenses for an emergency response and expenses for prosecuting the person. 
(b)  The expenses for which reimbursement may be ordered include all of the following: 
(1)  The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law enforcement personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which the conviction arose, arresting the person convicted, processing the person after the arrest, preparing reports on the incident, investigating the incident, and collecting and analyzing evidence, including, but not limited to, determining bodily alcohol content and determining the presence of and identifying controlled substances in the blood, breath, or urine. 
(2)  The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including overtime pay, of fire department and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, for time spent in responding to and providing firefighting, rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose. 
(3)  The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by fire department and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, in providing services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose. 
(4)  The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including, but not limited to, overtime pay of prosecution personnel for time spent investigating and prosecuting the crime or crimes resulting in conviction. 
(5)  The cost of extraditing a person from another state to this state including, but not limited to, all of the following: 
a.  Transportation costs. 
b.  The salaries or wages of law enforcement and prosecution personnel, including overtime pay, for processing the extradition and returning the person to this state. 
(c)  The amount ordered to be paid under this section shall be paid to the clerk of the court, who shall transmit the appropriate amount to the unit or units of government named in the order to receive reimbursement. If not otherwise provided by the court under this subsection, the reimbursement ordered under this section shall be made immediately. However, the court may require that the person make the reimbursement ordered under this section within a specified period or in specified installments. 
(d)  An order for reimbursement under this section may be enforced by the city to receive the reimbursement in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action. Failure to pay the bill within the specified period ordered by the court shall render such matter in default. The city may then commence suit against the person liable to recover the expense of the emergency response, protection and costs incurred in the collection process. 
(Code 1988, § 10.910; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000; Amd. of 6-11-2008, § 10.910) 
Secs. 36-911-36-941. - Reserved. 
Sec. 36-942. - Regulation of motor vehicles on streets and in parking areas. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of this article shall apply to all streets within the jurisdiction of this governmental unit and any parking area as defined in Public Act No. 235 of 1969 (MCL 257.941 et seq.), where the owner or person in charge of the general operation and control of the parking area so requests in a writing filed with the clerk of this governmental unit and concurred in by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 10.942; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
Sec. 36-943. - Regulation of motor vehicles on school property. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of this article shall apply to the property of any board of education, school district, or community college district if such board of education, school district, or community college district has by duly adopted resolution of such entity requested the adoption of such provision and a copy of such resolution has been filed with the clerk of this governmental unit and concurred in by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 10.943; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 8-15-2000) 
State Law reference- Regulation of motor vehicles on school grounds, MCL 257.961. 
Chapter 37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. 7, § 24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY WATER UTILITY 

Sec. 38-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Water connection means that part of the city water distribution system connecting the water main with the premises served. 
    Water main means that part of the city water distribution system located within easement lines or streets designed to supply more than one water connection. 
(Code 1988, § 2.20) 
Sec. 38-20. - Service connections. 
    Application for water connections shall be made to the department on forms prescribed and furnished by it. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in accordance with rules and regulations of the department and upon payment of the required connection fee and meter installation fee. All meters and water connections shall be the property of the city. Connection fees and meter installation charges shall not be less than the cost of materials, installation and overhead attributable to such installations. The city manager, with the approval of the city commission shall, from time to time, fix an amount for a meter installation charge, according to the size of meter. The installation of water connections shall be made in accordance with city specifications. 
(Code 1988, § 2.21) 
Sec. 38-21. - Turning on water service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the department, shall turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing the person's work when it must be immediately turned off or upon receiving a written order from the department; provided, that upon written permit from the department, water may be turned on for construction purposes only, prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the premises, and upon payment of the charges applicable thereto, which shall include the connection fee, meter installation fee and deposit. 
(Code 1988, § 2.22) 
Sec. 38-22. - Water meters. 
    All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise provided in this Code. No person except a department employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter. 
(Code 1988, § 2.23) 
Sec. 38-23. - Meter location. 
    Meters shall be set in an accessible location and in a manner satisfactory to the superintendent. Where the premises contain no basement or cellar, the meter shall be installed outside in a meter pit, the location of which shall be approved by the superintendent. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit, such pit shall be built at the expense of the owner as directed by the superintendent. 
(Code 1988, § 2.24) 
Sec. 38-24. - Access to meters. 
    The department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the department shall at all reasonable hours, have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing, or inspecting same and no person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of such employee's duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such water meter. 
(Code 1988, § 2.25) 
Sec. 38-25. - Reimbursement for damage. 
    Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent, or tenant or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water, or steam backing from a boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city on presentation of a bill therefor, and shall be collected as specified in article IV of this chapter for the collection of service charges. 
(Code 1988, § 2.26) 
Sec. 38-26. - Meter failure. 
    If any meter shall fail to register properly, the department shall estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly. 
(Code 1988, § 2.27) 
Sec. 38-27. - Inaccurate meters. 
    A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge as established by the city commission shall be made. If the meter is found defective, it shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made. 
(Code 1988, § 2.28) 
Sec. 38-28. - Accuracy required. 
    A meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested it registers not to exceed five percent more or five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of five percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered fast to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered slow to that extent. 
(Code 1988, § 2.29) 
Sec. 38-29. - Bill adjustment. 
    If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been determined to register fast, the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent fast multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by said consumer, within three months prior to the test, and if a meter so tested is determined to register slow, the department may collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent slow multiplied by the amount of all the bills incurred by the consumer for the prior three months. When the department, on its own initiative makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than the consumer paying the amount due the city for water used by the consumer as above provided, if the meter is found to be slow. 
(Code 1988, § 2.30) 
Sec. 38-30. - Hydrant use. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of the employee's duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant except in case of an emergency, without first securing a written permit from the department and paying such charges as may be prescribed. 
(Code 1988, § 2.31) 
Sec. 38-31. - Water use emergencies. 
(a)  The city manager, upon recommendation by the director of public works and/or the south county water authority, may declare a water use emergency, and order a reduction in water use, when either of the following conditions arises: 
(1)  Where a prolonged drought or other period of system wide heavy demand results in supply facilities, including system pump stations and reservoirs, being operated at or near their maximum capacity with no apparent means immediately available to adequately maintain flows and residual pressures throughout the system; or 
(2)  An emergency condition arises which has or will negatively affect operating flows and residual pressures in any substantial portion of the system for any appreciable length of time. In determining whether to declare a water use emergency, and the degree of water use reduction to order, the city manager may rely on information provided by the south county water authority, the City of Detroit Water Department and/or the state department of public health. 
(b)  Upon declaration of a water use reduction emergency, the city manager shall determine the degree of water rationing which is required, and may impose any limitations on water use which the city manager determines is necessary, including limitations applicable only in specified geographic areas. 
(c)  The determination of a water use emergency by the city manager and the degree of water rationing which is required and ordered, shall be submitted to the city commission at the next available opportunity. The city commission may continue, extend, reduce or eliminate water use restrictions as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)  Upon declaration of a water use emergency and imposition of water use restrictions, the city will announce such declaration by such use of cable television, public radio, broadcast television and newspapers with normal operating range covering the community as is determined appropriate and necessary. 
(e)  Water use restrictions ordered pursuant to the ordinance from which this section is derived shall remain in effect 24 hours per day, seven days per week until the city manager or the city commission has declared an end to the water use emergency or determines that a more limited restriction will be sufficient to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. The city manager may provide exceptions to water use restrictions where determined necessary to prevent imminent financial loss to a water user. 
(f)  No person whose premises are supplied with water by the city shall use any water in violation of any provision of this section or of any water use reduction required by action of the city manager or the city commission pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1988, § 2.32; Ord. No. 375, § 1, 11-1-1994) 
Sec. 38-32. - Additional rules. 
    The city manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning the water distribution system, connections thereto, meter installations and maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants and water mains and the appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent herewith. Such rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the city commission. The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until changed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1988, § 2.33) 
Sec. 38-33. - Injury to facilities. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of the duties of such employee, shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1988, § 2.34) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 38-34. - Cross connections. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the state department of environmental quality being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the state administrative code. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspection to be made of all properties served by public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(c)  Representatives of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of the property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)  The department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger or noncompliance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water system supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
(f)  This section does not supersede the state plumbing code or other provisions of this Code relating to plumbing. 
(g)  Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, or any written order of the city manager, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 2.35) 
Secs. 38-35-38-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-57. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building's sewer. The latter begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain that connects the building in which the sanitary sewage originates to the public sewer or other place of disposal and conveys the sewage of but one building. 
    Control manhole means a suitable manhole, together with such necessary meters, including where appropriate, adequate power source, and other appurtenances, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastewater to be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the county's engineering personnel. 
    County means the County of Oakland, State of Michigan, or its authorized representative, the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. 
    County agency means the Oakland County Drain Commissioner or the Oakland County Department of public services. 
    Days means, for purposes of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this article, as consecutive calendar days. 
    Debt service charge means charges levied to customers of the wastewater system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. The debt service charge is separate and distinct and may be in addition to the user charge specified in this section. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge or treated or untreated wastewater directly into the waters of the state. 
    Dwelling means any structure designed for yearround habitation including, but not limited to, houses, mobile homes, apartment buildings, condominiums and townhouses. 
    Footing drain means a pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits groundwater. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. It is composed of putrescible organic matter and its natural moisture content. 
    General specifications means the current edition of standard material and construction requirements of the county. 
    Groundwater means subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from which wells and springs are fed. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Infiltration means any waters entering the system from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. The term "infiltration" does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
    Infiltration/inflow means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow. 
    Inflow means any waters entering the system through such sources as, but not limited to, building downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas, and storm drain cross connections. 
    Lateral line means that portion of the sewer system located under the street or within the street right-of-way from the property line to the trunk line or interceptor and which collects sewage from a particular property for transfer to the trunk line or interceptor. 
    Local means a prefix denoting jurisdiction by the city. 
    Manager means the chief administrative officer of the city, or the authorized representatives or agents of such chief administrative officer. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Obstruction means any object of whatever nature which substantially impedes the flow of sewage from the point of origination to the trunk line or interceptor. This shall include, but not be limited to, objects, sewage tree roots, rocks and debris of any type. 
    Operation and maintenance (O&M) means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Owner means the owners of record of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagor or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person in control of a building. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district or any other legal representative, agent or assigns, or any combination thereof. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    Private means a prefix denoting jurisdiction by a nongovernmental entity. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public means a prefix denoting jurisdiction by any governmental subdivision or agency. 
    Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Replacement means the replacement in whole or in part of any equipment, appurtenances and accessories in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Separate means a prefix denoting a wastewater transmission facility or sewer which is intended to transport sanitary wastewater only. 
    Service area means any area whose wastewater is received by the city or the county for the transmission for treatment by the City of Detroit DWSD. 
    Sewage or wastewater means spent water which may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions, or other land uses, including drainage water and groundwater inadvertently present in said waste. 
    Sewage treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. See the following definitions modifying sewer: 
(1)  Building sewer means in plumbing, the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. Also called house connection. 
(2)  Combined sewer means a sewer intending to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface or drainage water. 
(3)  Common sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights. 
(4)  County sewer means a public sewer controlled by the county agency. 
(5)  Intercepting sewer means a sewer that received dry-weather flow from a number of transverse sewers of outlets in frequently additional predetermined quantities of stormwater (if from a combined system) and conducts such waters to a point for treatment of disposal. 
(6)  Lateral sewer means a sewer which is designed to receive a building sewer. 
(7)  Municipal sewer means a public sewer exclusive of a county sewer or City of Detroit sewer. 
(8)  Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
(9)  Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried waste from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters, and surface waters and drainage water which are not admitted intentionally. 
(10)  Storm sewer means a sewer that carries stormwater and surface water, street wash and other wash water, or drainage, but excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastewater. A storm sewer is also called a storm drain. 
(11)  Trunk sewer or trunk line means a sewer which connects the lateral sewer to the intercepting sewer and to which building sewers may be connected. 
    Sewer service charge means the sum of the applicable user charge, surcharges and debt service charges. 
    Stormwater means the water running off from the surface of a drainage area during and immediately after a period of rain. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the city department of public services or the sperintendent's duly authorized representative or agent. 
    Surcharge means an additional charge which may be imposed to cover the cost of treatment of excess strength wastewater discharged by any customer. 
    Surface water means: 
(1)  All water on the surface as distinguished from groundwater or subterranean water. 
(2)  Water appearing on the surface in a diffused state, with no permanent source of supply or regular course for any considerable time, as distinguished from water appearing in watercourses, lakes or ponds. 
    Total equivalent master metered water consumption means the equivalent to the total amount of potable water used by a municipality as recorded by a master water meter for sewered premises, and shall include, but not be limited to, fire protection water, gardening and lawn water. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the publicly-owned treatment works. Wastewater may also contain infiltration and inflow waters and cooling water. 
    Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial waste, and dispose of the effluent. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means and refers to all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public and private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 2.61; Ord. No. 351, § 2, 11-21-1989; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-58. - Waste deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1988, § 2.62) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 38-59. - Water pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any unsanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.63) 
State Law reference- Water resources protection, MCL 324.3101 et seq. 
Sec. 38-60. - Privies and septic tanks. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.64) 
Sec. 38-61. - Sewer connection required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreational, or other purpose, situated within the city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations supplementary hereto. 
(Code 1988, § 2.65) 
Sec. 38-62. - Sewer connections. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(Code 1988, § 2.66) 
Sec. 38-63. - Prohibited connections. 
(a)  No downspouts, footing drains, weep tile, sump pumps, or other conduit that carries stormwater or groundwater shall be connected to any storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or combined sewer. Structures existing prior to the date of the ordinance codified in this section shall not be required to remove existing connections that were in compliance with applicable Codes at the time of construction, but are strongly encouraged to make such disconnections in the future based upon the negative impact on the city's sewer system. 
(b)  A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 2.81; Ord. No. 396, § 1, 3-18-1997; Ord. No. 435, § 1, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 580, § 1, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 38-64. - Permit fee. 
    All connections with the sanitary or combined sewers of the city shall be made only on written authorization and permits issued by the city on such forms and on payments of such fees as shall be established from time to time by the city commission. 
(Code 1988, § 2.67) 
Sec. 38-65. - Installation costs. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of said property. The owner shall indemnify the city from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1988, § 2.68) 
Sec. 38-66. - Old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.69) 
Sec. 38-67. - Installation of building sewer. 
    All building sewer construction and the installation of pipes, fittings and appurtenances shall be done in accordance with the building regulations of the city and such supplementary rules and regulations as the director may prescribe, which shall be effective upon approval by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 2.70) 
Sec. 38-68. - Supervision of connection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the immediate supervision of the director. 
(Code 1988, § 2.71) 
Sec. 38-69. - Street openings. 
    Street openings shall be subject to the requirements of chapter 32. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.72) 
Sec. 38-70. - Prohibited uses. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinder, sand, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 10.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 2.73) 
Sec. 38-71. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Code 1988, § 2.74) 
Sec. 38-72. - Interceptor maintenance. 
    When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 2.75) 
Sec. 38-73. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be accessible at all times to the director, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 2.76) 
Sec. 38-74. - Measurements and tests. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in section 38-70 shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," as published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 38-73, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1988, § 2.77) 
Sec. 38-75. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. 
(Code 1988, § 2.78) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 38-76. - Inspectors. 
    The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.79) 
Secs. 38-77-38-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-96. - Delegation of authority. 
    The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state approved Control Authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this division on behalf of the city. The city has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated authority consistent with this division, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and federal law. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-1; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-97. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is the protection of the environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the city and enabling the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq., and the General Pretreatment Regulations, being 40 CFR 403. 
(b)  The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and 
(4)  To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system. 
(c)  This division provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit and the city wastewater collection and treatment systems through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-2; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-98. - Authority. 
    By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the city by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1251 et seq.; the 1963 Constitution of the State of Michigan; Part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.); the city Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al , the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, Case No. 77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the board of water commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this division shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-3; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-99. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a corporation, who is either: 
a.  The president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. 
    Available cyanide means the quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion (CN); hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq); and the cyano-complexes of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a standard method or approved under 40 CFR 136. 
    Best management practice (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts, initiated and implemented by a user, which can or does lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control, and may include technical and economic considerations. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of dissolved oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods. 
    Board means the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility means any facility that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker truck, trailer/roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment including: 
(1)  A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off-site; and 
(2)  A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site. 
    Compatible industrial wastewater means wastewater that is produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater. 
    Compatible pollutant means pollutants which can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream. 
    Composite sample means a collection of individual samples which are obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. (See 40 CFR 403, appendix E.) 
    Confidential information means information which would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
    Control authority means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has been officially designated as such by the state under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12. 
    Cooling water means the noncontact water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the exchange of heat. 
    Days mean consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this division. 
    Department means the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and authorized employees of the department. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Director means the director of the Detroit Department of Water and Sewerage, or the director's designee. 
    Discharger means a person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW. 
    Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or administrator or EPA administrator means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA. 
    Facility means a location which contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable. 
    Fats, oils or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods. 
    Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream. 
    Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under 33 USC 1317(b), (c) or (d). 
    Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable, but excludes single-family and multifamily residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
    Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder or more stringent State or local regulations: section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 USC 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 USC 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered; or 
(2)  Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or 
(3)  Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or operator has: begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 
b.  Significant site reparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
c.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section. 
    Pass through means discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns. 
    pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standards means all national categorical pretreatment standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 CFR 403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 CFR 403.5(b), and the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c), including the discharge prohibitions specified in section 38-100. 
    Public sewer means a sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 33 USC 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33 USC 1362, including: 
(1)  Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature; 
(2)  Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or 
(3)  The municipality, as defined in 33 USC 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
    Quantification level means the measurement of the concentration of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant. 
    Representative sample means any sample of wastewater, which accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled. Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
    Sanitary wastewater means the portion of wastewater that is not attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site noncommercial consumption. 
    Significant industrial users means any user of the POTW who: 
(1)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling water. 
(2)  Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards. 
(3)  Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations of this division. 
(4)  Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 USC 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this division as determined by the department. 
(5)  Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff. 
(6)  Is found by the City of Detroit or the city to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW. 
    Significant noncompliance means any violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six month period exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the department determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public. 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority. 
(5)  Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date. 
(6)  Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due date. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the department determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug means any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
    Standard methods means methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR 136 shall be followed. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids (total) means the total suspended matter which floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods. 
    Total PCB means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being treated as zero. 
    Total phenolic compounds means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1317, or included in the critical materials register promulgated by the state department of environmental quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or regulations. 
    Trade secret means the whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes, but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit Wastewater Treatment Plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this division or with national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    User means any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein. 
    Wastewater or wastestream means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including filtration and inflow waters, stormwater, and cooling water. 
    Wastewater discharge permits means permits issued by the department in accordance with section 38-102. 
    Waters of the state means groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes. 
(b)  For purposes of this division, the following acronyms shall have the meanings designated by this subsection: 
(1)  BMR-Baseline monitoring report. 
(2)  BOD-Biochemical oxygen demand. 
(3)  CFR-Code of Federal Regulations. 
(4)  EPA-Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)  FOG-Fats, oil or grease. 
(6)  L-liter. 
(7)  Mg-milligrams. 
(8)  Mg/l-milligrams per liter. 
(9)  NPDES-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(10)  POTW-Publicly owned treatment works. 
(11)  RCRA-Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
(12)  SIC-Standard industrial classification. 
(13)  SWDA-Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
(14)  TSS-Total suspended solids. 
(15)  USC-United States Code. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-4; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 38-100. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140° Fahrenheit or 60° Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities, which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshlings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than 11.5 units; 
(4)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals; 
(5)  Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; 
(6)  Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 USC 1345, with any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al , Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit; 
(8)  Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater being discharged; 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 150° Fahrenheit or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104° Fahrenheit (40° Celsius); 
(10)  Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations; 
(12)  Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or 
(13)  Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to cause interference with the POTW. 
(b)  Specific pollutant prohibitions. 
(1)  No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following limitations: 
a.  Compatible pollutants: See appendix C, section 38-111. 
b.  Noncompatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of mg/l: 
1.  Arsenic (As)-1.0. 
2.  Chromium (Cr)-25. 
3.  Copper (Cu)-2.5 
4.  Cyanide (Available)-1.0. 
5.  Lead (Pb)-1.0. 
6.  Nickel (Ni)-5.0. 
7.  Zinc (Zn)-7.3. 
8.  Total Phenolic Compounds-1.0, or see section 38-110. 
(2)  All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
(3)  The limitation for total PCB is nondetect. Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 mg/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this subsection, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with section 38-107(d). 
(c)  Limitations for mercury. The limitation for mercury (Hg) is nondetect. 
(1)  Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 mg/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with section 38-107(d). 
(2)  All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
(3)  Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the department shall notify all existing industrial users operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance report within 180 days after of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's compliance or noncompliance with these limitations, and in the event of noncompliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the department for a second extension as part of an administrative consent order. The department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this provision. 
(d)  National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall comply with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 CFR 405-471, "Effluent Guidelines and Standards," which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements; provided, however, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or this chapter, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403 and as established by the department. The national categorical pretreatment standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived are delineated in appendix A. 
(1)  Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's permit. 
(2)  Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the state department of environmental quality, whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40 CFR 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitations of such pollutants in the NPDES permit are neither being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. Where such authorization is given to the department, any industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the department, consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7 and of this division. Any credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 CFR 403.7, or as determined by the department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section. 
(3)  New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and start-up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(4)  Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with sections 40 CFR 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 CFR 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 USC 1317(d) and of this division. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(5)  Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under section 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the department a report containing the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to the director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 CFR 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the department a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-5). In such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4) and (5). 
(e)  Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the city, the City of Detroit or by the state. 
(f)  Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the requirements of this section including, but not limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the department for unloading such waste in accordance with the board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in section 38-107. The department may establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this section. 
(g)  Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued, by the department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the department to require further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the department before discharging such wastewater. The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures contained in section 38-102, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions contained in section 38-102 regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the department may include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the information mandated in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the department. An industrial user that provides centralized waste treatment services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof: 
(1)  The general nature, source and processes generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards as delineated in section 38-109, appendix A, shall be so designated. 
(2)  The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the wastewater. 
(3)  At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application is made in subsection (g)(1) of this section. 
(4)  A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or collected by the facility's treatment processes. 
(5)  The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the State, or by any other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the department. 
(6)  Other information requested by the department including, but not limited to, information required by section 38-102(c)(1) through (18), or by rules adopted by the board. 
(h)  Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited. The department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its enactment. If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from the department, the department may authorize the discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in section 38-102, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the board. 
(i)  City's right of revision. The city and the City of Detroit reserve the right to establish additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW through rules or regulations adopted by the board. Ninety days after adoption by the board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(j)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this section, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. New significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging. For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a concentration of five percent or greater in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW. The industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory. 
(2)  At least once every two years, the department shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within 30 days of notification by the department. 
(k)  Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this section or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state or city laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its control center and notify the department of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or property. 
(l)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial users bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees whom to contact in the department in the event of an actual or excessive or prohibited discharge. 
(m)  Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the provisions of this section, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the department's POTW, or causes the department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the department shall notify the user of its determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's NPDES permit and the department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this section. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this section, or this Code, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity. 
(n)  Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into the city collection system, shall notify the department in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261. Such notification must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(o)  Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined in section 38-99(a), may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in the definitions of "authorized representative," as defined in section 38-99(a) where: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in the definition of "authorized representative," as defined in section 38-99(a); 
(2)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(3)  The written authorization is submitted to the department. 
(p)  Pollution prevention. The department shall encourage and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels required by this division. The department may require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-5; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 507, § 2, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 38-101. - Fees. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(b)  The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the department's industrial waste control and pretreatment programs; 
(2)  User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; 
(3)  Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(4)  Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-6; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-102. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of section 38-100. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the department through a permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of the effective date of this section. Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all information specified in subsection (c) of this section and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). 
(2)  All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of a discharge. The application must include all information specified in subsection (c) of this section and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMP requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW. 
(3)  Any user who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW shall request approval from the department for the discharges at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the discharge. 
(b)  Permit application or reapplication. The department may require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the same to the department for determining whether the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with the department's request in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Failure of the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this section. 
(1)  A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, unless an earlier date is specified or required by 40 CFR 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in subsections (c) and (g) of this section. 
(2)  A separate permit application shall be required for each separate facility. 
(3)  Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the department. 
(c)  Application or reapplication information. In support of an application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Corporate or individual name, any assumed names, federal employer identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility; 
(2)  Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and legally; 
(3)  All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(4)  Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in section 38-100(a) and (b), those pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one year period shall be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process wastestream. Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined wastestream formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC 1314(g) and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator; 
(5)  A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to subsection (c)(4) of this section, identify which pollutants are associated with each process; 
(6)  Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4) of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4) of this section. Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity; 
(7)  A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the week; 
(8)  Denote the following: 
a.  The average and maximum 24 hour wastewater flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations. 
b.  Each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and stormwater flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW. 
c.  Each combined wastestream. 
(9)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream and which connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined wastestream. This schematic shall be cross referenced to the information furnished in subsection (c)(8) of this section; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements only; 
(11)  A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this section and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional; 
(12)  Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of section 38-100(j); 
(13)  Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process; 
(14)  A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process type; 
(15)  If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source; 
(16)  If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this section and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance procedures; 
(17)  Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and 
(18)  Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing regarding any of the following: 
(1)  The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit; 
(2)  The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant industrial user but is found by the department to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall make such determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6); 
(3)  The application is incomplete or the information only partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12 or by the department, and that additional information and data are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is unacceptable; 
(4)  The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its determination and the basis of the determination. The department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to the department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this section. If the department determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. An industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in section 38-108, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the department of any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one facility location shall be included in each permit. 
(e)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this section, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or the city without repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in section 38-100, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards; 
(2)  Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(3)  Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user; 
(4)  Restrictions on which of the user's discharge wastestreams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW; 
(5)  Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules; 
(6)  Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges; 
(7)  Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application; 
(8)  Additional reporting requirements: 
a.  All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by the department, or on an alternative form approved by the department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this section. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six month intervals on a schedule to be established by the department. Analytical data generated by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit. 
b.  Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the requirements of subsections (e)(8)d and e of this section. The report shall show the concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with subsection (e)(9) and (11) of this section. 
c.  Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by the department. A compliance report shall be submitted to the department no later than 90 days following the final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later than 90 days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six month intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the department and incorporated into the industrial users discharge permit and in accordance with subsection (e)(8)d and e of this section. The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the department or on an alternate form approved by the department, and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by national categorical pretreatment standards, or which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with subsection (e)(9) and (11) of this section. The report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined wastestream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the department, provided there have been no changes to the elements composing the combined wastestream. 
d.  Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for significant industrial users subject to production based standards, shall be cross referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required to determine compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 CFR 403, or by the department, but no less than is necessary to assess and ensure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the department using the procedures as prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in such report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. 
e.  This report, and those required under section 38-100(d)(5) and subsection (e)(8)b and c of this section, shall include the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations." Said certification shall be signed by the facility's authorized representative. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative definition must be submitted to the department prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
f.  If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the user shall notify the department within 24 hours of the time said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the department within 30 days after said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. 
(9)  In the event the director determines that an industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this section, the department shall provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit; 
(10)  Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and 
(11)  Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(f)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period. Except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise provided for under this section, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more than five years and not less than one year. The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final. 
(g)  Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the department during the term of the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in section 38-100 are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent. It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change; 
(2)  Change in the department's NPDES permit; 
(3)  Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court order; 
(4)  Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as control authority; 
(5)  An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing permit; 
(6)  A change of conditions within the POTW; 
(7)  A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the industrial user; 
(8)  Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 CFR 403 and those delineated in appendix A of this chapter. Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the department for a modified permit within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the department may initiate this action; 
(9)  Changes in the monitoring location; 
(10)  Typographical errors or omissions in permits; 
(11)  The department may modify the permit on its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or 
(12)  The user may request a modification of the permit. When initiated by the department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in section 38-108, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance. 
(h)  Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to notify the department of any such change at least 30 days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place, the department may require the application for a new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the department allows to be retained. 
(i)  Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-7; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-103. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the department and the industrial user, and to enable the department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this section. In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the department, said facility shall be provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the department. The industrial user shall provide the department with: 
(1)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the POTW; 
(2)  A flow schematic showing: 
a.  Which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream; 
b.  Which connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water; and 
c.  Which lines handle each combined wastestream. This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the department may install such structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the department for any costs incurred therein. 
(b)  The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user, the department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the department's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-8; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-104. - Inspection, sampling and recordkeeping. 
(a)  For purposes of administering and enforcing this division, any other applicable provisions of this division or applicable state or federal laws and regulations, the department may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The department's employees or authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities. 
(b)  Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the industrial user's premises, the department shall inform the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. The department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity. 
(c)  While performing work on private property, employees or authorized representatives of the department shall observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the department shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this section which shall be maintained by the department as confidential in accordance with section 38-105. 
(d)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from the department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(e)  Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The department may require such samples to be split with the department for the department's independent analysis. 
(f)  Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from monitoring activities required by this section, or by 40 CFR 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste Program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA. 
(g)  Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the department at all reasonable times, and allow the department to copy such records. 
(h)  In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user, the department employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be controlling unless proven invalid. 
(i)  In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is obtained by the department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in section 38-100(b), or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the department within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the limitation in the future. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-9; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-105. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. When submitted to the department, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked "confidential." When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this section, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the State Disposal System permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be nonconfidential by the governmental agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the department releases pursuant to a request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information released to the governmental agency. The department will use sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim. The department shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the department shall be made in writing. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(b)  Except as otherwise determined by the department or provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the user's authorized representative during normal business hours. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-10; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-106. - Statutes, laws and regulations. 
    The national categorical pretreatment standards as defined in 40 CFR 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this section to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or organization of government other than the city shall be construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-11; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-107. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be a violation of this section for any user to: 
(1)  Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge; 
(2)  Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time frames provided in section 38-102(g)(1); 
(3)  Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection; provided, that upon request reasonable, access to the facility is promptly provided to the department; 
(5)  Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers; 
(6)  Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit; 
(7)  Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of this section including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this section, and such permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this section until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance schedules. 
(b)  Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with national categorical pretreatment standards where the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section are met. 
(1)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
1.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; and 
(3)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this section upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(c)  Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Notice of an anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the department at least ten days in advance. 
(2)  Notice of an unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(3)  Bypass prohibited; enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user properly notified the department as described in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in subsection (c)(3) of this section, the department may approve an anticipated bypass. 
(d)  Pollution prevention initiatives. Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined in section 38-100(b) during a six month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum nondetect ordinance limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP as part of its response. The department may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as part of an enforcement response. Upon approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP, shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and certifications in support of its or implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement. 
(e)  Emergency suspensions and orders. The department may order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the department, such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the department provides informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the director shall notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the department shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or the director's designated representative, within ten days of such action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the department within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service. 
(f)  Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened discharge as specified in subsection (d) of this section, whenever the department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this section, the department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the department from escalating its enforcement response. 
(g)  Administrative actions. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any prohibition of this section, the department, except in the case of an emergency or flagrant violation, may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as possible. 
(1)  Conferences. The department may order any person, who violates this section, to attend a conference wherein the department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this section. Nothing contained herein shall require the department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (g)(2) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the department's duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this section and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder. 
a.  Compliance schedules. The user and the department may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement, or an administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection (g)(1)a shall adhere to the following conditions: 
1.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, and completing construction; 
2.  No single increment referred to in subsection (g)(1)a of this section shall exceed nine months; 
3.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reasons for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and 
4.  Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this section. 
b.  Administrative orders. The department may order any industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this section or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order. 
(2)  Show cause hearing. The department may order any industrial user, who violates this section or allows such violation to occur, to show cause before the department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the reason why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before the department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative. 
a.  Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the board. A hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may: 
1.  In the name of the board, issue notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; and 
2.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
b.  Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter. 
(3)  Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing any of the following actions: 
a.  Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this section, or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation. 
b.  Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time period. 
c.  Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a specified time period. 
d.  Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date. 
e.  Control of discharge quantities. 
f.  Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the department during compliance efforts. 
g.  Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that, following a specified time period, sewer or wastewater treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed. 
h.  A finding that the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this section or of a duly issued permit did not occur. 
(4)  Public notification of significant noncompliance. The department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit and the city a list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy. 
(h)  Legal actions. 
(1)  Criminal action. Any user who violates any provision of this section including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this section or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required under this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The department, consistent with the terms and conditions of the delegation agreement entered into with the city, is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this section. 
(2)  Civil action. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any requirement of this section, the director may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The department or board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit does not constitute an exclusive election of remedies and does not prohibit the department, director, board, City of Detroit or the city from commencing action in Federal Court for discharges believed to be in violation of this section, State and Federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit and/or the city may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this section, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(3)  Fines costs etc., paid to the city. All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and the city where applicable. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-12; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 507, § 3, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 38-108. - Reconsideration and appeal. 
    Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its construction, application and enforcement of this section. The procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this section. 
(1)  Selection of reconsideration or of appeal. 
a.  Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the department by the director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this section. 
b.  An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by a permit issued as final by the department, or by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration. 
c.  Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this section, a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative, and received at the department's general offices within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement of the reasons, and the factual basis underlying the request. 
d.  A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to reconsideration or appeal may be deemed waived. 
(2)  Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the applicant of the time and place for a hearing. 
a.  A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings officer who is designated by the director and may be an employee of the department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection (3) of this section. 
b.  Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may reject a request for reconsideration. The department shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected. 
c.  Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time. 
d.  The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the state rules of evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the department or from the court reporter. 
e.  Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer shall issue a final decision which shall contain a recommendation to the director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the requester by certified mail. 
f.  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration. 
(3)  Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for an appeal, the department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set by the board until rules are promulgated pursuant to section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition: 
a.  Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the department's action, determination or decision regarding the request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this section. 
b.  Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected. 
c.  The department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the department. 
d.  The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be submitted to the board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
e.  In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department may appeal any final decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
f.  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the appeal. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80-13; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-109. - Appendix A-Industrial point source categories. 
Aluminum forming 40 CFR 467 Asbestos manufacturing 40 CFR 427 Battery manufacturing 40 CFR 461 Builder's paper and board mills 40 CFR 431 Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables 40 CFR 407 Canned and preserved seafood processing 40 CFR 408 Carbon black manufacturing 40 CFR 458 Cement manufacturing 40 CFR 411 Coal mining 40 CFR 434 Coil coating 40 CFR 465 Copper forming 40 CFR 468 Dairy products processing 40 CFR 405 Electrical and electronic components I and II 40 CFR 469 Electroplating 40 CFR 413 Explosives manufacturing 40 CFR 457 Feed lots 40 CFR 412 Ferroalloy manufacturing 40 CFR 424 Fertilizer manufacturing 40 CFR 418 Glass manufacturing 40 CFR 426 Grain mills 40 CFR 406 Gum and wood chemicals manufacturing 40 CFR 454 Hospital 40 CFR 460 Ink formulating 40 CFR 447 Inorganic chemicals manufacture I and II 40 CFR 415 Iron and steel 40 CFR 420 Leather tanning and finishing 40 CFR 425 Meat products 40 CFR 432 Metal finishing 40 CFR 433 Metal molding and casting 40 CFR 464 Mineral mining and processing 40 CFR 436 Nonferrous metals forming 40 CFR 471 Nonferrous metals manufacturing I 40 CFR 421 Nonferrous metals manufacturing II 40 CFR 421 Ore mining and dressing 40 CFR 440 Organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers 40 CFR 414 Paint formulating 40 CFR 446 Paving and roofing materials 40 CFR 443 Pesticide chemicals 40 CFR 455 Petroleum refining 40 CFR 419 Pharmaceutical 40 CFR 439 Phosphate manufacturing 40 CFR 422 Photographic 40 CFR 459 Plastics molding and forming 40 CFR 463 Porcelain enameling 40 CFR 466 Pulp, paper, and paperboard 40 CFR 430 
and 431 Rubber manufacturing 40 CFR 428 Soap and detergent manufacturing 40 CFR 417 Steam electric 40 CFR 423 Sugar processing 40 CFR 409 Textile mills 40 CFR 410 Timber products 40 CFR 429  
(Code 1988, app. A; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 38-110. - Appendix B-Specific phenolic limitations; substitution and application. 
(a)  An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols limitation specified in section 38-100(b), to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the total phenols limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the total phenols limitation, upon election: 
2-Chlorophenol 2.0 mg/l 4-Chlorophenol 2.0 mg/l 4-Chloro-3-methylphenol 1.0 mg/l 2, 4-Dichlorophenol 5.5 mg/l 2, 4-Dinitrophenol 2.0 mg/l 4-Methylphenol 5.0 mg/l 4-Nitrophenol 15.0 mg/l Phenol 14.0 mg/l  
(b)  Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 4, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 38-111. - Appendix C-Interim discharge limitations. 
    No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants: 
a.  Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour period. 
b.  Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
c.  Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
d.  Any phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
e.  Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over an operating period representative of a user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
(2)  Noncompatible pollutants: cadmium (Cd), 1.0 mg/l. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 5, 7-18-2006) 
Secs. 38-112-38-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 38-136. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water distribution system of the city, or the sewage disposal system of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.81) 
Sec. 38-137. - Basis of charges. 
    All water service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed as determined by the meter installed in the premises of water or sewage disposal service customers by the department. All sewage disposal service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed, and where furnished to any premises not having a meter, the water consumption shall be estimated. No free water service or sewage disposal service shall be furnished to any person. 
(Code 1988, § 2.82) 
Sec. 38-138. - Water rates. 
    Water rates shall be established so as to be adequate to meet costs of the water supply system. The rates to be charged for water service in effect in the city on the date of the adoption of this Code, shall remain in effect until changed by resolution of the city commission. Such rates may be revised by resolution of the city commission from time to time and when so changed, shall be posted in two or more conspicuous places in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.83) 
Sec. 38-139. - Sewer rates. 
    The rates to be charged for sewage disposal service shall remain in effect until changed by resolution of the city commission. Such rates may be revised by resolution of the city commission from time to time and when so changed shall be posted in two or more conspicuous places in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.84) 
Sec. 38-140. - Service to city. 
    The city shall pay the same water and sewer rates for service to it as would be payable by a private customer for the same service. All such charges for service shall be payable quarterly from the current funds of the city, or from the proceeds of taxes. 
(Code 1988, § 2.85) 
Sec. 38-141. - Billing. 
    Charges for all water service and sewage disposal service shall be billed and collected monthly or quarterly by the city treasurer. All water meters shall be read at least every third month and bills rendered on the first of the month following the meter reading, which bills shall be immediately due and payable and may be paid without penalty up to and including the 25th day of the month when rendered, and shall thereafter be subject to a ten percent penalty. The city manager may waive the late payment penalty under demonstrated extenuating circumstances. However, no more than one such waiver shall be allowed in any calendar year per account. 
(Code 1988, § 2.86; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 38-142. - Collection. 
    The city treasurer is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water service to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the customer. The charges for water service and sewage disposal service, which, under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien; and the city treasurer shall, annually, on May 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on the April 30 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months, for placement on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. No such service shall be commenced or continued to any premises until there has been deposited with the city treasurer, a sum sufficient to cover three times the average quarterly bill for such premises as estimated by the superintendent, such deposit to be in no case less than such minimum as may be prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution. Where the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal service charges, the water service shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges have been paid, and there shall be a water turn-on charge in an amount established by resolution of the city commission. Such deposits may be applied against any delinquent water or sewage disposal service charges and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the treasurer or superintendent to turn off the water service and/or sewer service, to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest and such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the same when the customer shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service. 
(Code 1988, § 2.87; Ord. No. 328, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Secs. 38-143-38-167. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY CABINETS 

Sec. 38-168. - Purpose. 
    This article is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and the traveling public by regulating the location, installation and design of utility cabinets on public property and in public rights-of-way. The city's public rights-of-way are used by all residents, visitors and people traveling in and through the community in vehicles and as pedestrians. They are used by every type of utility including water, sewer, electricity, gas and the newer communication services. Because public property and public rights-of-way occupy a finite space, it is imperative that they are properly managed to provide for safe travel, distribution of essential services and maximum efficiency. Furthermore, the beauty of the city is reflected in its well-landscaped parks and tree lined streets whose integrity must be maintained. The following regulations have been found necessary to ensure that utility cabinets: 
(1)  Do not create an obstacle in the right-of-way. 
(2)  Do not block a driver's view of the street or sidewalk. 
(3)  Do not create an attractive nuisance to children. 
(4)  Do not interfere with essential services. 
(5)  Do not detract from the streetscape. 
(6)  Protect property owners' rights to attractive, well-maintained public spaces and rights-of-way, while ensuring that the legitimate needs of utility companies are met. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 5(2.500), 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.500), 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 38-169. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lawn extension means the area between the sidewalk and the street or curb. 
    Right-of-way means the land lying between property lines on either side of a street, alley, or boulevard in the city, including lawn extensions, sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
    Utility means a service carried, transmitted, received or otherwise provided to the public through the use of pipes, cables, wires, lines, conduit or other means. Such services include but are not limited to, water, sewer, electricity, telephone, cable communications, and telecommunications. 
    Utility cabinet means an enclosure, shelter or cover for equipment used in conjunction with a utility. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 5(2.501), 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.501), 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 38-170. - Permit required. 
(a)  A permit is required for the installation of a utility cabinet. Such permit is in addition to the permission required for the utility system itself such as a franchise agreement for a cable communications system or a permit for a telecommunication service. An installation permit for the cabinet shall not be granted until permission for the utility itself has been granted. 
(b)  The permit application shall be submitted to the department of public services along with a plan review fee as established by resolution of the city commission, and complete construction plans, including a boundary survey of all land within 100 feet of the proposed utility cabinet. The survey shall be prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor, and contain the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the surveyor. 
(2)  Date of the drawing, north arrow, and site location map. 
(3)  Scale of the drawing (no less than one inch equals ten feet). 
(4)  Lot lines and right-of-way boundaries including the location of any benchmarks or property corners found or set. 
(5)  Location of the proposed equipment. 
(6)  Location of neighboring houses, garages or other buildings, driveways, sidewalks, fences, trees, telephone poles, fire hydrants, play equipment, etc. 
(7)  Location of all other utilities in the right-of-way. 
(8)  For ground-mounted cabinets, the elevation of the land and the surrounding property, and any proposed change in elevation based on USGS datum. 
(c)  The utility cabinet shall not be installed and preparation work shall not begin until the permit has been issued. All work performed under the permit shall be inspected and a street address shall not be assigned until such work has passed inspection. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 5(2.502), 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.502), 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 38-171. - Notification required. 
    At least 14 days prior to the installation of a utility cabinet, the applicant shall give notice of such installation by first class mail to all property owners within 100 feet of the proposed utility cabinet. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 5(2.503), 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.503), 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 38-172. - Location. 
(a)  Utility cabinets shall only be installed at the locations designated on the utility cabinet location map approved by the city commission and on file with the department of public services. The department of public services shall prepare such map, giving appropriate consideration to the factors listed in section 38-168, and the requirements of this section, and submit it to the city commission with the recommendation of the director. 
(b)  Placement of the utility cabinet shall not be: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(2)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk. 
(3)  Within 30 feet of the approach to a stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the road. 
(4)  In a place or manner which blocks egress from an emergency exit. 
(5)  Within ten feet of the intersection of a sidewalk or street and the edge of a driveway. 
(6)  Within 75 feet of the center of the intersection of two streets. 
(7)  Within six feet of a tree. 
(8)  Within 30 feet of the approach to a bus stop. 
(9)  Above an underground utility if the utility cabinet is ground-mounted 
(10)  Within 850 feet of another utility cabinet. 
(11)  In a right-of-way adjacent to the front lot line of a property. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 5(2.504), 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.504), 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 38-173. - Specifications. 
    Utility cabinets may be installed in public rights-of-way, in public parks or on other public property with the permission of the department of public services and the governmental entity which owns the property. There shall be only one cabinet per location, however collocation in the same cabinet may be permitted. 
(1)  Pole-mounted utility cabinets shall not exceed 30 inches in width, 12 inches in depth and six feet in height, and shall be mounted at least six inches above grade. 
(2)  Groundmounted utility cabinets shall not exceed 80 cubic feet with a maximum height of 63 inches plus an attached meter box not to exceed 22 inches in width, nine inches in depth and the height of the utility cabinet itself, mounted on a concrete pad not to exceed 100 square feet. 
(3)  Underground utility vaults may have a ground-mounted utility cabinet not to exceed 72 cubic feet with a maximum height of two feet plus a meter box not to exceed 22 inches in width, nine inches in depth and 42 inches in height. 
(4)  The color of utility cabinets shall be approved by the department of public services. Utility cabinets shall not display any advertising. 
(5)  Utility cabinets in the public right-of-way shall be mounted with their widest side parallel to the street. 
(6)  Groundmounted utility cabinets in public parks shall be enclosed with a fence at least six feet in height and a locked gate. 
(7)  The utility cabinet shall be landscaped with plant material of sufficient height and density to screen the cabinet where deemed appropriate by the director of public services. Said plant material shall be guaranteed by the owner of the utility cabinet for two years from the date of planting. Plant material damaged or destroyed in the course of working in or near the utility cabinet shall be replaced and guaranteed by the owner of the utility responsible for the damage. 
(8)  All utility cabinets shall clearly display on the front of the cabinet, the owner of the cabinet and the equipment inside, and an emergency telephone number on a plaque or sign no larger than four inches by six inches. 
(9)  The utility cabinet number may be displayed on the cabinet, provided that the numbers are no taller than 21/2 inches. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 5(2.505(1)), 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.505), 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 38-174. - Permit modified or denied. 
    The director of the department of public services reserves right to modify or deny any permit which does not comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter or conform to the locations on the utility cabinet location map approved by the city commission pursuant to section 38-172. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 5(2.505(2)), 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.506), 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 38-175. - Removal. 
    At such time as the equipment in the utility cabinet becomes obsolete or is otherwise no longer used in the operation of the utility, the cabinet, equipment, and all ancillary items on site shall be removed by the permit holder at its sole cost and expense. If the permit holder cannot be located or does not respond to notice from the city to remove the cabinet, the city may determine the cabinet and equipment to be abandoned and remove it. 
(Ord. No. 516, § 1(2.507), 6-19-2007) 
Chapter 39 - RESERVED 
Chapter 40 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 600, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, amended the Huntington Woods Zoning Ordinance in its entirety. Former ch. 40, Zoning, §§ 40-1-40-394, derived from the 1988 Code, as amended through Ord. No. 598. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivative history of the former zoning provisions. 
State Law reference- Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 

Article 1 - Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses 

Section 1.01 - Title 
    This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Huntington Woods Zoning Ordinance," or the "Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-1.02 - Preamble 
    In accordance with the authority and intent of Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), the city desires to promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Huntington Woods; by protecting and conserving the character and the social and economic stability of the residential, commercial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; by preventing overcrowding of land and undue congestion of population; by providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; by facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation and other public needs, and by other means - all in accordance with an adopted Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-1.03 - Purpose 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to implement the development strategies described in the Master Plan, and other development policies adopted by the City Commission. The Master Plan was formulated with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated and adjusted development and redevelopment of the city, which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote efficiency and economy in the process of development. The Zoning Ordinance will provide for the adequate distribution of traffic, safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the healthful and balanced distribution of housing and population, the regulation of the density of population, the promotion of good development design and arrangement, the wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. The Zoning Ordinance is further designed to lessen congestion on public streets to facilitate adequate provisions for public transportation, streets, highways, sewers, water mains, schools, recreation areas and other public facilities, as carefully analyzed and conceived by said Master Plan and development policies. 
Section 40-1.04 - Validity and Severability 
A.  If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this Ordinance to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said ruling. 
B.  If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-1.05 - Scope and Construction of Regulations 
A.  This Ordinance shall be liberally construed in such a manner as to best effectuate its purpose. In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, these provisions are the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. Wherever any provision of this Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by any other law, rule, regulation or permit, then the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. Whenever any provision of this Ordinance imposes less stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by any other law, rule, regulation or permit, then the provisions of the other law, rule, regulation or permit shall control. 
B.  No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be used, erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change in use shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except as permitted by and in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-1.06 - Conflict with Other Laws 
A.  Except as otherwise provided under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (PA 110 of 2006, as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq.) this Ordinance shall be controlling in the case of any inconsistencies between this Ordinance and an Ordinance adopted under any other law. 
B.  This Ordinance is not intended to prevent compliance with any Federal, State, or local law, ordinance, or regulation, provided that where this Ordinance is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail. 
C.  This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other private agreement. However, where any provision of this Ordinance is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the provision of this Ordinance shall govern. 
D.  Nothing within this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition, any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-1.07 - Repeal of Ordinance 
    The City of Huntington Woods Zoning Ordinance, and all amendments thereto, and all prior zoning ordinances of the City of Huntington Woods, are hereby repealed effective coincident with the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 2 - Definitions 

Section 40-2.01 - Rules of Interpretation 
    For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.  The particular shall control the general. 
B.  In the case of any differences of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
C.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, proprietorship, organization, partnership, trust, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity as well as an individual. 
D.  The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
E.  The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
F.  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged to be used" or "arranged to be occupied." 
G.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either.....or," such conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
2.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.  "Either....or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
H.  Terms not defined in this Ordinance shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-2.02 - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    ALLEY: A way for public use, not exceeding 20 feet in width, or any way designated as an alley in a recorded deed, plat or decree of court. 
    ALTERATION: Any change, addition or modification in construction or to a structure or to a type of occupancy, or any change in the structural members of a structure, such as, but not limited to, walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders. Alterations may be referred to in this Ordinance as "altered" or "constructed" or "reconstructed". 
    ANTENNA: An exterior transmission or reception device mounted on a tower, structure, or utility poles and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals or other communication signals. 
    ATTIC: The unfinished space between the ceiling joists of the top story and the roof rafters. 
    BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the beams or joists of the floor above. A basement is not counted as a story. 
    BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES: Structural and non-structural practices and techniques that mitigate the adverse impacts caused by land development or water quality and quantity. 
    BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter or enclosure of persons or chattels. The term "building" also means a platform or base designed to support columns, walls and/or a roof. 
    BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building located on the same lot or attached to the main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building and customarily found in connection therewith. The term "accessory building" includes, but is not limited to, a private attached or detached garage, carport, playhouse, greenhouse, pool cabana, gazebo, shed or storage building. 
    BUILDING LINE: The front line of a building. 
    BUILDING OFFICIAL: An individual who is employed by City of Huntington Woods and is charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code and who is registered in compliance with the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act, 1986 PA 54, MCL 338.2301 to 338.2313. 
    BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is constructed. 
    CITY: The City of Huntington Woods. 
    CITY COMMISSION: The Commission of the City of Huntington Woods. 
    CLUB: An organization and its premises catering exclusively to members and their guests for social intellectual, recreational, cultural, or athletic purposes not operated for profit. 
    CLUBHOUSE: A structure erected by or for a club as defined in this section. 
    CO-LOCATION: The location by two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities (WCFs) on a common tower or building with the intent of reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the City. 
    CONDOMINIUM: The following definitions shall apply in the construction and application of this Ordinance: 
A.  CONDOMINIUM PROJECT, CONVENTIONAL: A development in which ownership interest is divided under the authority of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended) and in which the condominium unit consists primarily of the dwelling or other principal structure and most of the land in the development is part of the general common area. 
B.  CONDOMINIUM, GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS: Portions of the condominium development owned and maintained by the condominium association, as defined in the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended). 
C.  CONDOMINIUM, LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS: Portions of the condominium development other than the condominium unit reserved for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners of the condominium development, as defined by the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended). 
D.  CONDOMINIUM, MASTER DEED: The condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and including those items required in Section 8 of the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended. 
E.  CONDOMINIUM PROJECT, SITE: A development in which ownership is divided under the authority of the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended, and in which the condominium unit consists of a building site, with or without structures, which along with associated limited common area elements, constitutes the equivalent of a lot. 
F.  CONDOMINIUM UNIT: That portion of a condominium development designed and intended for occupancy and use by the unit owner consistent with the provisions of the master deed, as defined in the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended. 
    CONVENIENCE STORE: A type of general retail store which carries a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and/or travelers' shopping needs. 
    CURB LEVEL: The mean level of the established curb in front of a building. When no curb has been established, the City Director of Public Works shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of these regulations. 
    DAY CARE FACILITY: The following definitions shall apply in the construction and application of this Ordinance: 
A.  ADULT DAY CARE FACILITIES: 
1.  Adult Family Day Care Home: A private home in which six (6) or less adults eighteen (18) years of age or older receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day care home does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care center. 
2.  Adult Group Day Care Home: A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) adults eighteen years of age or older receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day care home does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care center. 
3.  Adult Day Care Center: A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more persons, eighteen (18) years of age or older, for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day care center does not include alcohol or substance abuse, rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care center. 
B.  CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES: 
1.  Child Family Day Care Home: A private home in which one (1) to six (6) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. Family day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
2.  Child Group Day Care Home: A private residence in which between seven (7) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year. 
3.  Child Day Care Center: A facility, other than a private residence, receiving more than one (1) or more minor children for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility that provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, child kindergarten, play group, or drop-in center. 
    DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS: A principal use or accessory use of a business that by design permits customers to obtain goods or services while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
    DRIVEWAY: A short road or path providing an unobstructed passage from a roadway to an off-street area used for driving, servicing, parking, or otherwise accommodating motor vehicles. 
    DRIVEWAY, SEMI-CIRCULAR: A private driveway which enters and leaves private property at two points within the same frontage. 
    DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY BUSINESSES: A commercial business providing dry cleaning and laundry services on-site for businesses and residents, which does not include a plant. 
    DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY PLANT: A facility used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, clothing, laundry or other similar articles by immersion and/or agitation in solvents or other processes. 
    DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. Multiple-family dwellings may consist of the following: 
A.  EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit containing not more than one (1) room in addition to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities. 
B.  ONE (1) BEDROOM UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of not more than two (2) rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities. 
C.  TWO (2) BEDROOM UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of not more than three (3) rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities. 
D.  THREE (3) OR MORE BEDROOM UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of not more than four (4) rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities. 
    DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building containing not less than three (3) nor more than eight (8) one-family dwelling units erected side by side as a single building, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an uninterrupted wall extending from the basement floor to the roof. No more than one (1) dwelling unit may be served by a single stairway or by a common exterior door. 
    DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building occupied or designed to be occupied by one family alone. 
    DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families, independent of each other such as a duplex dwelling unit. 
    FAMILY: Means either of the following: 
A.  A domestic family, that is, one (1) or more persons living together and related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or adoption, together with servants of the principal occupants and not more than one (1) additional unrelated person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
B.  The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie organization or group whose association is temporary or seasonal in character or nature. For the purposes of enforcement, it is presumed that a functional equivalent of a domestic family is limited to six (6) or fewer persons. 
    FENCE: A structure serving to enclose or divide all or part of a lot, or to function as a boundary or barrier between two or more lots. 
    FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: A business or entity which provides financial services which may include, but are not limited to, loans, savings, checking, money management and other similar services and includes, but is not limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions. 
    FLOODLIGHT or SPOTLIGHT means any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam. 
    FLOOR AREA, NONRESIDENTIAL: All floor area of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, or as tenants, and all floor area devoted to employee work space. Floors or parts of floors used exclusively for storage, toilets or rest rooms, and mechanical rooms shall be excluded from the definition of "usable floor area" for the purpose of this chapter. 
    FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL: For the purpose of determining minimum and maximum floor area requirements, the sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls but which shall exclude floor area of basements, garages, portions of attics with less than five feet of height, and unenclosed porches. 
    FOOD SERVICE BUILDING: Building whose principal use is the preparation, reheating, or serving of food including beverages. 
    FOSTER CARE FACILITIES: The following definitions shall apply in the construction and application of this Ordinance: 
A.  ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY: A state-licensed establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuing nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include convalescent or nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, MCL 400.701, et seq.; MSA 16.610(61) et seq., as amended. The following additional definitions shall apply in the application of this Ordinance: 
1.  Adult Foster Care Family Home: A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six (6) or fewer adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
2.  Adult Foster Care Small Group Home: An owner-occupied facility with the approved capacity to receive twelve (12) or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. 
3.  Adult Foster Care Large Group Home: A facility with approved capacity to receive at least thirteen (13) but not more than twenty (20) adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. 
4.  Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility: An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than twenty (20) adults to be provided with foster care. 
B.  CHILD FOSTER FAMILY FACILITIES: 
1.  Child Foster Family Home: A private home in which one (1) but not more than four (4) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the adoption code, Chapter X of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being sections MCL 710.21 to 710.70, are given care and supervision for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
2.  Child Foster Family Group Home: A private home in which more than four (4) but fewer than seven (7) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to Chapter X of Act No. 288 of Public Acts of 1939, are provided care for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
    FRONTAGE: Any portion of a parcel of land abutting, touching, or bordering a public or private street. 
    GARAGE, ATTACHED: A private garage having a common wall with the main building, with the roof of the main building continuous over the garage; or, a garage having a roof and floor continuous from one wall of the garage to a permanent connection with a wall of the main building with door beneath the roof both in the wall of the main building and in a wall of the garage. 
    GARAGE, DETACHED: A freestanding building designed or used primarily for the shelter or storage of vehicles that is not accessory to a single-family or duplex residence on the same building site. See accessory structure definition. 
    GARAGE, PRIVATE: An attached or detached accessory building with capacity for not more than three (3) vehicles, or 650 square feet, for storage only. 
    GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or premises used for the housing or care of more than four vehicles, or any building where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    GAS STATION: A building or premises which dispenses or sells motor fuels directly to users of vehicles; together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles such as filling tires with air, checking fluid levels, adding water to batteries or radiators, and similar activities; as well as selling convenience foods and other such items through a convenience store. 
    GLARE: A light emitting from a fixture with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, cause annoyance or discomfort, and in extreme cases, cause momentary blindness. Glare is most often caused by the fixture itself rather than what the fixture is meant to illuminate. 
    GOLF COURSE: A large, landscaped area laid out for playing the game of golf, with a series holes. A golf course may include accessory uses such as driving ranges and accessory buildings such as clubhouses. 
    HEDGE: A row of shrubs or trees. 
    HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from the lowest point of the natural ground level around the perimeter of the building to the highest point of the building. 
    HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or business activity, whether for compensation or not, conducted by the resident of a dwelling that results in a product or service and that is accessory and secondary to the permitted principal residential use, as further defined in this ordinance. 
    LIGHT TRESPASS: A light which is produced on one property and causes direct light on an adjacent or nearby property. 
    LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this chapter, including one main building together with its accessory buildings and accessory structures, and such yards, open spaces and parking spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. The boundaries of a lot shall be determined by the lines shown on the property description maps on file at the city offices, and include all the land described on the assessment roll of the city under a single tax parcel identification (Sidwell) number. No change or subdivision of lots, or alteration of lot lines as shown on the property description maps of the city shall be permitted without the prior approval of the city commission, or its designee, in its discretion. 
    LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    LOT, CORNER: A lot fronting on two or more street intersections at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. 
    LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    LOT FRONTAGE: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured between the points where said lot lines intersect the street right-of-way. Said frontage shall be continuous and unbroken, and shall be measured along the constructed portion of the right-of-way only. 
    LOT, INTERIOR: A lot with frontage on one street only. 
    LOT LINES: Lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
A.  FRONT LOT LINE: In the case of an interior lot, the lot line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, the line with the least amount of frontage upon a street. 
B.  REAR LOT LINE: The line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
C.  SIDE LOT LINE: Any lot lines other than the front line or rear lot line. 
    LOT, THROUGH: A parcel extending through a block from one street to another. 
    LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where the required front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    MARIHUANA or MEDICAL MARIHUANA Definitions: 
MARIHUANA or MEDICAL MARIHUANA: term as defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106, as amended. 
MEDICAL MARIHUANA ACTIVITIES: The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer or transportation of medical marihuana by a qualifying patient or primary caregiver as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1. Allowable medical marihuana activities do not include medical marihuana provisioning centers or safety compliance facilities as defined herein. 
MEDICAL MARIHUANA PROVISIONING CENTER: A commercial entity located in the City that acquires, possesses, manufactures, delivers, transfers, or transports medical marihuana and sells, supplies, or provides medical marihuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through their registered primary caregivers. The term shall include, but not be limited to, dispensaries, cooperatives, and any other operation or facility similar in nature, and any commercial property where medical marihuana is sold to registered qualifying patients and registered primary caregivers, or any property used by more than one primary caregiver. The location used by a single primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the medical marihuana registration process in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act is not a provisioning center for purposes of this ordinance. 
PRIMARY CAREGIVER or CAREGIVER: A person who is at least 21 years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony within the past 10 years and has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs or a felony that is an assaultive crime as defined in section 9a of chapter X of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175 (MCL 770.9a), as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1. 
REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARD: A document issued by the State of Michigan that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or a registered primary caregiver. 
SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY: An entity that tests marihuana produced for medical use for contaminants. 
SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY AGENT or PROVISIONING CENTER AGENT: A principal officer, board member, employee, operator or agent of the safety compliance facility or provisioning center, as applicable. 
    MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT: A development of a tract of land, building, or structure with a variety of complementary and integrated uses as permitted by the applicable zoning district, in a compact urban form. 
    NON-CONFORMING BUILDING: A building or portion thereof, existing at the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance relative to height, bulk, area, or yards for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    NON-CONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the Ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    PLACES OF WORSHIP: A site used for or intended for the regular assembly of persons for the conducting of religious services and accessory uses therewith. 
    PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Huntington Woods. 
    PORCH: An open, unenclosed entrance to a building which may be covered by a roof or trellis, and which may be supported by columns but is not otherwise enclosed. 
    POWER GENERATOR: A machine, permanent or temporary, that changes mechanical energy into electrical and produces either direct or alternating current. 
    RETAIL BUSINESS or RETAIL SALES: An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
    REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (BUILD-TO-LINE): A line established on which a building or a portion of a building must be located. 
    SENIOR HOUSING: An institution other than a hospital or hotel, which provides housing or room and board to non-transient persons primarily sixty (60) years of age or older. Senior Housing may include: 
A.  INDEPENDENT LIVING: A multiple-family housing form with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual dwelling unit. 
B.  CONGREGATE CARE: A dependent elderly housing facility with cooking facilities within the unit, but with a central dining service option. Limited medical care is available. 
C.  ASSISTED LIVING: A dependent elderly housing facility without cooking facilities in individual rooms and with and only central dining service. Limited medical care, including memory care, may be provided. 
D.  CONVALESCENT HOME: A state licensed medical establishment providing accommodation and care for aged or infirmed persons, or for those who are bedfast or needing considerable nursing care, but not including, facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or facilities for surgical care. Commonly referred to as "nursing home". 
    SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a specified lot line, measured along a straight line and at a right angle to such lot line, and the nearest point of a building or structure, excluding steps and unenclosed platforms. 
    SHIELD: An opaque cover over the light source. 
    SIGN: Any structure or part thereof, or devise attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, or any material or thing, illuminated or otherwise, which displays or includes any numeral, letter, work, model, banner, emblem, insignia, device, code mark or other representation used as, or in the nature of, an announcement, advertisement, direction or designation, of any person, firm, organization place, commodity, service, business, profession, or industry, or any backlit building area, which is located upon any land or in or on any building, in such a manner as to attract attention from outside the premises. 
1.  Abandoned sign: A sign which no longer advertises or identifies a business, lessor, owner, or activity conduced upon, or product available on, the premises where such sign is displayed. 
2.  Banner: A sign made of fabric or other similar non-rigid material with no enclosing framework or electrical components that is supported or anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners. 
3.  Billboard: See: Outdoor Advertising Signs . 
4.  Canopy or sign: Any sign attached to, or constructed within or on, a canopy or marquee. 
5.  Electronic message sign (LED): A sign with a fixed or changing message composed of a series of lights or light-emitting diodes (LED) that may be changed through electronic means. 
6.  Freestanding sign: A sign supported by a structure, such as a pole or pylon, independent of any other structure. The definition shall not include a ground sign. 
7.  Ground sign: A sign mounted directly on the ground or by a structure on a foundation. 
8.  Height of sign: The vertical distance to the top edge of the copy area or structure, whichever is higher, as measured from the adjacent street grade. 
9.  Identification sign: A sign which carries only the name of the firm, the major enterprise, or principal product or service offered for sale on the premises or a combination of these things only to identify location of said premises and not to advertise. 
10.  Off-site sign (off-premises sign): A sign other than an on-site sign. 
11.  On-site sign (on-premises sign): A sign which advertises or identifies only goods, services, facilities, events, or attractions on the premises where located. 
12.  Outdoor advertising sign: A sign, including billboards, on which the written or pictorial information is intending to advertise a use, product, service, goods, event or facility located on other premises, and which is intended primarily for advertising purposes. 
13.  Portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building. 
14.  Temporary sign: A sign that is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
15.  Sandwich board: A stationary, double faced temporary sign that is ground supported; also known as an A-frame sign. 
16.  Wall sign: A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building with the face in a plane parallel to the plane of the building wall. 
17.  Window sign: A sign installed on, or in, a window for the purpose of viewing from outside the premises. This term does not include merchandise located in a window. 
    SIGNBOARD: Any structure or part thereof on which is lettered, pictured or displayed matter, the chief purpose of which is for advertising or publicity. 
    SITE PLAN: The documents and drawings required in Article 7, herein of the Chapter 40, to ensure that a proposed land use or activity is in compliance with local ordinances and state and federal statutes. 
    STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: A structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the state under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act No. 218 of 1979 (MCL 400.701-400.737), or Public Act No. 116 of 1973 (MCL 722.111-722.128), and provides residential services for six or fewer persons under 24-hour supervision or care. 
    STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    STORY, HALF: That portion of a building between the eaves and the ridge lines of a pitched roof, containing at least one habitable room and connected by a fixed stairway to the main or ground floor. 
    STREET: A public thoroughfare more than 20 feet in width, unless designated otherwise by recorded deed, plat or decree of court. 
    STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any changes in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. Structure includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects. Structure does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials. 
    STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate structure located on the same lot or attached to the main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building and customarily found in connection therewith. The term "accessory structure" includes, but is not limited to, a driveway, parking lot, sidewalk, swimming pool, pool equipment, tennis or basketball court, dog house, trash enclosure, lamp post, patio, deck or signs. 
    TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING: A use or building permitted to exist during periods of construction of the main building or use, or for special events. 
    TOWER: A structure used to support wireless communication antennas. A tower within this definition, includes but shall not be limited to, a monopole, lattice tower, light pole, utility pole, flag pole, artificial tree or other structure which supports wireless communication facility (WCF) antennas. Buildings, equipment compounds and cabinets, and structures principally used for purposes other than supporting antennas shall not be considered as towers. 
    TOWER HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the lowest point of the natural ground level around the base of the tower to the highest point on the tower including any antenna. 
    USE: The purpose for which land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    USE, ACCESSORY: A use which is supplemental and subordinate to the main use and used for purposes clearly incidental to those of the main use. 
    VARIANCE: The term "variance" shall mean a modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the authority bestowed upon that Board by the provisions of this Ordinance. 
    WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: All structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short-wave receiving facilities; amateur (HAM) radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following additional terms are defined: 
A.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (WCA): Shall mean any antenna used for the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals excluding those used for dispatch communications by public emergency stations, ham radio antennas, and satellite antennas, those who receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services which are forty (40) inches or less in diameter and those which receive television broadcast signals. Antenna may be affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition. 
B.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURES: Shall mean structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure. 
C.  COLLOCATION: Shall mean the location by two (2) or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communications antennas within the community. 
    WIRELESS COMMUNICATION PROVIDER: A person, company, or entity providing or intending to provide wireless communication services of any kind, including telecommunications services. 
    WIRELESS EQUIPMENT CABINET: An upright, stand-alone, cupboard-like enclosure for wireless communications equipment. 
    WIRELESS EQUIPMENT COMPOUND: An area, covered by a roof, supported by a foundation and enclosed by walls, adjacent to the base of a building or tower and within which wireless communications equipment is located. 
    YARD: The open space on the same lot with a dwelling or main building which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as provided in this chapter, and as defined herein: 
A.  Front yard: An open space, extending the full width of the lot, between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
B.  Rear yard: An open space, extending the full width of the lot, between the rear lot line and the rear elevation, following the contour of the main building. References in this chapter to such terms as "rearmost" shall be interpreted to mean the definition above, it being the intent that the measurement is taken from any portion of the main building in the rear yard. 
C.  Side yard: An open space, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between the side lot line and nearest point of the main building. 
    ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The official of the City of Huntington Woods charged with the administration of this Zoning Ordinance. 
    ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the incorporated area of the City of Huntington Woods within which regulations and requirements governing use, lot area, lot size, and other provisions are uniform. 
    ZOO: A park accredited by a national zoological or museum association in which living animals are kept and exhibited to the public. 
    ZOO ANIMAL HABITAT: A defined area or building in which animals are confined within enclosures, to be displayed, bred, cared for, or rehabilitated. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 603, § 1, 4-10-2018) 
Article 3 - Administration and Enforcement 

Section 40-3.01 - Zoning Administration 
    This Zoning Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator or such deputies as designated by the City Manager. The Zoning Administrator shall be designated by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.02 - Zoning Duties and Responsibilities 
    The duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator shall include the following: 
A.  Receive and review for completeness all applications for site plan review, special land uses, planned unit developments, or other matters regulated by this Ordinance. 
B.  Receive and review for completeness all applications for appeals, variances, or other matters that the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to decide under this Ordinance and refer such applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals for determination. 
C.  Receive and review for completeness all applications for text or map (rezonings) amendments to this Ordinance and refer such applications to the Planning Commission and City Commission for determination. 
D.  Make periodic site inspections to determine Ordinance compliance, as needed. 
E.  Implement the decisions of the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and City Commission. 
F.  Coordinate with the Building Official where necessary to administer the Ordinance. 
G.  Investigate complaints regarding violations of the Zoning Ordinance. 
H.  Initiate prosecutions of violations of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.03 - Public Hearing Notice Requirements 
A.  When Required. Public hearings are required in those instances where public hearings are required by this Ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended. 
B.  Notice Requirements. Notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before each public hearing at which an application will be considered. Notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper that circulates in the City of Huntington Woods, and by personal delivery or mailing, where required, to the following: 
(1)  The applicant, and the owner(s) of the property, if the applicant is not the owner. 
(2)  All persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary for the property for which approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located within the City of Huntington Woods. 
(3)  The occupants of any structures within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located within the City of Huntington Woods, except as set forth below. 
(4)  Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. If a single structure contains more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
(5)  The notice under subsection 40-3.03.B is considered to be given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United States Postal Service or other public or private delivery service. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used for the intended recipient of the notice. 
C.  Actions Exempt from Notification. 
(1)  Requirements for individual notice to property owners shall not apply to Ordinance text amendments. 
(2)  For any group of adjacent properties numbering eleven (11) or more that is proposed for rezoning, the requirement for individual notice as set forth in Subsections 40-3.03.B(2), (3) and (4) does not apply to that group of adjacent properties. 
D.  Content of Notice. The notice shall include: 
(1)  The nature of the request. 
(2)  The property(ies) for which the request has been made. 
(3)  A listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is (are) the subject of the request. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses exist. If there are no street addresses, another means of identification may be used. 
(4)  The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date the application will be considered. 
(5)  The date, time, and location of when the hearing on the application will take place. 
(6)  The address at which written comments should be directed prior to the consideration. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.04 - Guarantee for Improvements 
A.  Purpose and Intent. In the interest of insuring compliance with the Zoning Ordinance provisions, protecting the natural resources and the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or inhabitants of an area for which a site plan for a non-single-family use has been submitted, the city may require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee for any or all site improvements required by this Ordinance. The purpose of the performance guarantee is to insure completion of improvements connected with the proposed use as required by this Ordinance, including but not limited to roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, drainage, fences, walls, screens, and landscaping. 
A performance guarantee may be a cash deposit, certified check, or automatically renewable irrevocable bank letter of credit, in the amount of the 125% cost of the improvements based upon an estimate submitted by the applicant and verified by the city. The city shall be authorized to employ the applicable City Department and/or city consultants to review cost estimates and conduct periodic inspection of the progress of improvements. 
B.  Procedure. 
(1)  When a performance guarantee is required, said guarantee shall be deposited with the city prior to the issuance of a building permit for the development and use of the land. Upon the deposit of the performance guarantee, the city shall issue the appropriate building permit. 
(2)  The approval shall also prescribe the period of time within which the improvements are to be completed. The period will begin from the date of the issuance of the building permit. 
(3)  The Building Official, upon the written request of the applicant, shall rebate portions of the performance guarantee upon determination that the improvements for which the rebate has been requested have been satisfactory completed, provided that the performance guarantee shall always be 125% of the cost of the remaining improvements. 
(4)  Upon the satisfactory completion, as determined by the city, of the improvement for which the performance guarantee was required, the city shall return to the applicant the performance guarantee deposited and any interest earned thereon. However, the city is not required to deposit the performance guarantee in an interest-bearing account. 
(5)  In the event the applicant defaults in making the improvements for which the performance guarantee was required within the time period established by the city, the city shall have the right, but not the obligation, to use the performance guarantee deposited and any interest earned thereon to complete the improvements through contract or otherwise, including specifically, the right to enter upon the subject property to make the improvements. 
If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the city to complete the improvements, the applicant shall be required to pay the city all the additional costs of completing the improvements. Should the city use the performance guarantee, or a portion thereof to complete the required improvements, any amounts remaining after said completion shall be applied first to the city's administrative costs including, without limitation, attorney consultant fees, planning consultant fees, and engineering consultant fees in completing the improvement with any balance remaining being refunded to the applicant. In the event the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the city to complete the improvements, the city completes the improvements, and the applicant fails to pay the deficiency, said deficiency shall be secured by a lien upon the property which may be enforced by the city in the same manner as the enforcement of liens for delinquent sewer or water charges. 
If the applicant has been required to post a performance guarantee or bond with another governmental agency other than the city to insure completion of an improvement, the applicant shall not be required to deposit with the city a performance guarantee for that specific improvement. At the time the performance guarantee is deposited with the city and prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall enter an agreement incorporating the provisions hereof with the city regarding the performance guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.05 - Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance 
A.  No premises shall be occupied or used and no building now or hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied, used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the Building Official or designee stating that the building or proposed use of a building or premises, complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances, and with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for after the issuance of a building permit, and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or alteration of such buildings shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. No fee shall be charged for an original certificate applied for coincident with the application for a building permit; for all other certificates, or copies of any original certificate, a fee may be charged as prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution. 
C.  No permit for excavation for any building or construction shall be issued before the appropriate building permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.06 - Surveys 
    All applications for a building permit that alters a building footprint, shall be accompanied by a survey drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A record of such applications and surveys shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk. No yard, or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations, shall be used as a yard, or other open space for another building. Surveys shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.07 - Violation Unlawful and Nuisance per se 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, the person's agents or employees, to erect, alter, raze or convert any building, or to use any premises situated in the city, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and buildings erected, altered, razed or converted and uses carried on in violation of the provisions of this chapter, are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.08 - Municipal Civil Infractions 
    A person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly constructs, builds or maintains a structure in violation of any provision of this chapter or a site plan approved pursuant to this chapter, or who knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by the enforcing agency, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Commission, or City Commission, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.09 - Enforcement 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator, Building Official, or ordinance officer. Appeals from the decision of the enforcing city official may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in Article 12. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.10 - Conflicting Authority 
    Authority given to any person or board under this chapter shall be considered as cumulative to and not in derogation of authority held under any other provision of this Code, the powers conferred, and duties imposed in this chapter to be construed as separate and distinct from powers conferred upon the duties required of any official or board under any other provision of this Code and not be construed as conflicting therewith or limiting the same. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.11 - State Construction Code Provisions Not Affected 
    No buildings shall be erected or altered in the city except in conformity with Chapter 6 of the City Code, anything to the contrary herein contained notwithstanding. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-3.12 - Interpretation of District Boundaries 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any district indicated on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following the lot lines. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
E.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow the centerline. 
F.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in subsections A through E of this section shall be so construed. 
G.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the Map. 
H.  Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through G of this section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
I.  Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the Zoning Map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that the district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 4 - District Regulations 

Section 40-4.01 - Creation of Districts or Zones 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into nine zone districts known as: 
R-1A One-family district R-1B One-family district R-1C One-family district R-1D One-family district R-1E One-family district RT One- and two-family attached district TD Transitional district BD Business district PRD Parks and recreation district  
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-4.02 - Zoning Map 
A.  The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the map on file in the office of the City Clerk and made a part of this chapter by reference, designated as "Zoning Map of the City of Huntington Woods," and said map and all notations, references and other data shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Unless otherwise shown, the boundaries of the districts or zones created in this chapter are either centerlines of streets or alleys, centerlines of vacated streets or alleys, lot lines, or such lines extended, or the city limit lines. Where uncertainty exists with respect to such boundary lines, the matter of the location of such lines shall be determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon petition of any person having an interest in the property affected. 
B.  Any territory embraced within any future enlargement of the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to be subject to the provisions of this chapter applying to the R-1C District until otherwise classified by the City Commission upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, and after publication of notice and public hearing thereon, as provided for in Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), as amended, hereinbefore referred to. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-4.03 - R-1A through R-1E: One-Family Districts 
A.  Intent. The Master Plan recognizes that single-family residential neighborhoods are vital components of the city, and comprise the majority of the land area within the city. The intent of the R-1A through R-1E Districts is to provide areas for single-family dwellings with the primary distinction being a range of densities and bulk provisions, implemented through varying lot sizes. The R-1A through R-1E Districts are further intended to preserve and improve upon the quality of residential neighborhoods while permitting a limited number of other compatible uses that support residential neighborhoods. 
B.  Use Regulations. No premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or used except for one or more uses contained within Section 40-4.08. 
C.  Special Land Uses. Special land use procedures shall meet the standards of Article 8. For special land uses in Zones R-1A through R-1E on properties located within an historic district, special land use approval and site plan approval by the Planning Commission, and a certificate of appropriateness later issued by the Historic District Commission, shall be required. The Planning Commission shall consult the Historic District Commission during the Special Land Use and site plan reviews. In the event the Historic District Commission, or a committee thereof, is currently reviewing a property for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether to establish an historic district or add the property to an established historic district, and the Historic District Committee, or a committee thereof, sends a report to the City Commission showing the presence of historic, architectural, archeological, engineering, or cultural significance of the property, then the City Commission can direct that the review process for the property and/or the proposed historic district follow the procedure contained herein for an established historic district. 
D.  Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the R-1A through R-1E Districts: 
Use District Minimum Size of Lot per Unit Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Max. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) (1) (6) Max. Percentage of Lot Coverage (2) Minimum Lot Area to be Used or Set Aside for Accessory Buildings (In Sq. Ft.) Sq. Ft. Width (Ft.) Stories Ft. Front (3) Sides (5) Rear Least One Least Two R-1A 30,000 160 2 30 40 20 40 60 1,400 Up to 3,600 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 4,200 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 4,350 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 4,950 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 15% 580 R-1B 9,000 60 2.5 35 40 5 14 35 1,300 Up to 3,000 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 3,600 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 3,812 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 4,412 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 25% 530 R-1C 7,000 50 2 30 30 5 14 35 1,300 Up to 2,500 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 3,100 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 3,125 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 3,725 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 30% 480 R-1D 6,000 50 2 30 (4) 25 5 14 30 1,200 Up to 1,900 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 2,350 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 2,500 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 2,950 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 30% 440 R-1E 5,000 40 2 30 (4) 25 5 14 25 1,100 Up to 1,700 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 2,100 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 2,300 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 2,700 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 30% 400  
E.  Footnotes to Schedule of Regulations. 
(1)  If the subject lot is below the minimum lot size, subtract floor area from the number at the same ratio above. 
(2)  Includes: 
(a)  The ground floor area of the main building; 
(b)  All appurtenances if covered by a roof; and 
(c)  All accessory buildings or the minimum lot area required to be set aside for accessory buildings, whichever is larger. For lots with less than 6,000 sq. ft. in area, the amount of lot coverage may be increase by 1 sq. ft. for every 6 sq. ft. that the lot is less than 6,000 sq. ft. For lots with less than 7,000 sq. ft. of area, a covered front porch may exceed the maximum lot coverage by up to one percent of lot area. 
(3)  Where there are existing residential dwellings on both sides of the subject lot fronting on the same street, the required setback shall be no less than the least of the two adjoining front setbacks; where there is an existing residential dwelling on only one side of the subject lot fronting on the same street, the required setback shall be no less than the setback of the adjacent residential dwelling; and in no case shall the setback be less than listed in the schedule of regulations. 
(4)  One additional foot of total side yard is required for every one foot or portion thereof of building height over 26 ft. At least one-half of the additional side yard shall be on the least side. 
(5)  Corner side yard. In the case of corner lots where the adjacent house fronts upon the side street, a setback shall be required from the side street lot line, which is at least equal to the front setback of the other adjoining property facing the same side street. In no case shall the side street setback be less than eight (8) ft. 
(6)  Maximum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit Bonuses. 
(a)  Character Bonus. 
1.  Single-family homes are permitted the following floor area square footage bonuses: 
Character Bonus New Construction Standard Addition Standard Eligible Bonus Roof Height Roof height of 26' or less Roof height of addition is equal to or lower than the existing roof height 150 sq. ft. Stepped in Second Floor 3-foot step-in on front elevation and at least one other elevation 100 sq. ft. Fenestration 20% or more fenestration per elevation Percentage of fenestration per elevation of addition is equal to or exceeds the elevation of the existing home with the highest percentage of fenestration or 20% whichever is greater 150 sq. ft. Detached Garage Existing or construction of a new detached garage 100 sq. ft. Architectural Details Any combination of 3 or more: quoins, muntin bars, key stones over windows and doors, shutters, pulled brick details, brick rowlocks or soldier coursing, trim boards for sided wall windows, natural materials, wood windows (can be clad), siding other than vinyl on permitted sided projects, or any other architectural detailed as deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission Up to 250 sq. ft. as determined by the Planning Commission  
2.  The maximum combination of character bonuses shall not exceed a total of six hundred (600) square feet. 
3.  New homes or additions to homes within a designated local Historic District automatically qualify for the maximum character bonus of six hundred (600) square feet provided that all other Historic District and applicable zoning regulations are met. 
(b)  Lot Size Bonus. Lot size bonus shall be determined by the following formula: 
1.  R-1A: 1 sq. ft. for every 14 sq. ft. of lot area over 30,000 sq. ft., up to a maximum of 750 additional sq. ft. 
2.  R-1B: 1 sq. ft. for every 9 sq. ft. of lot area over 9,000 sq. ft., up to a maximum of 812 additional sq. ft. 
3.  R-1C: 1 sq. ft. for every 9 sq. ft. of lot area over 9,000 sq. ft., up to a maximum of 625 additional sq. ft. 
4.  R-1D: 1 sq. ft. for every 12 sq. ft. of lot area over 6,000 sq. ft., up to a maximum of 350 additional sq. ft. 
5.  R-1E: 1 sq. ft. for every 12 sq. ft. of lot area over 5,000 sq. ft., up to a maximum of 400 additional sq. ft. 
Figure 4.03.1: R-1A District 

Refer to 4.03.E for footnotes to schedule of regulations. 
Use District Minimum Size of Lot per Unit (1) Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Max. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) (6) Max. Percentage of Lot Coverage (2) Sq. Ft. Width (Ft.) Stories Ft. Front (3) Sides (5) Rear Least One Least Two R-1A 30,000 160 2 30 40 20 40 60 1,400 Up to 3,600 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 4,200 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 4,350 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 4,950 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 15%  
Figure 4.03.2: R-1B District 

Refer to 4.03.E for footnotes to schedule of regulations. 
Use District Minimum Size of Lot per Unit (1) Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Max. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) (6) Max. Percentage of Lot Coverage (2) Sq. Ft. Width (Ft.) Stories Ft. Front (3) Sides (5) Rear Least One Least Two R-1B 9,000 60 2.5 35 40 5 14 35 1,300 Up to 3,000 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 3,600 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 3,812 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 4,412 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 25%  
Figure 4.03.3: R-1C District 

Refer to 4.03.E for footnotes to schedule of regulations. 
Use District Minimum Size of Lot per Unit (1) Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Max. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) (6) Max. Percentage of Lot Coverage (2) Sq. Ft. Width (Ft.) Stories Ft. Front (3) Sides (5) Rear Least One Least Two R-1C 7,000 50 2 30 30 5 14 35 1,300 Up to 2,500 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 3,100 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 3,125 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 3,725 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 30%  
Figure 4.03.4: R-1D 

Refer to 4.03.E for footnotes to schedule of regulations. 
Use District Minimum Size of Lot per Unit (1) Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Max. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) (6) Max. Percentage of Lot Coverage (2) Sq. Ft. Width (Ft.) Stories Ft. Front (3) Sides (5) Rear Least One Least Two R-1D 6,000 50 2 30 (4) 25 5 14 30 1,200 Up to 1,900 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 2,350 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 2,500 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 2,950 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 30%  
Figure 4.03.5: R-1E 

Refer to 4.03.E for footnotes to schedule of regulations. 
Use District Minimum Size of Lot per Unit (1) Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Max. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) (6) Max. Percentage of Lot Coverage (2) Sq. Ft. Width (Ft.) Stories Ft. Front (3) Sides (5) Rear Least One Least Two R-1E 5,000 40 2 30 (4) 25 5 14 25 1,100 Up to 1,700 sq. ft. without any bonus 
  
Up to 2,100 sq. ft. with lot size bonus 
  
Up to 2,300 sq. ft. with character bonus 
  
Up to 2,700 sq. ft. with character bonus and lot size bonus 30%  
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 604, § 1, 4-10-2018) 
Section 40-4.04 - RT, One and Two-Family Attached District 
A.  Intent. The intent of the RT, One and Two-Family Attached District is to accommodate a mix of residential types, including but not limited to, detached single-family homes and attached multi-family townhomes and duplexes. 
B.  Use Regulations. No premises shall be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or used except for one or more uses contained within Section 40-4.08. 
C.  Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the RT District: 

Use District Minimum Size of Lot Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback
(Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Max. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.) (5) Max. Percentage of Lot Coverage (2) Sq. Ft. Width (Ft.) Stories Ft. Front (3) Sides (4, 6) Rear Least One Least Two RT 6,000 50 2 35 25 5 14 30 1,100 2,500 +1 sq. ft. for every 6 sq. ft. of lot area over 6,000 sq. ft. 30%  
D.  Footnotes to Schedule of Regulations. 
(1)  If the subject lot is below the minimum lot size, subtract floor area from the base number at the same ratio above. 
(2)  Includes: 
(a)  The ground floor area of the main building; 
(b)  All appurtenances if covered by a roof; and 
(c)  All accessory buildings or the minimum lot area required to be set aside for accessory buildings, whichever is larger. For lots with less than 6,000 sq. ft. in area, the amount of lot coverage may be increased by 1 sq. ft. for every 6 sq. ft. that the lot is less than 6,000 sq. ft. For lots with less than 7,000 sq. ft. of area, a covered front porch may exceed the maximum lot coverage by up to one percent of lot area. 
(3)  Where there are existing residential dwellings on both sides of the subject lot fronting on the same street, the required setback shall be no less than the least of the two adjoining front setbacks; where there is an existing residential dwelling on only one side of the subject lot fronting on the same street, the required setback shall be no less than the setback of the adjacent residential dwelling; and in no case shall the setback be less than listed in the schedule of regulations. 
(4)  One additional foot of total side yard is required for every one (1) foot or portion thereof of building height over 26 ft. At least one-half of the additional side yard shall be on the least side. 
(5)  Not to exceed 3,500 sq. ft. 
(6)  Corner side yard. In the case of corner lots where the adjacent house fronts upon the side street, a setback shall be required from the side street lot line, which is at least equal to the front setback of the other adjoining property facing the same side street. In no case shall the side street setback be less than eight (8) ft. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-4.05 - TD: Transitional District 
A.  Intent. The TD, Transitional District, is intended to encourage a mixture of compatible uses, including multiple-family residential dwelling, retail, and office. Though built-out with established development patterns of isolated parcels and single-use development, redevelopment within the Transitional District encourages the development of a mixed-use environment that meets the needs for commercial, residential, and office space and increases transit and non-motorized transportation options while maintaining the existing neighborhood fabric and providing appropriate edge transitions. 
Multiple-family residential uses permitted within the Transitional District are intended to complement the city's existing single-family residential housing stock, thereby affording a diversity of housing opportunities in the city. The TD is intended to provide a buffer between adjacent single-family residential zones and major arterial roads. The limited hours of operation for nonresidential uses are intended to minimize potentially adverse effects upon adjoining and nearby residential districts. The regulations of the district are intended to promote high-quality architecture and site design, consistent with the established character of the city. 
Consolidation of smaller parcels into large parcels and mixed use development is encouraged and incentivized to meet the vision of the Master Plan and intent of the TD, Transitional District. Incentives as set forth in Section 40-4.05.E include additional height and parking reduction in exchange for a commensurate public benefit. 
B.  Use Regulations. No premises shall be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or used except for one or more uses contained within Section 40-4.08. 
C.  Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the TD, Transitional District: 

Use District Maximum Height of Building Yard Setbacks and Build-to-line (Per Lot in Ft.) Min. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit (in sq. ft.) Stories (3) Ft. (3) Maximum Front Build-to-line (1), (4) Minimum Sides (2) Minimum Rear Least One Least Two TD 3 40 10 0 0 15 (25 ft. for buildings taller than 30 ft.) 700  
D.  Footnotes to Dimensional Requirements. 
(1)  Corner Lot. In the case of a corner lot, any yard extending along the full length of a street line is considered a front yard. 
(2)  Side yard shall not be required for an interior lot in the TD, provided that: adequate access to the rear of the property is provided from an alley or driveway; the side in question abuts property in the TD. 
(3)  Buildings in the TD may be permitted additional building height per the bonus provisions of Section 40-4.05.E. 
(4)  Developments that incorporate outdoor seating or a permanent public plaza in the front of the building may be permitted a maximum front yard build-to-line of 30 ft. at the discretion of the Planning Commission as reviewed during the site plan review process. 
E.  Supplemental District Standards. 
(1)  Architectural and Site Design Standards. 
(a)  No building shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length without an alley, driveway, or pedestrian pathway providing through access. 
(b)  The front facade of any principal building on any lot shall face onto a street. 
(c)  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the first-floor facade area facing a right-of-way shall be clear glass. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the first-floor façade area facing a side yard or parking area shall be clear glass. First floor façade is measured from grade to eight (8) feet. For multiple tenant buildings the required transparency shall be provided for each tenant space. Visibility through the required transparency must portray the principal use of the operation and shall not portray secondary or "back of house" operation areas including, but not limited to, laundry, cleaning supply, stock, or storage areas. 
(d)  Outdoor seating areas may satisfy up to twenty-five (25) percent to transparency requirement. 
(e)  Ground floor shall include a depth of at least twenty-five (25) feet from the front façade and shall include an average of at least 14'-0" floor-to-ceiling height. 
(f)  Design details, building articulation, and techniques such as variation in wall plane shall be used to reduce the perceived mass of buildings, promote human-scale architecture, and stimulate pedestrian interest. Unadorned blank walls that are visible from a public right-of-way shall be prohibited on all buildings. All buildings should avoid being corporately "branded" so as to allow for their adaptation to future tenants. 
(g)  Building construction shall use high-quality exterior building materials such as full brick or modular stone. Use of exterior building materials such as cinder block, vinyl, aluminum, standard (smooth-faced) concrete masonry units (CMUs), or exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) shall be prohibited. 
(h)  Architectural features, materials, and facade articulation shall be consistent on all sides of buildings. 
(i)  Buildings should frame and enhance street corners through the use of architecturally prominent features at the corners or prominent three-dimensional site improvements (fountains, towers, sculpture, art, etc.). 
(j)  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets. Parapets may exceed the maximum building height requirements of this chapter by not more than ten (10) percent. 
(k)  Building entrances shall be clearly defined by architectural elements. A functional door shall be provided both on the façade facing the right-of-way and the façade facing the parking lot. 
(l)  Front entry garages shall be prohibited. Garages shall be placed to the side or behind the main structure so as to effectively screen them from major arterial roads and internal roads. Garages may be attached or detached and accessed by driveways or by use of alleys. Parking may also be provided in underground garages or parking decks located above the ground floor use. 
Figure 4.05.E.1. - Façade Transparency

(2)  Parking, Access Management, and Loading. 
(a)  Off-street parking is required for all uses and shall comply with the numerical parking requirements pursuant to Section 40-10.06. Certain projects may be eligible for parking reduction per Section 40-4.05.E. Parking shall be not permitted between any building line and right-of-way. 
(b)  When located to the side of a building, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total site's frontage along the required building line shall be occupied by parking. For a corner lot, the cumulative total of both frontages occupied by parking shall be no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total site's frontage along both frontages; the building shall be located at the corner of the lot adjacent to the intersection. 
(c)  Parking in excess. It is the intent of this Ordinance to minimize excessive areas of pavement which reduces aesthetic standards and contributes to high rates of stormwater runoff. Exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by more than twenty percent (20%) shall only be allowed with approval by the Planning Commission. In granting such additional space, the Planning Commission shall determine that such parking will be required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
(d)  Cross access may be required by Planning Commission for any non-single-family development going through a site plan review process. Cross access may be required for the purpose of providing a direct connection with an existing cross access point, or to allow a future cross access to abutting non-residential properties when those properties are redeveloped. A site plan without cross access may be approved when it can be demonstrated that there are either physical limitations or functional circumstances that would prevent such access from being installed. 
(e)  Loading spaces shall be located in the rear of a building and be so located as to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and uses. 
Figure 4.05.E.2. - Shared Parking/Cross Access

(3)  Landscaping and Screening Requirements. 
(a)  Developments within the TD shall meet the landscaping and screening requirements contained within Section 40-10.02. 
(b)  Parking that is adjacent to the public roadway shall be screened by a 30-inch tall masonry wall with landscaping. Alternative screening options may be considered by the Planning Commission. 
(c)  Screening of trash enclosures and mechanical equipment shall be screened in accordance with Section 40-10.03. 
(4)  Wall requirements. Where a lot in the TD District abuts a lot within an R-1 or RT District, the rear or side of each lot so abutting shall be provided with a continuous, unpierced brick masonry or brick patterned poured-in-place concrete wall which complies with the requirements of Section 40-10.10. 
(5)  Bonus Provisions. There are instances where it is in the best interests of the private landowner and the City of Huntington Woods to modify standards of this chapter. In such instances, the City's interests in upholding its standards can be offset by the provision of certain exemplary amenities that will benefit the Transitional District as a whole. This system provides regulatory incentives while ensuring that modifications are not made solely and exclusively for the private benefit of the landowner. 
Buildings within the Transitional District are eligible for a height bonus where certain eligibility criteria are met. 
(a)  Bonus Height Eligibility Criteria: 
1.  Buildings within the Transitional District are eligible for a height bonus of up to one (1) additional story and/or fifteen (15) feet where two (2) or more of the following criteria are met. 
a.  A mixed-use building that provides residential dwelling units above the first-floor commercial/office use where a minimum of 50% of the building's floor area is residential. 
b.  An assemblage of parcels in conjunction with a development as approved by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Installation of streetscape furnishings above and beyond what is required within this section, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, including street trees, tree grates, decorative lighting, or street furniture. 
d.  Dedication of an improved public plaza or open space area which ties into Woodward's pedestrian circulation system. 
2.  Additional stories shall be setback at least 50 feet from the rear property line in order to reduce the appearance of excessive height. 
3.  The provision of such bonus shall be the discretion of the Planning Commission, provided that the Planning Commission finds the proposed height bonus is commensurate with benefit being provided by the development. 
(b)  Drive-Through. A drive-through is only permitted to be reviewed as a Special Land Use where one (1) or more of the following criteria are met: 
1.  A mixed-use building that provides residential dwelling units above the first-floor commercial/office use where a minimum of 50% of the building's floor area is residential. 
2.  An assemblage of parcels in conjunction with a development as approved by the Planning Commission. 
3.  Installation of streetscape furnishings above and beyond what is required within this section, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, including street trees, tree grates, decorative lighting, or street furniture. 
4.  Dedication of an improved public plaza or open space area which ties into Woodward's pedestrian circulation system. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-4.06 - BD Business District 
A.  Intent. The BD, Business District is intended to provide a limited range of businesses and services for the local neighborhoods of the city and nearby vicinity. Because of the proximity of the business district to residential zones and the limited land typically available for building setbacks and off-street parking, the regulations of this district are intended to minimize potentially adverse effects upon adjoining and nearby residential districts. 
B.  Use Regulations. No premises shall be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or used except for one or more uses contained within Section 40-4.08. 
C.  Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the BD, Business District: 
Use District Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback (Per Lot in Ft.)   Stories Ft. Front (1) Sides (2) Rear Least One Least Two BD 2 35 12 0 0 15  
D.  Footnotes to Dimensional Requirements. 
(1)  Corner lot. In the case of a corner lot, any yard extending along the full length of a street line is considered a front yard. 
(2)  Where a lot in BD abuts a lot within the R-1 or RT District or a residential use, the abutting side yard setback shall be a minimum of 8 ft. 
E.  Supplemental District Standards. 
(1)  Wall requirements. Where a lot in the BD District abuts a lot within a R-1 or RT District, the rear or side of each lot so abutting shall be provided with a continuous, unpierced brick masonry or brick patterned poured-in-place concrete wall which complies with the requirements of Section 40-10.10. 
(2)  Architectural and Site Design Standards. 
(a)  Architectural design requirements. 
1.  The front facade of any principal building on any lot shall face onto a street. 
2.  A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the first-floor facade area facing a right-of-way shall be clear glass. The minimum transparency for facades facing a side yard, or parking area shall be no less than twenty (20) percent of the façade. 
3.  Design details, building articulation, and techniques such as variation in wall plane shall be used to reduce the perceived mass of buildings, promote human-scale architecture, and stimulate pedestrian interest. Unadorned blank walls shall be prohibited on all buildings. 
4.  Building construction shall use high quality exterior building materials such as full brick or modular stone. Use of exterior building materials such as cinder block, vinyl, aluminum, standard (smooth-faced) concrete masonry units (CMUs), or exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) may be considered but should not be the primary material use. 
5.  Architectural features, materials, and facade articulation shall be continued on all sides of buildings that are visible from a public right-of-way. 
6.  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets. Parapets may exceed the maximum building height requirements of this chapter by not more than ten (10) percent. 
7.  Building entrances shall be clearly defined by architectural elements. 
(b)  Parking, Access Management, and Loading. 
1.  Off-street parking is required for all uses and shall comply with the numerical parking requirements pursuant to Section 40-10.06. 
2.  Shared parking lots and driveways are encouraged within the BD for neighboring uses based upon the fact that certain uses may operate at various times over a 24-hour period, with the greatest demand for parking occurring at separate times. The Planning Commission may approve shared parking provided a signed agreement showing a permanent arrangement for shared parking is provided by the property owners, and the applicant(s), and the applicant can demonstrate that the peak usage will occur at different periods of the day. To demonstrate shared parking compatibility, the applicant shall use a recognized industry standard such as the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking Report. 
3.  Parking in excess. It is the intent of this Ordinance to minimize excessive areas of pavement which reduces aesthetic standards and contributes to high rates of stormwater runoff. Exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by more than twenty percent (20%) shall only be allowed with approval by the Planning Commission. In granting such additional space, the Planning Commission shall determine that such parking will be required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
4.  Cross access may be required by Planning Commission as part of a site plan review and shall be located to provide a direct connection with the existing or future access of the abutting non-residential properties. A site plan without cross access may be approved when it can be demonstrated that there are either physical limitations or functional circumstances that would prevent such access from being installed. 
5.  Loading spaces shall be located in the rear of a building and be so located as to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and uses. 
(c)  Landscaping, and Screening Requirements. 
1.  Developments within the BD shall meet the landscaping and screening requirements contained within Section 40-10.02. 
2.  Parking that is adjacent to the public roadway shall be screened by a 30-inch tall masonry wall with landscaping. Alternative screening options may be considered by the Planning Commission. 
3.  Screening of trash enclosures and mechanical equipment shall be screened in accordance with Section 40-10.03. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-4.07 - PRD: Parks and Recreation District 
A.  Intent. Recognizing that a substantial portion of the city's land area is devoted to parkland and recreational uses, the PRD, Parks and Recreation district is intended to retain publicly-owned lands already improved for or intended to be improved for parks, recreational uses, and/or open space. The intent of the district is further described as follows: 
(1)  To protect natural resources and wildlife habitat; 
(2)  To protect historic and cultural resources; 
(3)  To preserve areas significant to community character; 
(4)  To protect lands for scenic and visual enjoyment, and to beautify the city; 
(5)  To provide current residents of the city and the Detroit Metropolitan Area, as well as future generations, with access to green spaces and recreational opportunities; 
(6)  To preserve large outdoor recreation uses that could not easily be provided in the already urbanized portions of the city; 
(7)  To contribute to the environmental health of surrounding neighborhoods; and 
(8)  To provide a continued economic benefit, and to preserve and enhance property values in the city. 
Because of the proximity of the Parks and Recreation district to residential zones, the regulations of this district are also intended to ensure compatibility with adjacent and nearby residential uses. 
B.  Use Regulations. No premises shall be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or used except for one or more uses contained within Section 40-4.08. 
C.  Special Land Uses. For special land uses in the PRD District on properties located within an historic district, or within a proposed historic district consistent with Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended, MCL 399.214(3), special land use approval and site plan approval by the Planning Commission, and a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic District Commission, shall be required. Special land use approval and site plan approval shall be granted prior to the certificate of appropriateness. The Planning Commission shall consult the Historic District Commission during the special land use and site plan reviews. 
D.  Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the PRD District: 
Use District Maximum Height of Building Minimum Yard Setback (Per Lot in Ft.)   Stories Ft. Front Sides Rear Least One Least Two PRD 2.5 35 30 6 12 6  
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 604, § 2, 4-10-2018) 
Section 40-4.08 - Schedule of Use Regulations 
A.  In all Districts, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Article. The following land use matrix shows the uses which are permitted, permitted as a Special Use, permitted as an accessory use, or prohibited in specific districts or zones in the City of Huntington Woods. The land use matrix is intended to serve as a guide for the convenience of the user of this Zoning Ordinance. More detailed standards regarding uses are contained within the individual district standards within Article 5 - Specific Use Provisions. 
B.  The Schedule of Use Regulations identifies uses as follows: 
1.  P: Permitted Uses - Uses permitted by right in the applicable Zoning District, subject to compliance with all other applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  S: Special Land Uses - Uses which may be allowed subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with Article 8, subject to compliance with all other applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  A: Accessory Uses - Uses which may be permitted as an accessory use incidental to the principal use of the premise in accordance with Article 6, subject to compliance with all other applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
4.  NP: Not Permitted - Uses not permitted within the district. 
LAND USE ZONING DISTRICT NP = Not Permitted  P = Permitted by Right
S = Special Use  A = Accessory Use R-1 RT TD BD PRD Footnote RESIDENTIAL Single-family dwelling (one per lot) P P NP NP NP Home occupations A A A NP NP 1 One-family attached NP NP P P NP 5 Two-Family dwelling NP P NP NP NP Multiple-Family dwelling NP NP P S NP 5 Multiple-Family in mixed use building NP NP P P NP 5 Senior housing and assisted living facilities NP NP S S NP OFFICE Professional office NP NP P P NP Medical office NP NP P P NP RETAIL, ENTERTAINMENT AND SERVICE General retail and personal service uses not exceeding six thousand (6,000) sq. ft. for a single use. NP NP P P NP 4 General retail and personal service uses exceeding six thousand (6,000) sq. ft. for a single use. NP NP S S NP 4 Personal Service NP NP P P NP 4 Dry cleaners/laundromat NP NP NP P NP 4 Convenience stores (no gasoline/no drive-through) NP NP P P NP 4 Restaurants (no drive-through) NP NP P P A 4 Outdoor seating areas NP NP P/S P/S NP 6 Outdoor display of goods or materials NP NP S S NP Financial institutions (no drive-through) NP NP P P NP 4 Private recreational uses such as tennis clubs and swim clubs NP NP NP NP P 4 Medical Marihuana P NP NP NP NP AUTOMOTIVE/TRANSPORTATION Gasoline filling stations NP NP NP S NP 4 Drive-through for bank or pharmacy NP NP S S NP 4 Drive-through for food uses NP NP NP S NP 4 Public garages NP NP NP P NP INSTITUTIONAL Adult/Child Family day care homes P P NP NP NP Adult/Child Group day care homes S S NP NP NP Adult/Child Day Care Center + Preschools NP NP S P NP Adult and Child Foster Care Family Home P P NP NP NP Adult Foster Care, small group home S S NP NP NP Adult Foster Care, large group home NP S NP NP NP Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility NP NP NP S NP Child Foster Care Family Group Home S S NP NP NP Publicly owned parks P P P P P Recreational facility, municipal building and use NP S S NP S Clubs NP S S NP S Place of Worship NP S S NP S School NP S S NP S Educational facilities, such as nature centers, arboretums and botanical gardens NP NP NP NP S MISCELLANEOUS Accessory Building/Structure A A A A A 2 Wireless Communication Facilities (WCFs) P P NP NP P 3 Adult regulated use NP NP NP S NP Zoo NP NP NP NP P 7 Golf course, but not including "par-3" or "miniature golf." NP NP NP NP P Other uses similar to the above S S S S S  
C.  Footnotes to the Use Matrix. 
(1)  Home occupations shall be subject to the Specific Use Provisions contained in Section 40-5.03. 
(2)  No more than two (2) accessory buildings may be permitted per lot. Accessory buildings and structure shall be subject to the provisions contained in Section 40-6.03. 
(3)  Wireless communication facilities (WCFs) in R-1 districts shall be located on the same lot as a publicly owned park, recreational facility, or municipal building and use and shall comply with Section 40-5.13. 
(4)  Hours. No premises shall be open to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(5)  In TD, district Multiple-family dwellings are permitted either: 
(a)  Within a mixed-use building, on upper floors above retail and/or office uses; or 
(b)  As townhouses, with a single unit occupying a minimum of two (2) floors; provided, however, that apartment flats or "stacked ranch" units shall be permitted if they provide an exterior façade with the appearance of townhouse-style architecture, as deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission. 
(6)  Outdoor seating areas are permitted by right if located towards the front or side of a building and located further than seventy (70) feet from a residentially-zoned or used property. Outdoor seating areas located behind a building or seventy (70) feet or less from a residentially-zoned or used property may be permitted as a special land use subject to the special use standards contained within Article 8. 
(7)  Zoo fences shall comply with Section 40-10.10. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 5 - Specific Use Provisions 

Section 40-5.01 - Intent 
    The intent of this Article is to provide standards for specific uses, whether regulated as a permitted use or Special Use. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.02 - Family Day Care Homes, Group Day Care Homes, Day Care Center, and Child and Adult Foster Care 
A.  A family day care home shall be a permitted home occupation, subject to regulations contained in Section 40-5.03, and further subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The owner or occupant shall obtain a license for the operation of the dwelling from the city clerk as a family day care home pursuant to Chapter 8 of the City Code. 
(2)  The dropping off and picking up of children shall not be allowed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  No family day care home may operate within a distance of 750 feet from any existing registered family day care home or group day care home, measured from the nearest property line of the proposed use to the nearest property line of the existing use, except upon review and approval by the Planning Commission as a Special Use, and upon proof and specific findings by the Commission that the resulting concentration of uses will not adversely affect the peace and tranquility of the residential character of the surrounding area. 
B.  A group day care home may be a permitted home occupation as a Special Use, subject to the Special Use standards as set forth in Article 8 and the Home Occupation standards of Section 40-5.03, and subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  The owner or occupant of the dwelling shall, after approval of the operation by the Planning Commission, obtain a license therefor pursuant to Chapter 8 of the City Code. 
(2)  That the proposed use will not result in on-street parking requirements, traffic congestion, or hazardous traffic conditions. 
(3)  No family day care home may operate within a distance of 750 feet from any existing registered family day care home or group day care home, measured from the nearest property line of the proposed use to the nearest property line of the existing use, except upon review and approval by the Planning Commission, and upon proof and specific findings by the Commission that the resulting concentration of uses will not adversely affect the peace and tranquility of the residential character of the surrounding area. 
(4)  One (1) off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be provided. 
(5)  No group day care home shall be conducted unless a Special Use is granted by the Planning Commission upon finding that: 
(a)  The proposed group day care home meets all the conditions and requirements set forth in Article 8. 
(b)  The proposed group day care home meets any other conditions and requirements applicable to a particular proposed group day care home. 
(c)  The proposed group day care home is not likely to be dangerous or detrimental to residents of the neighborhood or contrary to public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(d)  The proposed group day care home and its location will be desirable to the public convenience or welfare and consistent with the spirit and purpose of this section. 
(e)  The proposed group day care home will preserve the residential character of the affected neighborhood. 
(f)  That the use not result in on-street parking requirements, traffic congestion or hazardous traffic conditions. 
C.  A day care center. The following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  Frontage and access on an arterial street. 
(2)  A separate drop-off and pickup area shall be required adjacent to the main building entrance, located off a public street and the parking access lane, and shall be of sufficient size so as to not create congestion on the site or within a public roadway. 
(3)  A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 7 shall be required to be submitted. 
(4)  There shall be an outdoor play area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet provided on the premises. Said play area shall not be located within the front setback. This requirement may be waived if a public play area is available five hundred (500) feet from the subject parcel. 
(5)  One (1) off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be provided. 
(6)  Appropriate licenses with the State shall be maintained. 
D.  Adult Foster Care Facilities. 
(1)  Adult foster care family homes serving six (6) persons or less. A state-licensed adult foster care home, foster family home, or foster family group home serving six (6) persons or less shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all residential districts. 
(2)  Child foster care group and adult foster care small group home. 
(a)  A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 7 shall be required to be submitted. 
(b)  The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of two thousand (2,000) square feet per adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers. 
(c)  The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood. 
(d)  One (1) off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be provided. 
(e)  Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained. 
(3)  Congregate care and Adult foster care large group homes serving between thirteen (13) and twenty (20) persons. 
(a)  Frontage and access on an arterial street. 
(b)  A separate drop-off and pickup area shall be required adjacent to the main building entrance, located off of a public street and the parking access lane, and shall be of sufficient size so as to not create congestion on the site or within a public roadway. 
(c)  A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 7 shall be required to be submitted. 
(d)  The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of two thousand (2,000) square feet per adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers. 
(e)  The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood. 
(f)  One (1) off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be provided. 
(g)  Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.03 - Home Occupations 
A.  Purpose. It is the intent of this section to permit the owner, lessee, or other persons who have legal right to use of the dwelling unit to also have the ability to conduct a home occupation without securing special permission to do so. However, such person shall be subject to all conditions which are applied in this chapter generally, such as off-street parking, and to all other business licenses. It is also the intent of this section to eliminate as home occupations all uses except those that conform to the standards set forth in this chapter. Custom and tradition are intentionally excluded as criteria. In general, a home occupation is an accessory use so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence other than for a nameplate as permitted elsewhere in this chapter. The standards for home occupations in this chapter are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and with the secondary or incidental status in relation to the residential use of the main building. 
B.  Necessary conditions. Home occupations are permitted accessory uses in all R1, one-family residential districts; RT, one- and two-family district; and the TD, transitional district only so long as such home occupations do not change the character of the residential district in which they are located or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district and meets the following conditions: 
(1)  Such occupations shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit. 
(2)  No more than 25 percent of the gross area of said residence shall be used for the home occupation purpose. 
(3)  The use of accessory buildings for a home occupation is prohibited. 
(4)  No use shall: 
(a)  Require internal or external alterations; 
(b)  Involve construction features; or 
(c)  Involve the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure based on the International or other applicable Fire Code in which the structure is located. 
(5)  No more than one (1) employee shall be permitted other than members of the immediate family resident in the dwelling unit. 
(6)  There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the home occupation. 
(7)  The use may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no more than two additional vehicles at a time. 
(8)  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, mold, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average residential occupancy in the district in question under normal circumstances wherein no home occupation exists. 
(9)  There shall be no sale of goods on the premises other than those incidental to the services performed and expressly permitted by this section. 
(10)  The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles, other than one vehicle not to exceed three-quarter-ton load-carrying capacity, owned by the resident of the dwelling, which shall be parked in accordance with subsection 36-675i. 
(11)  Deliveries to or from the premises by commercial suppliers shall not be made more than once each week, shall not restrict traffic circulation, and shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. only. 
C.  Nameplate allowed. Only one nameplate shall be allowed. It shall not exceed one-half of one square foot in area, shall be non-illuminated and attached flat to the main structure or visible through a window. The limitation of one nameplate is intended to apply to all lots, including corner lots. 
D.  Uses that are prohibited. The following uses by the nature of the investment or operation generally require the use of electrical or mechanical equipment; generate excessive pedestrian or vehicular traffic, noise, odor, smoke, dust, vibration, mold, solid waste, etc.; have a pronounced tendency once started to rapidly increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations as outlined in subsection 40-5.03.B. above; cause a potential fire hazard or other danger; have a tendency to involve or attract criminal activity; have an adverse effect upon adjacent and nearby residents; and/or impair the use and value of a residentially zoned area for residential purposes. Therefore, the uses specified in this subsection shall not be permitted as home occupations: 
 Auto repair, minor or major; barbershop; beauty parlor; carpentry work; dental or medical office; dealer of firearms; food processing; massage therapy; law office; real estate office; social worker, counselor, psychologist or psychiatrist; painting of vehicles, trailers or boats; photo developing; private school with organized classes; electronics repair; and upholstering. 
E.  Uses that may qualify as a home occupation with approval as a Special Use. The following are examples of uses which may qualify as home occupations with approval by the Planning Commission as a Special Use: 
 Bakers; confectionery; dance instruction; photo studio; food preparation; offices of a landscaper; locksmith or other tradesmen, and other uses similar to those listed herein. 
No Special Use for a home occupation shall be granted by the Planning Commission unless it finds that: 
(1)  The proposed home occupation meets all the conditions and requirements set forth in subsection 40-5.03.B of this section; 
(2)  The proposed home occupation meets any other conditions and requirements applicable to a particular home occupation; 
(3)  The proposed home occupation is not likely to be dangerous or detrimental to residents of the neighborhood or contrary to public health, safety, morals or general welfare; 
(4)  The proposed home occupation and its location will be desirable to the public convenience or welfare and consistent with the spirit and purpose of this section; 
(5)  The proposed home occupation will preserve the residential character of the affected neighborhood; 
(6)  The proposed home occupation will not result in on-street parking requirements, traffic congestion or hazardous traffic conditions; and 
(7)  The proposed home occupation is consistent with and complies with the intent and purposes of this chapter, the Huntington Woods Master Plan and other statutorily authorized and properly adopted city planning documents, other applicable ordinances, and state and federal statutes. 
F.  Any home occupation carried on in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be nuisance per se and is subject to the penalties set forth in Section 40-3.08. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.04 - Medical Marihuana 
A.  Uses of land or buildings or structures for commercial uses or purposes that are prohibited by or contrary to federal, state or local regulations and ordinances are expressly prohibited in any zoning district within the City. Medical marihuana provision centers, safety compliance facilities, dispensaries, cooperatives, and any other operation or facility similar in nature, are specifically prohibited. However, the following activities are exempt from this prohibition in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1, MCL 333.26423(d): 
(1)  The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer or transportation of Medical Marihuana by a registered qualifying patient as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1, subject to subsection 40-5.04.B below; 
(2)  The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer or transportation of Medical Marihuana or provision of services to a qualifying patient by a primary caregiver as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1, subject to subsection 40-5.04.B below. 
B.  Medical marihuana activities shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Medical marihuana activities are permitted only in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D and R-1E zoning districts. Medical marihuana activities are expressly prohibited in all other zoning districts. 
(2)  All medical marihuana activities shall be conducted in full compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law, as amended. 
(3)  All medical marihuana activities shall be conducted in full compliance with all applicable building, plumbing and fire codes. 
(4)  Medical marihuana provisioning centers, safety compliance facilities, dispensaries, cooperatives, and any other operation or facility similar in nature are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 602, § 1, 4-10-2018) 
Section 40-5.05 - Outdoor Seating Areas 
A.  Outdoor seating areas accessory to a permitted use shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The seating area may be located toward the front or side of a building. 
(2)  The seating area shall not be located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A five-foot wide pedestrian path shall remain clear. 
(4)  Noise levels at all property lines shall not exceed seventy (70) A-weighted decibels (dB(a)) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  A physical barrier, such as a fence (permanent or temporary), planters or bollards shall be installed to define the outdoor eating area. 
(6)  Outdoor seating areas located seventy (70) feet or less from a residentially-zoned or used property, shall be reviewed as a Special use, shall limit the hours of outdoor dining to between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m, and shall be appropriately screened from the adjacent residential property. 
(7)  All food preparation shall take place inside of the building on the premises. 
(8)  Outdoor seating areas shall not have the effect of reducing the number of on-site parking. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.06 - Outdoor Display of Goods or Materials 
A.  Outdoor display of goods or materials accessory to a permitted retail use shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The display area may be located in a required front or side yard. 
(2)  The display area shall not be located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A five-foot wide pedestrian path shall remain clear. 
(4)  The display area shall be located against the building wall and shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the building. 
(5)  The display area shall not block access to alleys, off-street parking, or trash storage areas. 
(6)  The display area shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the length of the storefront. 
(7)  The product displayed must be sold within interior to the retail establishment. 
(8)  Outdoor sales are prohibited. 
(9)  Outdoor display is not a permitted principal use of a parcel. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.07 - Gas Stations 
A.  Permissible uses of a gas station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in gasoline service stations. A gas station shall not include a repair garage or a body shop. 
B.  Any services other than the dispersing of fuel and incidental related services shall be conducted inside a completely enclosed building. No motor vehicles shall be parked or stored in the open or out of doors for a period of time longer than twelve (12) hours or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
C.  The following minimum setbacks shall apply to canopies and pump facilities constructed in conjunction with fueling station: 
Setback Canopy Support Pump Islands Canopy Edge Front Property Line 15 20 10 Side Property Line 15 20 10 Rear Property Line 30 30 20  
D.  Canopy structures shall be designed and constructed in a manner that is architecturally compatible with the principal building. The canopy structure shall be attached to and made an integral part of the principal building unless can be demonstrated that the design of the building and canopy in combination would be more functional and aesthetically pleasing if the canopy was not physically attached to the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.08 - Places of Worship 
A.  All religious activities shall take place in a fully enclosed building except as may be approved by the City. 
B.  Facilities shall front and have access to an arterial road. 
C.  Facilities incidental to the main religious sanctuary must be used for church, worship, or religious education purposes, in a manner that is consistent with residential zoning and compatible with adjacent residential property. Associated uses on the site such as recreation centers, banquet facilities, retreat facilities, conference centers, schools, convents, and others shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance for such uses. 
D.  Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in the District in which a place of worship is located may be allowed provided that the front, side and rear yards are increased one (1) foot for each foot of building height which exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.09 - Adult Regulated Uses 
A.  Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate adult use businesses, to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of adult use businesses within the City. It is recognized that the adult businesses identified in this section, because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics that cause negative secondary effects upon nearby residential, educational, religious, and other similar public and private uses. The regulation of such businesses is necessary to ensure that their negative secondary effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of surrounding areas and will not negatively impact the health, safety, and general welfare of City residents. 
The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult materials protected by the Constitution of the United States or the Michigan Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment or adult use businesses to their intended market. It is also neither the intent nor effect of this Section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
Prior to adopting these regulations, the City reviewed studies prepared on these uses, reviewed ordinances and regulations prepared by other municipalities, and reviewed applicable federal and state case law. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, for sale, lease or any other exchange, books, videotapes, movies, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities," or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this subsection, or an establishment within a segment or section devoted to the sale, lease, or display of such material. 
(2)  ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this subsection, for observation by patrons therein. 
(3)  ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with capacity for fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in this subsection, for observation by patrons therein. 
(4)  SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
1.  Human genitals, pubic region; 
2.  Buttock; and 
3.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(5)  SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: 
(a)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(b)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(c)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
(6)  SWINGERS CLUBS OR SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS A social gathering specifically designed for various couples (male and/or female) to engage in sexual activities, ranging from a couple to a group of participants, whether the activities take place on a particular parcel or whether the individuals are transported elsewhere after meeting on the particular parcel. 
C.  Regulated Uses. In the development and execution of this chapter, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent uses. Specific regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this section. Prior to adopting these regulations, the City reviewed studies prepared on these uses, reviewed ordinances and regulations prepared by other municipalities, and reviewed applicable federal and state case law. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area, not more than two (2) such uses within five hundred (500) feet of each other, which would create such adverse effects. The uses subject to these controls are as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore. 
(2)  Adult motion picture theater. 
(3)  Adult mini-motion picture theater. 
(4)  Swingers Club. 
D.  Procedure. Application to establish any of the above regulated uses shall be made to the Planning Commission, who shall not approve any such request if there are already in existence two (2) or more such regulated uses within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of the site of the proposed regulated use, except as provided in subsection 40-5.09.E. 
E.  Reduction of locational provision. The Planning Commission may reduce this locational provision for adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters and adult mini-motion picture theaters, if the following findings are made: 
(1)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit of the chapter will be observed. 
(2)  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a rundown or dilapidated area within the city. 
(3)  That the establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere any plans for future development of the area according to the City's Master Plan. 
(4)  That all applicable regulations of this chapter will be observed. 
The Planning Commission may not waive this location provision for sexually-oriented businesses as defined by this Ordinance. 
F.  Adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, swingers club prohibited. It shall be unlawful to hereafter establish any adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater or swingers club within five hundred (500) feet of any building containing a residential dwelling, or rooming unit. This locational provision may be reduced if the person applying for the reduction shall file with the Planning Commission, a petition which indicates approval of the proposed regulated use by fifty-one (51) percent of the persons owning, residing or doing business within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the proposed use. The petitioner shall attempt to contact all eligible locations within the radius and must maintain a list of all addresses at which no contact was made. A minimum of fifty-one (51) percent of the persons owning, residing or doing business within the five hundred-foot radius is required. 
(1)  The Planning Commission shall adopt rules and regulations governing the procedure for securing the required petition of consent. The rules shall provide that the circulator of the petition requesting a reduction shall subscribe to an affidavit attesting to the fact that the petition was circulated in accordance with the rules of the Planning Commission, and that the same were affixed to the petition by the person whose name appeared thereon. 
(2)  The Planning Commission shall not consider the reduction of locational requirements set forth in this chapter, until the above-described petition shall have been filed and verified with the city clerk. 
G.  Conditions of approval: The Planning Commission may recommend that the City Commission impose such conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of the regulated use, as shall, in its judgment, be necessary for the protection of the public interest, except that any conditions imposed on an adult business as defined in this Section shall be limited to those conditions necessary to assure compliance with the standards and requirements of this Section. Any evidence and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection with the establishment, maintenance and operation of a sexually-oriented business shall be fulfilled. 
H.  Time limits for review: The following time limits shall apply to the review of an application by the Planning Commission and City Commission for special approval of an adult business as defined by this Section. 
(1)  The Planning Commission will publish notice and hold a public hearing as required for special land use approval within sixty (60) days of receiving a technically complete special approval and site plan application as required by Article 7 of the Zoning Ordinance for an adult business as defined in Subsections 40-5.09.B and C of this Section. This period can be extended by agreement of the Planning Commission and the applicant. 
(2)  The Planning Commission will make its recommendation regarding the special approval application for an adult business at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission following the public hearing held to review the application, unless additional information is required from the applicant, or unless this period of time is extended by agreement of the Planning Commission and the applicant. If additional information is required, the Planning Commission will make its recommendation at the next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the requested additional information, unless this period of time is extended by agreement of the Planning Commission and the applicant. 
(3)  The recommendation of the Planning Commission will be forwarded to the City Commission within sixty (60) days of the meeting at which Planning Commission issues its recommendation. The City Commission will render its decision to grant or deny special approval of the adult business or to grant approval with conditions, as stipulated by the Zoning Ordinance at this meeting, unless the City Commission requires additional information, or unless this period of time is extended by agreement of the City Commission and the applicant. 
(4)  Failure of the City to act within the above-specified time limits shall not be deemed to constitute the grant of special approval to the adult business. 
I.  Effect of denial. No applicant for a regulated use which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions. 
J.  An applicant shall have the right to appeal a denial in whole or in part of an application for a regulated use a court of competent jurisdiction. 
K.  Revocations: In any case where a building permit for a regulated use is required and has not been obtained within six (6) months after the granting of the special approval by the City Commission, the grant of special land use approval shall become null and void. 
L.  Reconstruction of damaged regulated uses: Nothing in this Section shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding and continued use of any building or structure, the use of which makes it subject to the controls of this Section, which is damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, provided that the expense of such reconstruction does not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the reconstruction cost of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred, provided that where the reconstruction repair or rebuilding exceeds the above-stated expense, the re-establishment of the use shall be subject to all provisions of this Section and further provided, that the re-established use complies with the off-street parking requirements of Article 10. 
M.  (Reserved for future use.) 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.10 - Zoos and Golf Courses 
A.  The total size of any zoo or golf course shall be no less than 120 acres. 
B.  The zoo or golf course shall front and have access to an arterial road. 
C.  Golf courses may also include accessory uses and structures such as, but not limited to, clubhouse, restaurant, pro shop, and maintenance building. Any accessory uses and buildings associated with the golf course, and any buildings on the site shall conform to setback and dimensional requirements of the zoning district. Such ancillary accessory use shall be incidental to principal use of the golf course as a golfing facility. Any improvement to the golf course shall comply with all applicable Local Historic District regulations. 
D.  A driving range is only permitted as a Special Use in conjunction with an existing golf course. 
E.  All storage, service, and maintenance areas shall be screened from view of residentially zoned or used property. 
F.  Site Plan Review for Development within the Zoo. 
(1)  Any construction of a new or modification, except minor modifications as listed in subsection 40-5.10.F(2) below, to an existing zoo animal habitat, food service building, or office building within 120 feet of the Huntington Road centerline shall require site plan review as set forth in Article 7. Any construction of a new or modification to a zoo animal habitat, food service building, or office building outside of 120 feet from the Huntington Road centerline is exempt from site plan review, if such improvement complies and consistent with the Zoo Master Plan. Any construction of a new or modification to a zoo animal habitat, food service building, or office building outside of 120 feet from the Huntington Road centerline must be in compliance with City ordinances controlling noise, height, lighting and odor. Landscaping may be required to screen the development if the City Manager or his/her designee determines it is in the best interest of the City. 
(2)  Minor modifications to existing zoo animal habitats, food service building, or office building within 120 feet of the Huntington Road centerline may be permitted without site plan review. For the purposes of zoo animal habitats, food service building, or office buildings only, minor modification shall be defined as any interior building modification, or a modification that does not increase the buildings height, encroach closer to residential property, or increase the footprint by more than 500 square feet. 
(3)  The Zoo Master Plan shall be submitted annually to the City for administrative review. City administration will review the Zoo Master Plan, note any proposed changes from the prior year's Master Plan, and forward a report to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission will review the Zoo Master Plan and consider whether any proposed changes or development would create an adverse impact on the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of Huntington Woods. The Zoo Master Plan shall be reviewed annually by the City. 
(4)  Any fence or modification to an existing fence within 120 feet of the Huntington Road centerline shall require compliance with Section 40-10.10. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.11 - Drive-Through Facility 
A.  On-Site Stacking. On-site vehicle stacking for drive-in windows shall not interfere with access to, or egress from the site or cause standing of vehicles in a public right-of-way. Adequate on-site stacking space for vehicles shall be provided for each drive-through window so that vehicles will not interfere with vehicular circulation or parking maneuvers on this site. Access to and egress from the site shall not interfere with peak hour traffic flow on the street serving the property. 
B.  Traffic Control. Projected peak hour traffic volumes which will be generated by the proposed drive-through service shall not cause undue congestion during the peak hour of the street serving the site. 
C.  Ingress and Egress. Ingress and egress to drive-through facilities shall be part of the internal circulation of the site and integrated with the overall site design. Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be provided. Drive-through facilities shall be designed in a manner that promotes pedestrian and vehicular operation and safety. 
D.  Drive-Through Locations. Single-lane drive-throughs may be located at the side of a building. Multiple-lane drive-throughs shall be located in a manner that will be the least visible from a public thoroughfare. Canopy design shall be compatible with the design of the principal building and incorporate similar materials and architectural elements. 
E.  Stacking Space Requirements. Each drive-through facility shall provide stacking space meeting the following standards: 
(1)  Each stacking lane shall be one-way, and each stacking lane space shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length. 
(2)  If proposed, an escape lane shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width to allow other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served. 
(3)  The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for the uses as listed in Table 5.11.E.(3). 
Table 5.11.E.(3) Use Stacking Spaces Pharmacy/Financial Institution/Other 4 Restaurant and/or any food use 10  
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.12 - Senior and Assisted Living Centers 
A.  The maximum allowable density varies by housing type, but shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Dwellings may be provided for as single-family detached, two-family or multiple family units. When such dwellings contain kitchens, the minimum site area requirements for purposes of calculating density shall be as follows: 
Dwelling Unit Size Site Area/Unit (Square Feet) Efficiency/one (1) bedroom 2,000 Two (2) bedroom 2,500 Each additional bedroom 500 additional  
(2)  Where facilities do not contain kitchen facilities within individual dwelling units, the site area per bed shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
B.  Parking is not allowed in any front yard. 
C.  The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building façade facing public streets, residentially zoned or used property, and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Façade articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance. Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building. 
D.  The drop-off/pick-up of residents shall be provided at the front entrance of the building with a covered canopy. 
E.  Frontage on an arterial street shall be required. All site access shall be provided on an arterial street. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.13 - Wireless Communications 
A.  For wireless communications facilities (WCFs) only, the application is considered to be complete when the city manager or his or her designee makes that determination 14 business days after the city manager or his or her designee receives the application, whichever is first. 
B.  Wireless Communications Facilities. 
(1)  For WCFs only, if the city manager or his or her designee notifies the applicant before the expiration of the 14-day period, that the application is not complete, specifying the information necessary to make the application complete, or notifies the applicant that a fee required to accompany the application has not been paid, specifying the amount due, the running of the 14-day period shall be tolled until the applicant submits to the city manager or his or her designee the specified information or fee amount due. The notice shall be given in writing or by electronic notification. 
(a)  Not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing and review, the notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  Not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing and review, the notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of the property that is the subject of the request and to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the subject property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(c)  At the appointed date, time and place, the Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing, site plan review and Special Use review. Comments from the public and staff, and the Planning Commission's finding of fact, decisions and any conditions imposed thereon, shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting and shall become part of the permanent record. 
(2)  For WCFs only, the Planning Commission shall approve or deny the application not more than 60 days after the application is considered complete for WCFs co-located on an existing tower or 90 days for a new WCF, unless an extension in time is mutually agreed to between the WCF applicant and the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to timely approve or deny the application, the application shall be considered approved. 
(a)  A building permit shall not be issued until Special Use approval and site plan approval have been granted by the Planning Commission. If no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy or business license shall not be issued until Special Use approval and site plan approval have been granted by the Planning Commission. 
(3)  For WCFs only, the WCF shall not be authorized by the city commission until Special Use approval and site plan approval have been granted by the Planning Commission, if required. 
(a)  After approval for a Special Use has been granted, no change in that use may be made, nor may any addition or change in the building or improvements on the property take place until a new request for approval has been filed with the Planning Commission and the Planning Commission has approved the request for change. 
(b)  After approval of a Special Use has been granted by the Planning Commission, application for a building permit, or if no building permit is required, application for a certificate of occupancy or business license shall be filed with the building department within 120 days thereafter, or such approval shall automatically be revoked unless an extension is granted. The Planning Commission may grant an extension of the first approval for good causes for a period not to exceed six (6) months. 
(4)  Equipment or shelters housing equipment for wireless communication facilities shall be permitted in the PRD subject to a Planning Commission determination that the architectural design is appropriate in relation to the surrounding neighborhood in accordance with a site plan and special use review. Accessory buildings and structures may be erected within the boundaries of any rear yard required hereunder upon application to and approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall not permit the erection of any accessory building or structure nearer to the side property line than the width of the side yard required hereunder, nor closer to the rear property line than six (6) feet. The Planning Commission shall not permit the erection of such accessory building or structure, if it finds that: 
(a)  Sufficient off-street parking has not been provided on the premises to fully meet the needs of employees and customers. 
(b)  The accessory building or structure will impair the values of the adjoining properties, as a result of insufficient screening or by other means. 
(c)  The accessory building or structure is closer to the rear property line than six (6) feet. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-5.14 - Single-family Architectural Design Standards 
A.  Community Expectations. Design review involves a balancing of the needs and expectations of the applicant with those of the surrounding neighbors, many of which bought into the neighborhood for the residential quality and character, have made substantial investments in their homes, and have developed an understandable attachment to the surrounding visual qualities. An applicant should be aware of the built and natural elements and architectural styles that establish the unique character and scale of each neighborhood and block. 
The 2015 Huntington Woods Master Plan underlines the importance of residential quality and design integrity by retaining and enhancing the community character of the Huntington Woods' neighborhoods. Each Huntington Woods' neighborhood has its own unique image established by the existing setbacks, lot sizes, building materials, masonry and architectural styles that predominate the block. Huntington Woods neighborhoods vary from the older tracts of the Hill Historic District and the denser areas of the Bronx subdivision, to the larger lots on Borgman, LaSalle, and Nadine Avenue. The natural setting, the pattern of lot subdivision, and the dominant period of development establish the defining characteristics of each of Huntington Woods neighborhood. 
Neighborhood character is often apparent through observable patterns, such as: 
  Quality exterior building materials; 
  Exterior wall complexity and fenestration; 
  Appropriate window types, size, and proportions; 
  Consideration of entry treatment and scale; 
  Appropriate roof types, orientation, slopes, eave heights, gables, and over hangs; 
  Compatible building heights; 
  Congruent second floor size and placement; 
  Proper garage location, size and treatment; and 
  Use of decorative fencing and landscaping. 
Huntington Woods' housing stock primarily consists of Colonial Revival, and Tudor Revival, but also includes a mix of Contemporary, Ranch, Craftsman, Prairie, Mid-Century Modern, and Foursquare. The community expects to see design integrity in additions and new homes that respect the qualities that make the neighborhood unique and to see care taken in the siting and design. Though new homes tend to be larger than the older homes of the neighborhood they should be designed to maintain a compatible scale and bulk of other nearby homes and add to the fabric of the neighborhood. The fact that one or more homes of a different scale and character have been constructed in the past, often before design review, does not negate the need and desirability of relating new homes to the majority of homes nearby. Further, where streetscape components are similar or compatible in appearance, they contribute to and provide a cohesive sense of neighborhood character. These features should not necessarily be copied but should be respected to avoid new construction that detracts from the neighborhood. 
B.  Purpose and Intent. The following standards are to help applicants prepare plans for construction. The standards will also be used by the Planning Commission to determine if proposed plans for new residential buildings (principal or accessory) or additions are in compliance with the Standards for Site Plan Review: 
The standards emphasize the architectural elements that shape the building's appearance from the street. Primary importance is the use of high quality exterior finishes and 360-degree architecture treatment. These standards are intended to help maintain the high quality of Huntington Woods' neighborhoods by providing standards for the design of new houses, additions and/or remodels in existing neighborhoods. These standards are intended to focus on the characteristics of neighborhood compatibility and to leave individual homeowners with flexibility to build, expand or remodel to meet their own needs and objectives. 
C.  Exterior Finishes. 
(1)  Intent. Building materials shall be selected of high, durable quality that are representative of houses historically built in Huntington Woods. 
(2)  Standards: 
(a)  The exterior building finish for new homes shall be the same predominant material as the existing homes in the neighborhood. A detached garage for a new home shall include a minimum of 50% of the predominant material used for the new home. 
(b)  The exterior building finish for additions shall be the same predominant material as the existing building. Materials shall be the same proportions, within 10%, as the original structure unless it can be reasonably demonstrated that those materials are unavailable. 
(c)  The Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis may consider alternative exterior materials of proven durability and longevity, which are compatible with existing materials in the neighborhood. Samples and specifications must be submitted for evaluation and the Planning Commission may impose restrictions as to grade, design, and area where certain materials may be used. 
(d)  Accent materials may be used for architectural detailing and trim such as wooden rake boards, limestone keystones, fieldstone corners, wooden columns, etc. 
(e)  Natural materials to the extent possible shall be used rather than engineered materials. 
(f)  Chimneys shall have a foundation and are of masonry or stone construction and finish. 
(g)  Where the predominant exterior material is wood, vinyl, aluminum, cement board or other siding material, such material may also be used on the addition. 
(h)  Roofing materials may include asphalt and wood shingles. Metal, copper, and clay-tile may be used as accent roofing materials. 
D.  Elevations. 
(1)  Intent: The design of buildings shall coordinate the materials and details of all sides of the building with the design of the front elevation and side streets. Materials and colors shall harmonize with existing home design, desired architectural style, and neighborhood character. 
(2)  Standards: 
(a)  All elevations of the main building shall have the same materials in the same approximate proportions, and matching windows, trim, and architectural details, providing a 360-degree finish. 
(b)  The exterior materials, windows, trim and architectural details on the sides and rear of a building shall be compatible with those used on the front. 
(c)  All elevations shall have windows and the windows shall be placed so that no elevation has a large expanse of blank wall. The Planning Commission may approve elevations without a window if the applicant is able to demonstrate difficulty including a window on an elevation due to floorplan layout or intended use. In lieu of a window, additional architectural details may be required. 
(d)  The addition is constructed so the character-defining features such as lintels, quoins, keystones, etc. are not obscured, damaged or destroyed. 
E.  Form, Scale and Massing. 
(1)  Intent: The architectural form, scale, and massing shall be carefully crafted to reduce visual mass, and distinguish the house's architectural lines or style to ensure buildings are in proportion and complementary to those in the existing neighborhood. 
(2)  Standards: 
(a)  Additions may not be greater than the floor area of the existing main building. 
(b)  The depth of the building cannot exceed twice the width of the building. 
(c)  No portion of the second story may be cantilevered beyond the first story by more than 18 inches. Cantilevers are only permitted when used for architectural feature appropriate for the architectural style. Cantilevers may not encroach within a required setback. 
(d)  Gables and dormers shall be proportional to and not dominate the main roof over the house or garage. 
(e)  Entrance design characteristics shall be similar to other buildings in the neighborhood; specifically: (1) the main entrance faces the street, (2) the front porch is unenclosed, (3) if the front porch has a roof, it is only 1 story in height, not 1-1/2 or 2 stories, (4) the front porch and entrance are stepped up only slightly from the grade of the property, (5) the front door is a single door, not a double door or the appearance of a double door (such as a single door with a stationary door), and (6) if the building is masonry, the front porch is masonry. 
(f)  Bay windows on the front facade shall not extend above the first story. 
(g)  The building shall not have more than three front gables. Layered gables shall be separated by at least 12 inches of depth. 
(h)  Front facing garage doors shall be stepped back from the plane of the front door of the house and the roof over the garage shall be lower than the height of the main building, even if living space is above the garage. 
(i)  An attached garage cannot exceed more than 50% of first floor length of the front building façade. 
(j)  Gables and dormers on an attached garage shall be no larger than the gables and dormers on the main house. 
(k)  Side-entry doors may be covered with an awning or covering provided the canopy or covering does not encroach into a required side yard by more than three feet. 
F.  Roofs. 
(1)  Roofing material, and style should be consistent with the building architectural style. Roof profiles shall enhance the form, scale and proportion of primary and secondary house volumes. 
(2)  Standards: 
(a)  New roofs, including additions, porches, gables, and dorms, shall be perceived as similar or related to the pitch of the existing or main roof. These new roofs may have a different scale and/or style. 
(b)  Roofs may overhang a maximum of 12-inches into a side yard when used for an architectural feature appropriate for the architectural style. Roof overhangs over 12-inches may be granted by the Planning Commission if the overhang is appropriate for the architectural style. 
(c)  There shall only be one main roof ridge. 
(d)  Flat roofs may be used if appropriate for the architectural style. 
(e)  Reverse gables shall not be higher than the main roof. 
(f)  The height of the roof of an addition shall be less than or equal to the existing roof peak. 
(g)  Roofs for additions shall utilize the same material and style as the existing remaining structure. 
(h)  Buildings shall be limited to two roofing materials: one for the main roof and another material as an accent for dorms, porches, or other smaller roofs. Accessory structures shall utilize the same roofing material. 
(i)  Metal roofs are permissible if determined by the Planning Commission to be compatible with and appropriate for the architectural style. 
G.  Windows and Doors. 
(1)  Intent: Window and door styles and frame materials are an important expression of architectural style and should be consistent among all elevations of a building. 
(2)  Standards: 
(a)  The style, sash color and proportions of new windows should be compatible with the existing windows on the original building unless the new windows are not visible from the street. 
H.  Yard and Landscape. 
(1)  Intent: To ensure that the front yard complements the home and the street block face. 
(2)  Standards: 
(a)  A front yard shall be 80% grass unless a natural lawn with native plants and maintenance plan is approved by the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Patios, and fountains are permitted in the rear and side yard but may not be located between the front building line and the street. Anything projecting into the required setback must obtain a variance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 6 - General Provisions 

Section 40-6.01 - Intent/Applicability 
    The intent of this Article is to provide regulations that generally apply to all uses regardless of the particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-6.02 - General Lot Requirements 
A.  General Lot Requirement. No portion of a lot used to comply with the yard, setback requirements, lot area per unit, residential density, percentage of lot occupancy, or other site requirement of this Ordinance shall be counted toward the yard, lot area per unit, residential density, percentage of occupancy, or other site requirement for any other existing building or structure. 
B.  Number of Buildings per Lot. 
(1)  There shall be only one (1) single-family dwelling or one (1) two-family dwelling permitted per lot, provided all other requirements of this Ordinance are met. 
(2)  For all developments within the TD, Transitional District BD, Business District; or PRD, Parks and Recreation District more than one (1) principal building per lot may be permitted, as long as all other requirements of this Ordinance are met. 
C.  The requirements for a rear yard herein set forth shall not apply to buildings on through lots running from street to street. 
D.  In computing the depth of a rear yard or the distance a building or structure must be set back from the rear lot line where such yard abuts an alley or street, one-half of such alley or street may be assumed to be a portion of the yard. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-6.03 - Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses 
A.  General Requirements 
(1)  Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental and accessory to the uses permitted by Section 40-4.08 shall be permitted when located on the same lot and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  No accessory building or structure shall be built upon a lot or parcel unless and until a principal structure is erected. 
(3)  No accessory use on a lot shall be permitted to operate unless such lot is occupied by an operational principal use. 
(4)  In no instance, shall an accessory building or structure be located within a dedicated easement or right-of-way. 
(5)  An accessory building attached to the principal building shall be considered part of the principal building and shall be made a structural part thereof and shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  Accessory Buildings in Residential Zoning Districts. 
(1)  No more than two (2) accessory building or structures may be permitted per lot. A private garage or carport not to exceed 650 square feet in floor area and one other accessory building not to exceed 100 sq. ft. in floor area may be permitted. 
(2)  An accessory building shall not be used for the conduct of any business or home occupation or for use as a dwelling. 
(3)  An accessory building or structure shall only be built or constructed in the rear yard except for the exceptions as provided in Section 40-6.04. 
(4)  Accessory buildings or structure shall meet the following setbacks, except for the exceptions as provided in Section 40-6.04: 
(a)  Accessory structures may be no closer than six (6) feet to the rear lot line. 
(b)  No detached accessory building or accessory structure may be closer than three (3) feet from a side lot line. If a detached accessory building is to be located within ten (10) feet of a residence on an adjoining lot, such accessory building shall be at least five (5) feet from the side lot line. 
(c)  A detached accessory building shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building or another accessory building. 
(d)  Where an accessory building or structure is attached to a principal building or is an extension of a principal building (such as a garage, carport, deck, chimney, window box, cantilevered bay, etc.) said building or structure shall conform to all regulations applicable to the principal building. 
(e)  In the case of a corner lot, where an adjacent house fronts upon the side street, an accessory building or accessory structure shall be set back from the side street lot line a distance which is at least equal to the front setback of the adjoining house facing the same side street. In no case, shall the accessory building or accessory structure be located closer than eight (8) feet from said side street lot line. A private garage, whether attached or detached, the garage doors of which face the side street shall be set back at least 18 feet from the side street lot line. 
(5)  The total ground area covered by all accessory buildings and structures together shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the rear yard. 
(6)  An accessory building or structure attached to a main building shall not exceed the height of the main building. All other accessory buildings or structure shall not exceed 16 feet in height, except as provided in Section 40-6.04, and shall not include any habitable living space. 
(7)  An attached accessory building shall not project forward of any portion of the front façade of the main building including the front door and shall not exceed 50 percent of the width of the building. 
C.  Accessory Buildings in the TD, Transitional District; BD, Business District; or PRD, Parks and Recreation District. 
(1)  Accessory buildings or structure shall meet the following setbacks, except for the exceptions as provided in Section 40-6.04: 
(a)  No accessory buildings or structures shall be erected within the boundaries of any front or side yards required hereunder. 
(b)  Accessory structures may be located in a rear yard, but no accessory building or accessory structure shall be located within six (6) feet to the rear lot line. 
(2)  An accessory building or structure attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the principal building and meet all bulk regulations. All other accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed 16 feet in height, except as provided in Section 40-6.04. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-6.04 - Height and Area Regulations and Exceptions 
A.  Height Exceptions. 
(1)  A chimney may exceed the height regulations of the zoning district in which it is located by two (2) feet. 
(2)  In the TD, Transitional District; BD, Business District; or PRD, Parks and Recreation District, roof structures and screening devices for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, roof-mounted mechanical equipment, solar panels, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building shall not exceed by more than ten (10) feet the height limit of the district in which the use is located. 
(3)  Fire walls and skylights shall not exceed the height limit of the district in which the use is located by more than five (5) feet. 
(4)  A structure which is permitted by this Section to exceed height limits shall account for no more than ten percent (10%) of the roof area of the building; nor shall such structure be used for any residential, commercial, or industrial purpose whatsoever other than a service use incidental to the main use of the building. 
B.  Front porches. An open, single-story, unenclosed porch may project in front of a dwelling, into a required front yard for a maximum distance not to exceed six (6) feet. Uncovered steps may project an additional two (2) feet in front of a front porch. The steps must be the same material as the porch. The porch may be covered by a roof subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The porch ceiling shall not exceed the eaves of the house to which it is attached. 
(2)  The porch roof may be supported by columns but shall not be otherwise enclosed (i.e., no walls, windows or screens). 
(3)  Railings, if required, shall not be a solid wall and shall not exceed 36 inches in height. 
(4)  Pressure treated lumber and synthetic deck materials are prohibited. 
(5)  If the porch floor is masonry, it shall have a solid concrete foundation and exposed foundation walls must be brick, stone, decorative block or other finished masonry to match the dwelling. 
(6)  If the porch floor is wood, it shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch solid tongue and groove style boards with a finish compatible with existing siding. The exposed foundation walls may have non-pressure treated wood lattice between masonry porch piers, and the bottom framing piece resting on the soil may be made of pressure treated lumber. 
(7)  The width of the porch, including the roof overhang, shall not exceed the width of the dwelling; however, a front porch may wrap around to a side porch provided the required side yard setback is met. 
(8)  For lots with less than 7,000 square feet of area, a covered front porch may exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed in the Schedule of Regulations by up to one (1) percent of the lot area. 
C.  Handicap Ramps. A handicap ramp may project into a front yard for a distance necessary to meet the standards set forth in Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
D.  Projections. Roof overhangs, cornices, eaves, gutters, window awnings and similar projections may extend into a required front yard or rear yard for a distance not exceeding three (3) feet. Garden windows, first floor cantilevered bay windows and chimneys may extend into a required front yard or rear yard for a distance not exceeding two (2) feet. Roof overhangs, cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys may extend into a required side yard for a distance not exceeding one (1) foot. Window or door wells for emergency escape and rescue openings shall only be located in a rear yard, except a window well may be located in a side yard, including a required side yard, provided: 
(1)  The window well extends outward from the building no more than three (3) feet. 
(2)  There is at least two (2) feet between the window well and the side lot line. 
(3)  The window well is no more than six (6) inches above the surrounding grade. 
(4)  The window well is covered by a safety grate. 
E.  Air Conditioners and Power Generators. Refrigeration or cooling equipment (used for central air conditioning purposes) or power generators (used as a source of interim power) installed outside of a dwelling or main building shall be: 
(1)  Screened with approved fencing or landscaping. 
(2)  Located in the rear yard of the dwelling or main building. 
(3)  Not more than three (3) feet away from the related dwelling or principal building. 
(4)  In compliance with sound emission as set forth in Section 40-9.04.C. 
(5)  In the case of corner lots, the city manager may authorize installation toward the side lot line adjacent to the street in instances where compliance with the general rules set forth above would cause practical difficulties or result in unnecessary hardship. If authorized, shrubbery or other live plant material must be planted and maintained to screen it from view; further provided that the city manager may authorize installation toward side lot lines on any lot upon the receipt of written approval of such installation from the owner of the premises adjacent to and affected by such installation. 
F.  Basketball Net Assemblies. A maximum of two (2) basketball net assemblies may be erected upon a lot. Only one (1) basketball net assembly may be erected in the front yard provided that it is setback at least 50 percent of the front setback to the front lot line. Basketball net assemblies shall be set back at least six (6) inches from the lot line. 
G.  Driveways. A driveway may be constructed in a front, side or rear yard provided such driveway is in conformance with the regulations of Section 40-10.09. 
H.  Sidewalks, Sprinkler Systems and Yard Lights. Sprinkler systems and yard lights may be constructed or installed in a front, side or rear yard. 
I.  Exceptions. The Planning Commission may permit exceptions to: 
(1)  The height regulations of this chapter for towers of places of worship and for towers for wireless communications facilities. 
(2)  The height, area, and setback regulations of this chapter for bus shelters, utility cabinets, recreation facilities such as tennis courts and play structures, and similar structures. 
(3)  In approving such exception, the Planning Commission shall make a finding that the exception will not have an adverse impact on adjacent or nearby properties. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-6.06 - Visibility at Intersections 
A.  No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of thirty (30) inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 7 - Site Plan Review 

Section 40-7.01 - Intent 
    The site plan review requirements are intended to provide a consistent and uniform method of review of proposed development plans, to ensure full compliance with the regulations in this Ordinance, other applicable ordinances, and state and federal laws, to achieve efficient use of the land, to encourage innovative design solutions, to ensure safety for both internal and external vehicular and pedestrian users, to achieve innovative stormwater management solutions, and to prevent adverse impact on adjoining or nearby properties. It is the intent of these provisions to encourage cooperation and consultation between the City and the applicant to facilitate development in accordance with the City's land use objectives. Through the application of the following provisions, the attainment of the City's plans and goals will be ensured and the city will progress in an orderly fashion. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-7.02 - Site Plan Required 
A.  Site Plan Review. A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval of: 
(1)  New single-family dwellings. For purposes of this section, a new single-family dwelling is a dwelling proposed for construction on a vacant lot or an existing dwelling where more than 50 percent of the existing floor area is being altered as determined by the City Building Official or his/her designee. 
(2)  Additions to single-family dwellings except those additions which meet all of the following: 
(a)  Are to the rear of the existing building; 
(b)  Are no higher than the existing building; 
(c)  Are no closer to the side lot lines than the existing building; 
(d)  Are no larger than 50 percent of the floor area of the existing building; 
(e)  Are of the same predominant exterior material and proportion as the existing building; and 
(f)  Have windows on all elevations so that no elevation has a large expanse of blank wall. 
(3)  Additions or alterations to nonconforming uses, buildings containing nonconforming uses and/or changes in the off-street parking connected therewith. Any addition or alteration to a nonconforming use or building containing a nonconforming use shall require approval of a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to submission of the site plan. 
(4)  All residentially-related buildings and uses, such as, but not limited to: places of worship, schools, clubhouses, pubic facilities and additions thereto. 
(5)  Nonresidential buildings and accessory buildings, and additions or alterations to nonresidential buildings and accessory buildings. 
(6)  Off-street parking areas for three (3) or more vehicles in connection with subsections A(1) through (5) of this section. 
(7)  Semicircular driveways. 
(8)  Special land uses. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, site plan review by the Planning Commission shall not be required with respect to properties located within an historic district, or within a proposed historic district consistent with Public Act 169, as amended, MCL 399.214(3), but only if special land use approval is not required. The City Commission has provided that all applications for such properties be referred to the Historic District Commission. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 604, § 3, 4-10-2018) 
Section 40-7.03 - Application 
    Application for site plan review shall be made to the Zoning Administrator by submitting an application not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission, at which the application for a preliminary site plan will be considered. The application shall contain the following: 
A.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
B.  A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or a signed statement from the owner that the applicant is officially acting on the owner's behalf, and whether there are any options on the property or liens against it. 
C.  A boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer, including the following information: 
(1)  Certification that lot corners have been found and staked. 
(2)  Existing and proposed grades on the site and grades of adjacent properties. 
(3)  The date of the drawing. 
(4)  North arrow and scale (to be drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet). 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the surveyor or civil engineer. 
(6)  A site location map. 
(7)  Street address and legal description of the property. 
(8)  Property boundaries, dimensions and size (in square feet). 
(9)  Location of existing buildings on the property including all dimensions. 
(10)  Distances to lot lines and immediately adjacent buildings. 
(11)  Front and side yard setbacks of buildings on either side of subject property. 
(12)  Location of existing and proposed structures including air conditioners, swimming pools, decks, porches, patios, etc. 
(13)  Location of driveways and parking areas on the property. 
(14)  Existing roads and utility lines. 
(15)  Trees, including trees to be removed and trees in the city's right-of-way. 
D.  Architectural plans prepared by an architect or designer, including the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of architect or designer. 
(2)  A summary of pertinent facts about the plan (i.e., square feet of land, square feet of building, and percentage of lot coverage). 
(3)  Elevations for the front, sides, and rear of the building including all dimensions and location of gutters and downspouts (to be drawn at a scale of one-fourth inch equals one foot). 
(4)  Floor plans, including all dimensions (to be drawn at a scale of one-fourth inch equals one foot). 
(5)  A roof plan, including pitch, (to be drawn at a minimum scale of one-eighth inch equals one foot). 
(6)  Materials and colors to be used on existing and proposed buildings. 
(7)  If the front elevation is changing, a drawing of the front elevation of the buildings on the site together with the elevations of the immediately adjacent buildings drawn to a minimum scale of one-eighth inch equals one foot. 
(8)  For new buildings and semi-circular driveways, a landscaping plan, including trees, shrubs and other vegetation to be added (to be drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet). 
(9)  Site Plan requirements for uses or development in any R1 District shall include: 
(a)  All drawings are to have a title block, which shall have the name of the project and date of plans including revision dates. 
(b)  All drawings are to have a northpoint and the scale of the drawing is to be indicated. 
(c)  All lot and property lines. 
(d)  Location of all proposed structures. 
(e)  Existing and future right-of-way of adjacent streets, including centerlines and section lines where applicable. 
(f)  Location of all fences, driveways, and sidewalks, on and adjacent to the site. 
(g)  Setbacks and required yards. 
(10)  In addition to the above, applications for site plan review for uses or development in RT, One and Two-family Attached District; TD, Transitional District; BD, Business District; and PRD, Parks and Recreation District shall include: 
(a)  All drawings are to have a title block, which shall have the name of the project and date of plans including revision dates. 
(b)  All drawings are to have a northpoint and the scale of the drawing is to be indicated. 
(c)  All lot and property lines. 
(d)  Location of all proposed structures. 
(e)  Existing and future right-of-way of adjacent streets, including centerlines and section lines where applicable. 
(f)  Location of all sidewalks, on and adjacent to the site. 
(g)  The means by which stormwater detention will be provided. 
(h)  Setbacks and required yards. 
(i)  Parking areas, access drives, loading and unloading areas, and trash receptacles. 
(j)  Greenbelts, landscape areas, other open space areas and screening walls. 
(k)  The location of any existing driveways and streets within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property, including those across frontage streets. 
(l)  The location of existing cross access easements on abutting properties and the location of proposed cross access or joint drive easements on the subject property. 
(m)  Calculations for the following shall be included on the site plan: 
1.  Gross and net (after rights-of-way) site area. 
2.  Gross and net ("usable") building area. 
3.  Required parking and statement of parking provided. 
4.  Required landscape and open space area, and statement of intent for each. 
E.  Zoning Administrator. 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator may waive the submission of a site plan submittal requirement where such information is not material to the Planning Commission and/or the City Commission action. 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator may require additional information or studies to assist in the review of a site plan where such information is material to the Planning Commission and/or the City Commission action. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-7.04 - Procedure 
A.  Prior to review by the Planning Commission, the site plan application as required in Section 40-7.03 shall be reviewed, as applicable, by the Public Safety Director, the Zoning Administrator, the Director of Public Services, and the City's consulting engineer and City's consulting planner, for compliance with the City Code and the standards of the respective departments. The site plan will then be placed on a Planning Commission agenda for review. 
B.  The petitioner and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property will be notified by mail of the date, time and place of the Planning Commission meeting. 
C.  In the event that permission for a Special Use is also required for the subject property, such Special Use shall be applied for and reviewed by the Planning Commission concurrent with review of the site plan. 
D.  If an application to the Board of Zoning Appeals requires site plan approval by the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of this article, the applicant shall first receive site plan approval as set forth in this article. 
E.  The site plan, staff comments and comments from the public shall become part of the permanent record. The Planning Commission shall state in the record all the grounds for the action taken upon the site plan submitted for its approval. 
F.  Site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission is required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
G.  Approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission shall be valid for one (1) year from the date it is granted. Thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date, the applicant may make application to the Planning Commission for a six-month extension with no fee. The applicant shall explain in writing why the development has not proceeded, what the current timeframe is and why an extension should be granted. The Planning Commission will consider the reasons, and determine whether an extension should be granted. 
H.  An applicant, having secured approval of a site plan, shall develop such site in complete conformity with the approved site plan. Any change to the approved site plan deemed significant by the Zoning Administrator, shall be submitted with fee to the Planning Commission for revised approval. 
I.  For all new buildings, an "as-built" boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer certifying compliance with all approved grades, both existing and proposed, must be submitted prior to final inspection by the Building Official and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-7.05 - Amendment or Revision of Site Plan 
    A site plan for which the Building Official has not issued a building permit, or the work authorized under an issued building permit has not been completed, may be amended by the Planning Commission. Any amendment to an approved site plan shall be made upon application and in accordance with the procedure provided under Section 40-7.04 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-7.06 - Standards 
A.  The Planning Commission shall grant approval to a site plan which meets all of the following standards: 
(1)  The proposed use conforms to the uses permitted in that zoning district. 
(2)  The dimensional arrangement of buildings and structures conform to the required yards, setbacks and height restrictions of this chapter. 
(3)  The location, size and height of buildings, walls, fences and structures provides adequate landscaped open space, light, air and access to the subject property and to adjacent properties. 
(4)  The development will not hinder the reasonable development of adjoining properties nor diminish the value thereof. 
(5)  The proposed on-site buildings, structures and entryways are situated and designed to minimize adverse effects (upon owners and occupants of adjacent and surrounding properties) by providing for adequate design of ingress/egress, interior/exterior traffic flow, storm drainage, erosion, grading, lighting and parking. 
(6)  The site plan and its relation to streets, driveways and sidewalks does not interfere with and is not hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(7)  Natural features of the landscape are retained where they can enhance the development on the site, or where they furnish a barrier or buffer between the project and adjoining properties (used for dissimilar purposes) or where they assist in preserving the general safety, health and appearance of the neighborhood. 
(8)  Adverse effects of the proposed development and activities upon adjoining residents or owners are minimized by appropriate shielding, screening, fencing, or landscaping. 
(9)  All buildings and structures are accessible to emergency vehicles. 
(10)  The site plan is consistent with and complies with the intent and purposes of this chapter, the Huntington Woods Master Plan and other statutorily-authorized and properly adopted city planning documents, other applicable ordinances, and state and federal statutes. 
B.  In addition to the above, all site plans in Zone R-l A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D, R-1E and RT, One and Two-family Attached District, shall comply with the Design Standards set forth in Section 40-5.14. 
C.  Appeals. Any applicant for site plan review shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Planning Commission to the Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 8 - Special Land Use Approval 

Section 40-8.01 - Intent 
    This Article provides a set of procedures and standards for Special Uses, which, because of their unique characteristics, require specific consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole. 
    These provisions are designed to allow practical latitude for the applicant and at the same time, maintain adequate provision for the protection of the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community. Among the purposes for Special Use review are to: 
A.  Provide for public input on decisions involving land uses that may be more intense, less desirable, or potentially more problematic. 
B.  Reduce negative impacts of potentially conflicting land uses. 
C.  Provide greater flexibility to integrate land uses within the city. 
D.  Permit certain land uses that might not otherwise be permitted, provided such uses comply with established standards and specific conditions that may be imposed by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-8.02 - Procedure 
A.  Application. A petitioner seeking Special Use approval shall file an application with the Zoning Administrator, together with the appropriate fee and required information, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the Special Use application will be considered. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  A detailed description of the proposed Special Use. 
(2)  The address and legal description of the property where the Special Use will be located. 
(3)  The name, address, phone number and other contact information of: 
(a)  The applicant (including the basis of representation). 
(b)  The firm or other individuals responsible for the establishment and operation of the special land use. 
(c)  The legal owner of the property. 
(4)  The signature of the applicant and the date of the application. 
(5)  A signed and notarized statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or a signed and notarized statement from the owner that the applicant, the firm or other individuals named in the application have authorization to establish and operate such special land use on the property. 
(6)  A site plan with the required information, as set forth in Section 40-7.03. 
(7)  A statement addressing compliance with the standards required for approval in Section 40-8.03, Standards for Special Use approval and any specific standards required by the Ordinance for the requested use. 
B.  Review. Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator shall determine if it is complete. 
C.  Public Notice and Signage. If complete, a notice of the public hearing and review shall be prepared which: 
(1)  Describes the nature of the request. 
(2)  Indicates the property that is the subject of the request. 
(3)  States when and where the request will be considered. 
(4)  Indicates when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
D.  Public Hearing. The process for Special Use review includes a public hearing and site plan review in accordance with MCL 125.3501 and 125.3502 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, or hearings, upon any application for a Special Use permit, notice of which shall be in the manner required by Section 40-3.03. 
E.  Planning Commission Action. 
(1)  At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application for Special Use approval and shall either approve the application, approve the application with conditions, deny the application, or postpone action. 
(2)  The Planning Commission 's decision shall be made a part of the public record and incorporated into a resolution. 
(3)  Any conditions required by the Planning Commission for approval shall also be made a part of the public record and incorporated into the resolution. 
(4)  The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no authority to review Planning Commission decisions regarding a Special Use. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-8.03 - Special Use Standards 
A.  Standards. The Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use, and shall consider the following general standards and any specific standards established for a particular use: 
(1)  Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. The Special Use shall be designed and constructed in a manner harmonious with the character of adjacent property and the surrounding area. A Special Use shall be harmonious and not create a significant detrimental impact, as compared to the impacts of permitted uses. 
(2)  Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed Special Use shall be compatible and in accordance with the goals and objectives of the Master Plan and any associated subarea and corridor plans. 
(3)  Traffic Impact. The proposed Special Use shall be located and designed in a manner that will minimize the impact of traffic, taking into consideration: pedestrian access and safety, vehicle trip generation (i.e., volumes), types of traffic, access location, and design, circulation, and parking design, street and bridge capacity, and traffic operations at nearby intersections and access points. Efforts shall be made to ensure that multiple transportation modes are safely and effectively accommodated to provide alternate modes of access and alleviate vehicular traffic congestion. 
(4)  Impact on Public Services. The proposed Special Use shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services, such as: streets, pedestrian or bicycle facilities, police and fire protection, drainage systems, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities and schools. Such services shall be provided and accommodated without an unreasonable public burden. 
(5)  Compliance with Zoning Ordinance Standards. The proposed Special Use shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to meet the stated intent of the zoning districts and shall comply with all applicable ordinance standards. 
(6)  Impact on the Overall Environment. The proposed Special Use shall not unreasonably impact the quality of natural features and the environment in comparison to the impact associated with typical permitted uses. 
(7)  Special Use Approval Specific Requirements. The general standards and requirements of this Section are basic to all uses authorized by Special Use Approval. The specific and detailed requirements relating to particular uses and area requirements must also be satisfied for those uses. 
(8)  Additional Findings. The Planning Commission shall also consider the following factors when reviewing a Special Use request: 
(a)  The nature and character of the activities, processes, materials, equipment, or conditions of operation, either specifically or typically associated with the use. 
(b)  Public safety, specifically police and fire. 
(c)  Vehicular circulation and parking areas. 
(d)  Outdoor activity, storage, and work areas. 
(e)  Hours of operation. 
(f)  Production of traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, odors, dust, glare, and light. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-8.04 - Conditions of Approval 
A.  Authority. The Planning Commission, in its review of a request for Special Use approval, may at its discretion impose additional conditions when it is determined that such increases in standards or additional conditions are required to achieve or assure compatibility with adjacent uses and/or structures. 
B.  Scope. Conditions that are imposed by the Planning Commission shall: 
(1)  Be related to and ensure that all site design standards of Article 10 and any other applicable specific regulations are met. 
(2)  Be related to a valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(3)  Be applicable to a property, not property owners, so long as use remains in effect under terms set forth in Section 40-8.06. 
(4)  Remain unchanged unless an amendment to the Special Use approval is approved. 
C.  A violation of a requirement, condition, or safeguard shall be considered a violation of this ordinance, and grounds for the Planning Commission to terminate such Special Use permit, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-8.05 - Effectiveness 
A.  Remain in Force. Receipt of Special Use approval shall continue in force so long as the particular use or activity continues to operate as approved on the approved site, unless otherwise specified in the Planning Commission resolution of approval. 
B.  Abandonment. When a use approved under the Special Use approval procedure ceases to function or is abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months, the Special Use approval shall lapse and shall no longer be in effect. 
C.  Resubmittal. No application for a Special Use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the Planning Commission shall be re-submitted for a period of three hundred and sixty-five (365) days from such denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change conditions found by the Planning Commission to be valid. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-8.06 - Amendments, Expansions, or Change in Use 
    The following provisions apply when there is an amendment or a proposed expansion to approved Special Uses or when there is a proposed change from one Special Use to another: 
A.  Amendments. Any applicant who has been granted Special Use approval shall notify the Zoning Administrator of any proposed amendment to the approved site plan. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a proposed amendment requires new Special Use approval. A new Special Use approval may be required when such amendment is a departure from the operation or use described in the approved application or causes external impacts such as additional traffic, hours of operation, noise, additional outdoor storage, or display. 
B.  Expansions. An expansion of any use requiring a Special Use approval that results in an increase of the building, parking, paved areas, or site area shall require resubmittal in the manner described in this Article. A separate Special Use approval shall be required for each use requiring Special Use approval on a lot, or for any expansions of a Special Use approval. 
C.  Change in Use. The applicant shall be responsible for informing the Zoning Administrator of any change in an approved use, operations, or activities prior to any such change. The Zoning Administrator shall determine if a new Special Use approval is required. Change in use shall mean any departure from the operation or use described in the approved application or any change that may cause external impacts such as additional traffic, hours of operation, noise, additional outdoor storage, or display. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 9 - Sustainable Design and Environmental Standards 

Section 40-9.01 - Purpose 
    Sustainable design and environmental standards are established to preserve the short-term and long-term environmental health, safety and quality of Huntington Woods. No use that does not conform to the environmental standards set forth in this Article shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-9.02 - Stormwater Management 
A.  Intent. The intent of this section is to encourage the use of structural, vegetative or managerial practices, commonly referred to as best management practices (BMP's), designed to treat, prevent, or reduce degradation of water quality due to stormwater runoff. Where practical, all development projects subject to site plan review shall use best management practices (BMP's) to prevent flooding, protect water quality, reduce soil erosion, maintain and improve wildlife habitat, and contribute to the aesthetic values of the project. The particular facilities and measures required on-site shall reflect and incorporate existing grade, natural features, wetlands and watercourses on the site to the maximum extent feasible. 
B.  Stormwater Management. All stormwater management plans shall meet the Engineering Standards adopted by Oakland County as determined by the City Engineer, and shall utilize nonstructural control techniques to the maximum extent feasible, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Limitation of land disturbance and grading. 
(2)  Maintenance of vegetated buffers and natural vegetation. 
(3)  Minimization of impervious surfaces. 
(4)  Use of terraces, contoured landscapes, runoff spreaders, grass or rock-lined swales. 
(5)  Use of infiltration devices. 
C.  General Standards. 
(1)  The design of storm sewers, detention facilities, and other stormwater management facilities shall comply with the standards of the Oakland County Drain Commissioner. 
(2)  Stormwater management conveyance, storage and infiltration measures and facilities shall be designed to prevent flood hazards and water pollution related to stormwater runoff and soil erosion from the proposed development. 
(3)  Priority shall be placed on-site design which maintains natural drainage patterns and watercourses. Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create flooding or degradation of water quality for adjacent or downstream property owners. 
(4)  The use of swales and buffer strips vegetated with desirable native materials is encouraged as a method of stormwater conveyance to decrease runoff velocity, allow for bio-filtration, allow suspended sediment particles to settle and to remove pollutants. 
(5)  Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create flooding or water pollution for adjacent or downstream property owners. 
(6)  Discharge of runoff from any site which may contain oil, grease, toxic chemicals, or other polluting materials is prohibited. If a property owner desires to propose measures to reduce and trap pollutants, the owner must meet the requirements of the state department of environmental quality and the county drain commissioner, based upon professionally accepted principles; such a proposal shall be submitted and reviewed by the city engineer, with consultation of appropriate experts. 
(7)  Drainage systems shall be designed to protect public health and safety and to be visually attractive, taking into consideration viable alternatives. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-9.03 - Solar Structures and Easements 
A.  Active and passive accessory roof mounted solar energy devices, systems or structures shall be permitted in all zoning classifications by right, subject to site plan review in accordance with Article 7. 
B.  Separate, non-integrated, flush-mounted solar panels shall be located on a rear- or side-facing roof, which do not front any street, unless such installation is proven to be ineffective or impractical as determined by the Planning Commission. Such system shall not project vertically above the peak of the roof to which it is attached, or project vertically more than three (3) feet above a flat roof installation. 
C.  Integrated flush-mounted solar panels installed on a building or structure with a sloped roof surface shall not project vertically above the peak of the roof. 
D.  Ground-mounted solar systems are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-9.04 - Environmental Performance Standards 
A.  Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the public or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public shall be removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove the odor. 
B.  Fire and Explosive Hazards. Any activity, or storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids, liquefied petroleum gases, and explosives shall comply with applicable State of Michigan requirements. 
C.  Noise. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, all terminology used in this section, not defined in this section, shall be in conformance with the applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network as specified in the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1983, or its successor provision. The sound pressure level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
(b)  Authorized city official means all designated Huntington Woods Public Safety Officers, Building Officials or Code Enforcement Officers, authorized to investigate all complaints of violation of this section and who are further authorized to issue municipal civil infractions. 
(c)  City commission means the City Commission of the City of Huntington Woods. 
(d)  Commercial area means property zoned for uses other than residential or parks-recreation, regardless of whether the property has a commercial use. 
(e)  Continuous sound means any sound with a duration of more than one (1) second, as measured with a sound level meter set to the "fast" meter response. 
(f)  Decibel (dB) means a unit of sound pressure level on a logarithmic scale measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in compliance with the American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1983, or its successor provision. 
(g)  Extraneous sound means a sound which is relatively intense, intermittent and of short duration and is neither part of the neighborhood residual sound, nor comes from the sound source under investigation. The sources of extraneous sound are noted, but excluded from all measurements (e.g., passing vehicle or distant train). 
(h)  Immediate vicinity means any distance beyond the property line of the parcel or lot from which the source of noise or disturbance is emanating as determined by the authorized city official during the course of investigating a complaint of noise disturbance. 
(i)  Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled whether or not licensed or intended for use on the public roads. 
(j)  Neighborhood residual sound level means that measured value which represents the summation of the sound from all of the discrete sources affecting a given site at a given time. Neighborhood residual sounds are differentiated from extraneous sounds by the fact that the former is a steadier state, although they may not be continuous. 
(k)  Parks-Recreation means Parks and Recreation District as defined by the Huntington Woods Code of Ordinances. 
(l)  Person means any owner, lessee or occupant of property, including any individual, corporation, business or other entity; "person" also means any individual in any public place or any private place open to the general public. 
(m)  Property line means the imaginary line which represents the legal limits of property owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person or business entity. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public right-of-way, the property line shall be the nearest boundary of the public right-of-way. 
(n)  Public right-of-way means the entire easement width or ownership interest of any publicly dedicated street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place. 
(o)  Residential area means property used for temporary or permanent dwelling purposes. 
(p)  Sound level meter means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels. This instrument shall comply with the standards for type 1 or type 2 sound level meters as specified in the American National Institute Standard ANSI S1.4-1983, or its successor provision. 
(q)  Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals. This sound pressure level is expressed in decibels (dB). 
(r)  Total sound level means that measured level which represents the summation of the sounds from the sound source under investigation and the neighborhood residual sounds which affect a given place at a given time, exclusive of extraneous sound sources. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(2)  Interference with sound monitoring equipment. No person shall remove or render inaccurate or inoperative any sound level meter or any similar monitoring instrument or device positioned for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(3)  Prohibited acts; purpose generally. It is the purpose of this article that no person shall create, assist in creating, continue or permit the continuation of any excessive or unnecessarily loud disturbance of noise of a high volume or intensity which is clearly audible and disturbs, annoys or endangers the safety of others beyond the immediate vicinity of the disturbance ("noise disturbances"). Those noise disturbances not in compliance with Section 40-9.04.C(4) or Section 40-9.04.C(5) shall be a violation of this article. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(4)  Prohibited acts; specifically. No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts of noise disturbance which are deemed a violation of this section: 
(a)  The sounding of any horn, car alarm or signaling device in any vehicle while not in motion except as a danger signal, or where the car alarm is properly used or to give warning of intent to enter a lane of traffic. 
(b)  The playing or use of any battery or electrically powered or electronic sound-producing or amplifying device, speaker or instrument, including a musical instrument, in such a manner or in such a loud volume or intensity, at any time or place, that exceeds permissible sound levels in Section 40-9.04.C(5). 
(c)  The sound created by any domesticated animal kept or maintained by any person, when such animal creates a noise disturbance that is frequent or continued and clearly audible at a distance within or beyond the immediate vicinity of the noise as determined by an authorized city official. 
(d)  No person shall create a noise disturbance in or with a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other motorized equipment so as to disturb or destroy or endanger the peace, comfort or repose of a person within or beyond the immediate vicinity of the source of the noise disturbance as determined by an authorized city official. No person shall operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other motorized equipment without a properly functioning muffler. 
(e)  Engaging in the erection, including excavating therefor, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, at any time on Sundays, and on other days, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (or between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on properties in Parks and Recreation District, unless a permit is first obtained from the City Manager. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(5)  Maximum permissible sound levels for amplified sounds and mechanical devices. Use of any loud speaker, amplifier or other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any purpose, except by speakers in the course of public address which is noncommercial in character (recognized First Amendment speech), shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  Continuous sound. 
1.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any source of amplified sound on any property or in the public right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits listed in Table 9.04.C(5) as measured at any location at or within the property line of another person's property. A sound source shall not continuously exceed the sound level listed in Table 9.04.C(5) for longer than the period of time defined in Section 40-9.04.C(5)(a)2.). Sound pressure levels in excess of those established in for the period of time in 40-9.04.C(5)(a)2.)., shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is in violation of this Code. 
TABLE 9.04.C.(5)
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVEL LIMITS DB(A) 
Commercial and Parks-Recreation (all times): 65 Residential (all times): 65  
2.  The limits defined in Table 9.04.C.(5) may not be exceeded continuously for more than one minute. 
3.  Nothing in this section supersedes the requirements of employers to comply with the Occupational Noise Exposure Standard of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (29 CFR Part 1910.95). Compliance will help conserve workers' hearing, and reduce potential liability for the source. 
(b)  Steady pure tones. If the sound source under investigation is a mechanical device, and is in the authorized city official's opinion emitting a sound with a steady tonal quality, the maximum permissible sound level limits in Table 9.04.C(5) shall be reduced by 5dB. The sound emissions must be comprised of a single frequency and/or its harmonics, which may be referred to as a tone, whine, hum or buzz. Such sound sources include, but are not limited to: heating, ventilating or air conditioning units; refrigeration units; and transformers. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(6)  Procedures for the determination of sound levels. The sound level shall be measured with a field calibrated sound level meter. The sound level meter shall conform with ANSI S1.13 of 1973, or its successor provision. The DB(A) methodology will be used to measure sound levels, and the meter readings will be set for a fast response. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(7)  General exemptions. The following activities are exempted from specific prohibited acts and/or the sound pressure level limitations set forth in Section 40-9.04.C(5): 
(a)  Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster; to restore public utilities; or to protect persons or property from imminent danger. 
(b)  Sounds made to alert persons to such emergency, danger or attempted crime. 
(c)  Parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar activities, if approved by the City Commission, subject to any sound pressure limits specified in the City Commission's approval. 
(d)  Athletic, musical or cultural activities or events (including practices and rehearsals) conducted by or under the auspices of public or private schools. 
(e)  Bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with an ongoing religious service. 
(f)  Sounds created while conducting yard work or lawn maintenance between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. including, but not limited to, lawn mowing, leaf blowing, brush clearing, the use of chain saws, etc. However, no more than two gas-powered pieces of equipment shall be permitted to be used or operated at any one time on any single residential property. 
(g)  Sounds created during new construction, remodeling or maintenance activities on a building or structure between the hours as specified in Section 40-9.04.C(4), subject to the limitation that no more than two gas-powered machines shall be operated or in use at one time on any single residential property. 
(h)  Sounds created while removing snow or cleaning streets, roads, driveways, parking lots or sidewalks necessary to allow safe access and transport. 
(i)  The use of fireworks in compliance with State law and City ordinance. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(8)  Temporary exemptions. 
(a)  The City Manager is authorized to grant a temporary exemption from the provisions of this section if such temporary exemption would be in the public interest, and if there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the activity or the method of conducting the activity for which the temporary exemption is sought. 
(b)  The following factors shall be considered by the City Manager in determining whether to grant a temporary exemption: 
1.  The hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons if the exemption is not granted, balanced against the adverse impact on the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons if the exemption is granted; 
2.  The nearness of any residence or residences, or any other land use which would be adversely affected; 
3.  The sound pressure level to be generated by the activity for which the temporary exception is sought; 
4.  Whether the type of sound to be produced by the activity is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the exemption is requested; 
5.  The density of population in the area where the activity is to take place; and 
6.  The time of day or night during which the activity will take place. 
(c)  A temporary exemption may be granted only for the period of time that is reasonably necessary to conduct the activity, up to thirty (30) days, which may, if necessary be extended by the city commission upon written request by the applicant. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(9)  Liability of owner, lessee or occupant. If the person responsible for an activity which violates this section cannot be determined, the owner of the property upon which the activity is located shall be deemed responsible for the violation unless the property is leased or occupied by persons other than the owner, in which case the lessees or occupants in possession and/or control of the property shall be responsible for the violation. (Ord. No. 576, § 1, 6-16-2015) 
(10)  Enforcement. 
(a)  This section governs the initiation of enforcement actions and the imposition of civil penalties for violations of this Code. 
(b)  If a person violates any provision of this Code, or an order issued, the city may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to prohibit and prevent such violation or violations and the court may proceed in the action in a summary manner. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this Code is guilty of a municipal civil infraction. Each day during which the violation continues shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 10 - Site Design Standards 

Section 40-10.01 - Intent 
    The intent of this Article is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and improve the site design and visual appearance of the city by requiring consistent standards for such site elements as landscaping, trash enclosures, lighting, parking, loading, site access, and signage. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.02 - Landscaping 
A.  Requirement. A separate, detailed landscape plan shall be submitted for all developments, including single-family residential, as part of the site plan review as set forth in Article 7. A detailed landscape plan shall be drawn to the same scale as required in Article 7, Site Plan Review. The landscape plan shall include the location, spacing, size, number and root type (bare root (BR), balled and burlapped (BB), pot (p), or container (C)) and botanical and common name for each plant type proposed for use within the required landscape area and shall demonstrate that all requirements of this Section are met. 
B.  Parking Lot Landscaping. 
(1)  Landscaping Standards within Parking Lots. Each row of parking in a parking lot serving uses other than one- and two-family dwellings shall include landscaped end islands. End islands shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width with a depth two (2) feet shorter than the depth of adjacent parking spaces. At least one (1) deciduous canopy tree shall be planted on each island. 
(2)  Landscaping Standards at the Perimeter of Parking Lots. The perimeter of parking lots serving uses other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be planted with one (1) deciduous canopy tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty (30) linear feet. The parking lot perimeter shall be defined as the area extending six (6) feet from the parking lot edge. 
(3)  Wall/Screening Requirement. 
a.  Where lots used for off-street parking facilities in non-one-family and two-family zoning district abut lots in one-family and two-family districts, the rear or side of each lot so abutting and so used shall be provided with a continuous unpierced brick masonry or brick patterned poured-in-place concrete wall which complies with the following requirements: 
1.  It shall measure six feet in height and a minimum of eight inches in width with a reinforced trench foundation 42 inches below grade and a minimum of four inches wider than the wall to be erected; 
2.  It shall not contain any wood, vinyl or metal except for unexposed reinforcing materials and shall be faced on all sides with brick, stone or textured concrete with a limestone or concrete cap; 
3.  It shall not contain any openings except as approved by the Planning Commission; 
4.  Where underground utilities interfere, the location of the wall shall be determined by the Director of the Department of Public Services; and 
5.  It shall be constructed before occupancy. 
b.  Combinations. A combination of landscaping and a solid opaque wall or fence may be approved by the Planning Commission where such a combination provides more effective screening. 
C.  Landscaping Adjacent to Roads. Deciduous canopy trees shall be installed at no more than 40-foot intervals along the road right-of-way. Installation of street trees in tree wells in the sidewalk or within a planting strip between the sidewalk and the curb shall be encouraged. 
D.  Landscaped Open Space. Landscaped open space, equal to at least ten (10) percent of the lot area, shall be provided. Such landscaped open space may include landscaping within required yards, rights-of-way, or stormwater storage areas. 
(1)  A building designed or intended to be used for a use permitted in TD, Transitional District shall provide and maintain the following: in the case of a corner lot, a side yard setback of at least eight (8) feet from the side street lot line, which shall be landscaped with live plant material and shall not be used for the purpose of parking or storing vehicles. This side yard may be used as part of the landscaped open space required in Section 40-10.02.D. 
E.  Composition. 
(1)  Plant materials shall be of generally acceptable varieties and species, free from insects and diseases, hardy to Oakland County, conform to the current minimum standards for nursery stock of the American Nursery and Landscape Association and shall have proof of any required governmental regulations and/or inspections. 
(2)  A mixture of live plant material, such as evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, is required as a protective measure against insect and disease infestation. Artificial plant materials are prohibited. A limited mixture of hardy species is recommended rather than a large quantity of different species to produce a more aesthetic, cohesive design and avoid a disorderly arrangement. 
(3)  Species sizes at time of planting: 
Height Spread 6' - 7' 5' - 6' 2" Large Evergreen Trees, such as: Fir (Abies)   Spruce (Picea)   Pine (Pinus)   Hemlock (Tsuga)   Douglas Fir (Psudotsuga)   Tamarack; Larch (Larix)   Narrow Evergreen Trees, such as: Arborvitae (Thuja)   Juniper (Juniperus)   Large Deciduous Trees, such as: Oak (Quercus)   Maple (Acer)   Beech (Fagus)   Linden or Basswood (Tilia)   Sweetgum (Liquidambar)   Ginkgo (Male Only) (Ginkgo)   Honeylocust (Gleditsia)   Birch (Betula)   Sycamore (Plantanus)   Hickory (Carya)   Black Cherry (Prunus)   Tulip Tree (Liriodendron)   Blackgum (Nyssa)   Small Deciduous Trees (Ornamental), such as: Dogwood   Flowering Cherry, Plum, Pear   Hawthorn   Redbud   Magnolia   Flowering Crabapple   Mountain Ash   Hornbeam   Sassafras   Ironwood   Serviceberry; Juneberry    
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.03 - Trash Containers 
A.  The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses that have refuse disposal service. This does not include curbside pickup for single-family residential uses. 
B.  Standards. 
(1)  Containers used to dispose of trash, grease, recyclables, and similar materials shall be screened on all sides with a wall, and gate at least as high as the container, up to eight (8) feet in height, and shall be constructed of durable material and construction which is compatible with the architectural materials used in the site development. 
(2)  Containers shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites, located in close proximity to the building they serve, and easily accessed by refuse vehicles without potential damage to parked vehicles. 
(3)  Containers and enclosures shall be situated so that they do not cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings. 
(4)  Concrete pads and aprons of appropriate size and construction shall be provided. 
(5)  Dumpsters should be located in a rear yard and be so located as to minimize visibility from adjacent properties. An alternative location on the site may be as approved by the City Manager if putting the dumpster in the rear yard is not achievable or another location provides better screening. 
(6)  Trash pickup may not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.04 - Equipment Screening 
A.  Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses for which mechanical equipment is placed upon a roof of any building or on the ground outside of the building. Mechanical equipment includes, but is not limited to: generators, heating, ventilation and air conditioning units. 
B.  Screening Requirements. All equipment shall be screened as follows: 
(1)  Rooftop screening. 
(a)  Rooftop equipment shall be screened with architectural materials matching or harmonious with the building. 
(b)  Rooftop equipment shall be located on the side or rear of a pitched-roof building, screened from public view. 
(c)  Screens provided to obscure mechanical equipment shall be an opaque barrier at least as high as the equipment being screened. 
(d)  Rooftop equipment shall be situated so that it does not cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings. 
(2)  At-grade equipment. 
(a)  At-grade equipment shall be screened with architectural and/or landscape materials matching or harmonious with the building or landscape materials provided elsewhere on-site. 
(b)  Landscape materials shall be evergreen species, planted at the height of the equipment upon installation, so as to provide a screen year-round. 
(c)  Walls provided to screen mechanical equipment shall be an opaque fence or wall, with a gate at least as high as the equipment being screened. 
(d)  At-grade equipment shall be located in a side or rear yard, screened from public view. 
(e)  At-grade equipment shall be situated so that it does not cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.05 - Lighting 
A.  Intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by regulating the use of outdoor lighting in all zone districts to encourage lighting practices and systems that will minimize glare, energy usage, and light trespass and maintain the character and ambiance of an area, while recognizing the need for safety, security, and visibility. 
B.  Residential. 
(1)  On all residential property, high intensity discharge lighting, including but not limited to, high pressure sodium, mercury vapor and metal halide shall be prohibited. 
(2)  All outdoor lighting used to light the general area of a site shall be shielded or directed in a manner which reduces glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect objectionable lights away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences. 
C.  Non-Residential. 
(1)  Lighting Plan Requirements. The following information must be provided on all site plan submissions: 
(a)  Location of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and/or building elevations. 
(b)  Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan, indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in foot-candles) and ten feet beyond the parcel lines. The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for sites with parking lots of twenty (20) spaces or less. 
(c)  Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed, including the initial lumen rating, type of lamp, method of shielding, type of lens and all applicable accessories. The details shall include a depiction of the lighting pattern and light levels applicable for the proposed pole height. 
(2)  Freestanding Pole Lighting. 
(a)  Fixture Design. 
1.  Exterior lighting shall be a full cut-off fixture or a fully shielded fixture, downward directed with a flat lens to prevent glare. 
2.  Decorative or historic light fixtures may be approved as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be shown that there will be no off-site glare through the use of low wattage lamps and the proposed fixtures will be more consistent with the character of the site. 
(b)  Lighting Levels. 
1.  The intensity of light at the base of a light fixture pole shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles during business hours and ten (10) foot-candles after business hours. 
a.  All outdoor lighting fixtures, existing or hereafter installed and maintained upon private property for non-single-family residential uses, shall be turned off or reduced in lighting intensity between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. The following exceptions may be approved: 
i.  Where greater lighting levels are necessary for security or safety purposes; or 
ii.  Where permissible commercial or industrial uses such as sales, assembly and repair operate after 11:00 p.m., in which case the lighting levels shall be turned off or reduced after the use ceases for that day. 
2.  Light shall not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle along any boundary adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, and one (1) foot-candle along all nonresidential property boundaries. 
3.  Light levels shall be measured on the horizontal plane at grade level within the site, and on the vertical plane of any property line boundary or street right-of-way line at a height of five (5) feet above grade level. 
4.  Height. The maximum height of a base, a pole and fixtures shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(3)  Building-Mounted Lighting. Building-mounted lighting for the purpose of lighting entrances, adjacent sidewalks, parking areas and loading areas is permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Building-mounted lighting shall be a full cutoff fixture or fully shielded and directed downward to prevent glare. The intensity of light shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles during business hours and ten (10) foot-candles after business hours at the ground level for any building-mounted fixture. Maximum height shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(b)  Light shall not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle along zoned or existing residential property lines and one (1) foot-candle along non-residential property lines. 
(c)  Decorative or historic light fixtures may be approved as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare through the use of low wattage lamps and the proposed fixtures will be more consistent with the character of the site. 
(4)  Prohibited Lighting Types. The following lighting types are prohibited: 
(a)  The use of search lights or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment. 
(b)  Flashing, moving, strobe, or intermittent type lighting, or any light having regular periods of shining and eclipse. 
(5)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this Section, except that the Zoning Administrator may require a lighting and photometric plan when deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare: 
(a)  Sports fields. 
(b)  Holiday decorations. 
(c)  Three-foot high, shielded pedestrian walkway lighting. 
(d)  Ornamental low voltage lighting (twelve (12) volts or less), low wattage ornamental landscape lighting fixtures, and solar operated light fixtures having self-contained rechargeable batteries, where any single light fixture does not exceed one hundred (100) lumens. 
(e)  Street lights or lights within a public or private road right-of-way. 
(f)  Traffic control devices, municipal lights, and temporary emergency lights. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.06 - Parking and Circulation 
A.  Parking Space Required. Hereafter, no building intended for occupancy within the city shall be erected unless there be provided on the same parcel of land or adjacent thereto off-street parking space or spaces in a ratio hereinafter set forth, which shall be the minimum area for such parking as hereinafter specified. 
B.  There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as hereinafter prescribed. 
C.  Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained for a principal use erected, altered, or expanded after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
D.  General Off-Street Parking Requirements. No permit shall be issued for the erection or alteration of any building or structure in the TD, Transition District; BD, Business District, or Parks and Recreation District unless the requirements of this chapter concerning off-street parking have been complied with. The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto and additions to existing buildings, shall be in accordance with the requirements of this subsection except as otherwise provided, and the space so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use. In addition, off-street parking in the TD, Transition District; BD, Business District, or Parks and Recreation District shall be constructed and maintained subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Adequate and safe ingress and egress shall be provided to meet the approval of the Director of Public Safety and the City Engineer. 
(2)  Such parking lots shall be provided with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a durable, hard, smooth, dust-proof surface to meet the approval of the City Engineer and shall be graded and proper drainage facilities provided to dispose of all surface water to meet the approval of the City Engineer. 
(3)  Such parking lot shall be used only for parking automobiles and no commercial activities such as washing or greasing, sale of merchandise, repair work or servicing of any kind shall be done thereon. 
(4)  Parking lot lighting shall adhere to the outdoor lighting requirements of this Code. When such property is closed at night, no lighting shall be maintained, except as may be reasonable for the protection of the premises. 
(5)  Necessary curbs or other protection against damage to adjoining properties shall be provided and maintained. 
(6)  Off-street parking lot for residential uses shall be located within sixty (60) feet of the building they are intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the off-street parking facilities and the nearest point of the building. The location of required off-street parking facilities for other than residential uses shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the building they are intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the off-street parking facilities and the nearest point of the building. 
(7)  Within non-residential districts, off-street parking for continuous periods of more than twenty-four (24) hours shall be prohibited unless for automobiles and commercial vehicles owned and operated in conjunction with the principal use of the property. 
(8)  The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
(9)  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use that the Planning Commission considers is similar in type. 
(10)  Off-street parking areas shall be designed to provide for removal and storage of snow. 
(11)  Barrier-Free Parking. Off-street parking facilities are required to provide Barrier-Free Parking spaces in accordance with the Michigan Department of Labor, Construction Code Commission Barrier-Free Design Division. 
(12)  Drainage. All parking lots shall be graded or drained to dispose of stormwater runoff. The City may permit openings in the curbing for drainage purposes. No surface water shall be permitted to drain directly onto adjoining property unless a drainage easement has been obtained. Discharge of drainage into a public right-of-way, County Drain or municipal storm sewer shall require written approval from the appropriate local, County, or State agency. 
E.  Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces. The number of off-street parking facilities required shall be as follows: 
Use Parking Spaces Required Single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit Banks, credit unions, or savings and loans 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 2 spaces for each non-drive-up ATM Drive-through facilities for non-restaurant uses 4 stacking space for each window or drive-up ATM Barbershops and beauty shops 2 parking spaces per barber chair or operator station Bowling alleys 4 parking spaces for each bowling lane Day care centers 1 parking space for each employee plus 1 parking space for every 10 children based upon the regulated capacity of the center Funeral homes 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area Hospitals and convalescent homes 1 parking space for each 4 beds therein Furniture and appliance stores, contractor's offices, showroom of a decorator, plumber, electrician or similar trade, dry cleaners, repair shops and other similar uses 1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area Laundromats and self-service dry cleaners 1 parking space for every 3 washing machines and/or dry cleaning machines Offices for business or professional use; doctors, lawyers, real estate offices, banks, and similar uses 1 parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area Retail sales, business or service shops, including drug stores, grocery stores, hardware stores, florists, photography studios, publishing and printing establishments, and other similar uses 1 parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area Restaurants, coffee shops or similar establishments for the sale and consumption of food, beverages or refreshments 1 space for each 2 seats, based on maximum seating capacity as determined by the building code in effect in the City Places of assembly including theaters, auditoriums, clubs, lodge halls, places of worship, and similar buildings 1 parking space for each 6 permanent seats therein, or if there are no permanent seats, 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of assembly area Light industrial businesses 5 parking spaces plus 1 parking space for each employee in the largest working shift Golf courses 3 parking spaces for each course hole plus 1 parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area of an accessory clubhouse Vehicle fueling/multi-use station 1 space for each 125 square feet of net floor area, plus 2 parking spaces per fueling station Dance and Exercise Studio 1 space per maximum class size plus 1 parking space for each employee in the largest working shift Health fitness centers, athletic clubs, and other similar uses 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area Medical clinics, outpatient centers, 24-hour urgent care centers 2 spaces per exam or outpatient procedure/operating room, plus 1 space per laboratory or recovery room, plus 1 space per 1 employee  
F.  Collective Off-Street Parking Facilities. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the joint use of storage or parking space by two (2) or more buildings or uses, if the total of such space when used together shall comply with the joint requirements thereof. 
G.  Flexibility in Application. The City recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the parking standards may result in development with inadequate parking or parking far in excess of that which is needed. The former situation may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized parking on adjacent streets or neighboring sites. The latter situation may result in excessive paving and stormwater runoff and a waste of space which could be left as open space. 
(1)  Shared Parking. 
(a)  In the instance of collective provision for off-street parking facilities for two (2) or more buildings or uses, the Planning Commission may permit a reduction in the number of parking spaces required by this chapter. Shared parking may be permitted between two (2) or more uses when the minimum parking requirements of the use requiring the largest number of parking spaces have been met and the applicant has demonstrated that the peak parking demand for one (1) use will not overlap with the peak parking demand for the other uses. In no case may parking be reduced by more than thirty (30) percent below the minimum required for each individual use. To demonstrate shared parking compatibility, the applicant shall use the methodology for calculating shared parking established by the most recent edition of the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking book or similarly accepted industry standard. Underlying parking space requirements for each use shall be based on the city parking requirements noted herein or as otherwise modified by the provisions of this Article. An irrevocable, reciprocal use easement agreement shall be required for all nonresidential developments that permit shared parking between uses within the same development. In the instance of phased projects, the applicant shall provide empirical evidence of the success of the shared parking approved in earlier phases prior to the approval of a subsequent phase. 
(2)  Deviations. The Planning Commission may grant deviations from off-street parking requirements. These deviations may require less parking based upon a finding that such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. If a deviation is granted, the following shall apply: 
(a)  An applicant may request a parking deviation as part of a development application or as a separate and distinct action with no other concurrent request. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide a parking study with adequate detail and information to assist the Planning Commission in determining the appropriateness of the request. 
(c)  The Planning Commission may attach conditions to the approval of a deviation from the off-street parking requirements that bind such approval to the specific use in question. 
(d)  The Planning Commission may require the applicant to set aside area for reserve parking (landbanking) that can be constructed as needed, although this is not a prerequisite for the approval or a deviation. Where an area is set aside for reserve parking, it shall be easily developed, not devoted to a use other than open space, and shall be designed to accommodate attendant facilities such as maneuvering lanes and drainage. 
H.  Parking Maximum. It is the intent of this Ordinance to minimize excessive areas of pavement which reduces aesthetic standards and contributes to high rates of stormwater runoff. Exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by more than twenty percent (20%) shall only be allowed with approval by the Planning Commission. In granting such additional space, the Planning Commission shall determine that such parking will be required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
I.  Off-Street Parking Regulations for one- and two-family residential zone districts. 
(1)  Prohibition of parking in front yards. No parking or storing vehicles or any other material or equipment shall be permitted on any portion of the lot between the front of the building and the public street except that vehicles bearing current license plates which are in normal operating condition may be parked on a driveway. 
(2)  All parking of commercial vehicle parking shall comply with Section 35-675i. 
(3)  Driveway requirements. A building permit is required for the construction of a driveway. There shall be only one driveway and curb opening per lot, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. The driveway shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, crushed stone, brick pavers, porous paving or paver blocks or other hard-surfaced material as approved by the City Engineer. 
(a)  The driveway shall be a straight or nearly straight extension from the public street directly to the side yard; or in the case of a front facing attached garage or carport, directly to the garage or carport; or in the case of a corner lot, directly to the side facing attached garage or carport, or the rear yard. 
1.  A driveway in the front yard shall not be wider than 12 feet, except a driveway from the front street to an attached front facing garage or carport may be up to the width of the garage door or carport opening, but in no case wider than 18 feet between the street and the lot line parallel to the street, except for driveway flares as provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
2.  In the case of corner lots, a driveway from the side street to the side or rear yard shall not be wider than the width of the garage door, carport opening or 20 feet, whichever is greater, but in no case wider than 20 feet between the street and the lot line parallel to the street, except for driveway flares as provided in subsection (a)3. of this section. 
3.  The opening in a curb or street may exceed the driveway width by up to six feet (three feet per side) for a driveway flare, provided the maximum opening in a curb or street does not exceed 22 feet. 
4.  A sidewalk may be located in the front or side yard parallel and adjacent to one side of the driveway provided that it is no wider than three (3) feet, and further provided that it is differentiated from the driveway by the use of a different pattern, material and/or color. 
(b)  In addition to a straight driveway, a semi-circular driveway may be permitted in the front yard, but only if one of the following two criteria is met: 
1.  The lot is in the R-1A zone district and has a lot width of at least 150 feet, a front yard depth of at least 40 feet, and the total driveway area (straight driveway plus semi-circular driveway) does not occupy more than 25 percent of the front yard; or 
2.  The lot fronts on Eleven Mile Road and the total driveway area (straight driveway plus semi-circular driveway) does not occupy more than 60 percent of the front yard. 
3.  A semi-circular driveway must comply with all of the following conditions: 
i.  Except for corner lots where the straight driveway is off the side street, there shall be no more than two driveway openings per lot and the semi-circular driveway shall join the straight driveway before entering the public right-of-way. 
ii.  The semi-circular driveway shall not exceed ten feet in width with each curb cut opening not to exceed 14 feet in width. 
iii.  An application for the semi-circular driveway shall be accompanied by a plan sealed by a registered engineer showing how the stormwater runoff from the driveway will be drained and certifying that all of said water will be retained and absorbed on-site. 
iv.  A site plan for the semi-circular driveway along with a landscape plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval in accordance with the requirements of section 40-10.08. The landscape plan shall show the plant materials being used to substantially soften the impact of the semi-circular driveway. Such materials shall be installed and planted simultaneously with the installation of the semi-circular driveway. 
(4)  Prohibited use for open areas. No machinery, equipment, vehicles or other materials, either discarded or showing evidence of need for repairs or maintenance, shall be stored or parked, or permitted to stand in any open area that is visible from the street, public place or adjoining residential property. 
J.  Off-Street Parking Design Standards. 
(1)  Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 10.06. 
Table 10.06
Parking Dimensions Parking Angle Stall Width Aisle Width Parking Stall Length Curb to Curb 0 Deg. to 15 Deg. 9.0 feet 12 feet Minimum of 23 feet 30.0 feet 16 Deg. to 37 Deg. 9.0 feet 11 feet 19 feet 46.6 feet 38 Deg. to 57 Deg. 9.0 feet 13 feet 19 feet 53.2 feet 58 Deg. to 74 Deg. 9.0 feet 18 feet 19 feet 60.4 feet 75 Deg. to 90 Deg. 9.5 feet 24 feet 19 feet  
(a)  All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. 
(2)  Illumination. All illumination of parking lots or display areas shall be designed and installed to comply with the requirements of Section 40-10.05. 
(3)  Landscaping. The parking area shall provide screening, greenbelts, buffers and parking lot landscaping in accordance with Section 40-10.02. Where parking abuts required landscape islands or greenbelt areas, the parking space may be decreased by two (2) feet in length if curbing is provided. 
(4)  Parking Abutting Sidewalks. Where a parking space overhangs a sidewalk the minimum sidewalk width shall be seven (7) feet and the parking space may be decreased by two (2) feet in length if curbing is provided. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.07 - Off-Street Loading and Unloading 
A.  Where Required. On-premises space for standing, loading and unloading vehicles shall be provided for each use involving the receipt or distribution of goods. As part of the site plan review, the Planning Commission may permit central loading areas to be shared by multiple uses. 
B.  Traffic Flow Location. The location of the loading area shall be sufficient to prevent undue interference with adjacent, required parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, or traffic flow and no unloading on public streets. Loading/unloading areas and docks shall not be located in the front yard. Where possible, loading areas shall be integrated into the design of the building to minimize visibility. 
C.  Alleys. Where an alley exists at the rear of the building, the required loading area may be computed from the centerline of the alley. 
D.  Size. The size of all required loading/unloading spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet or five hundred (500) square feet in area, with a clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet in height. The Planning Commission may modify this requirement for uses when it is shown that smaller delivery trucks will be utilized on a regular basis. 
E.  Pavement. Loading dock approaches shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete with a base sufficient to accommodate expected vehicle weight as approved by the City Engineer. 
F.  Number. The minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Table 10.07. 
Table 10.07
Off-Street Loading Requirements Institutional, Commercial, and Office Uses Up to 6,000 sq. ft. Gross Floor Area (GFA) 1 space 6,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 1 space, plus 1 space per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. GFA  
G.  Flexibility in Application. 
(1)  The city recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the loading standards may result in development with unnecessary loading area, which may lead to internal traffic congestion and excessive paving and stormwater runoff and a waste of space which could be left as open space. 
(2)  The Planning Commission may grant deviations from loading requirements. These deviations may require more or less loading based upon a finding that such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of loading space to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.08 - Access Management 
A.  Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses that access a public street. 
B.  General Requirements. 
(1)  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking facility shall be provided by clearly defined driveways. Access to public roads shall be controlled in the interest of public safety. Each building or group of buildings used for non-residential purposes, and its parking or service area, shall be physically separated from public roads by a greenbelt, curb, or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle access or egress, except for access ways authorized herein. 
(2)  Driveway design and placement must be in harmony with internal circulation and parking design such that the entrance can absorb the maximum rate of inbound traffic during a normal peak traffic period. Parking lots shall be designed to prevent vehicles from backing into the street or requiring use of the street for maneuvering between parking rows. 
(3)  Cross access is required and shall be located to provide a direct connection with the existing or future access of the abutting non-residential properties. A site plan without cross access may be approved when it can be demonstrated that there are either physical limitations or functional circumstances that would prevent such access from being installed. As part of a site plan review, the Planning Commission may require cross access or a cross access easement for future a cross access connection. 
(4)  There must be sufficient on-site storage to accommodate at least three (3) queued vehicles waiting to park or exit without using a portion of the public right-of-way obstructing exiting vehicle sight distance, or otherwise interfering with street traffic. 
(5)  Driveways shall be designed to accommodate all vehicle types having occasion to enter and exit the site, including delivery vehicles. There shall be clear delineation and/or separation, where appropriate, of entry and exit lanes within driveways. 
(6)  Ingress and egress to an off-street parking facility for all uses other than single-family residential shall not cross land zoned for single-family. 
a.  Location and Spacing. 
1.  Ingress and egress from an off-street parking facility located in an area zoned for all uses other than single-family residential shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from adjacent property zoned single-family residential. 
2.  The number of access points shall be limited to the minimum needed to provide reasonable access. Access points shall be designed and located to minimize conflicts with traffic operations along the street and be placed as far from intersections and other access points as approved by the City Engineer or appropriate governing agency. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.09 - Pedestrian Access 
A.  General Standard. The parking and circulation system within each development shall accommodate the movement of vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and transit, throughout the proposed development and to and from surrounding areas, safely and conveniently, and shall contribute to the attractiveness of the development. The on-site pedestrian system must provide continuity, street crossings, visual interest and security as defined by the standards in this Section. 
B.  Safety Considerations. To the maximum extent feasible, pedestrians shall be separated from vehicles. 
(1)  Minimizing Pedestrian/Vehicular Conflicts. Physical separation of pedestrian and vehicular access is the most effective means of avoiding conflicts and unsafe conditions. Where complete separation of pedestrians and vehicles is not possible, potential hazards shall be minimized by the use of techniques such as special paving, grade separations, pavement marking, signs or striping, bollards, pedestrian safety island, landscaping, lighting or other traffic calming measures to clearly delineate pedestrian areas, for both day and night use. 
(2)  Multi-Use Paths. Where bicycle paths are required or are specifically part of a site plan and pedestrians and bicyclist share walkways, the pedestrian/bicycle system shall be designed to be wide enough to easily accommodate the amount of pedestrian and bicycle traffic volumes that are anticipated. The minimum width shall meet American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines and applicable City Engineering design standards as determined by the City's consulting engineer. 
(3)  Curb Cuts and Ramps. Curb cuts and ramps shall be located at convenient, safe locations for the physically disabled, for bicyclists and for people pushing strollers or carts. Curb cuts and ramps shall be located at convenient and safe locations. The location and design of curb cuts and ramps shall comply with the Michigan Barrier-Free Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act Standards for Accessible Design. 
C.  Site Amenities. Development plans shall include site amenities that enhance safety and convenience and promote walking or bicycling as an alternative means of transportation. Site amenities may include bike racks, drinking fountains, canopies and benches. However, all sites with parking of ten (10) spaces or greater shall provide a bike rack for at least two (2) bicycles within fifty (50) feet of the building entrance. 
D.  Walkways. 
(1)  Walkways within the site shall directly connect points of pedestrian origin and destination. Walkways shall not be located based only on the outline of a parking lot if it does not provide direct pedestrian access. Walkways shall either be grade separated from parking lots or clearly delineated to avoid pedestrian/vehicular conflicts. 
(2)  Where it is necessary for the pedestrian access to cross maneuvering aisles or internal roadways, the crossings shall emphasize and place priority on pedestrian access and safety. The pedestrian crossings must be well-marked, using such measures as pavement treatments, signs, striping, signals, lighting, pedestrian safety islands, landscaping and other traffic calming techniques. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.10 - Fences, Hedges and Walls 
A.  Application and permit required. No person shall erect or rebuild any fence or wall unless such person shall first have applied for and received a permit therefor from the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. Application for such permit shall contain a plot plan showing the proposed location, height, material, and opacity of the fence. The city may request additional information to confirm that the erection of such fence is consistent with the provisions of this chapter or the laws of the State of Michigan. 
B.  Height and Location for fences. 
(1)  No fence shall be erected, constructed, maintained or rebuilt in a front yard. 
(2)  No fence shall exceed four (4) feet in height at any point behind the front yard except: 
(a)  Fences up to six (6) feet in height are permissible along shared rear property and along shared side property line in rear yard provided that the fence meets all other requirements of this article, and provided that the property owner adjacent to the proposed fence shall approve, in writing, of the additional height. 
(b)  On a corner lot, a fence may be constructed up to six (6) feet in height, provided it is constructed in the rear yard and adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
(c)  Fences up to six (6) feet in height are permissible along shared side or rear property lines between residential properties and nonresidential property. 
(d)  Fences up to eight (8) feet in height are permissible along shared side or rear property lines between residential properties and nonresidential property used to store dump trucks, cars or heavy equipment, or upon which salt, sand or other raw materials are stockpiled. 
(e)  Fences up to twenty (20) feet in height are permissible upon public property used for parks, playgrounds, ballfields and golf courses. 
(f)  Maximum height for driveway clearance. No fence or hedge which obstructs the visibility of sidewalks or streets from any driveway on the property, or any pre-existing driveway on an adjacent property, may exceed thirty (30) inches in height if located within ten (10) feet of the intersection of the driveway edges and the sidewalk. 
(g)  A fence up to four (4) feet in height may connect a fence in the side yard to the side of the house, provided that the connecting fence shall be no further forward than the midpoint of the house depth or a house having a side door entrance may have a connecting fence up to four (4) feet in height extending toward the front of the house for distance not to exceed three (3) feet in front of the side door. A fence in a side yard shall not be located next to a driveway on an adjacent parcel to prevent full use of such driveway. 
(h)  Where the side yard is adjacent to Coolidge Highway, a fence is permitted up to six (6) feet in height. 
C.  Privacy screens. Privacy screen means a type of fence that is a substantially opaque barrier intended to screen a selected use or particular area in a private residential yard. Privacy screens may be placed on the interior of a lot, subject to the following: 
(1)  Height. Privacy screens shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(2)  Location. Privacy screens shall not be located in a required rear yard accessory structure setback area. 
(3)  Limits on enclosure. A privacy screen shall be designed to screen a selected use or area (such as a swimming pool or patio) but cannot extend for the entire length of a side or rear yard. In no case shall a privacy screen be located in a front yard. 
(4)  Materials. Privacy screens shall be constructed primarily of wood, masonry, or wrought iron. 
D.  Height and Location for Hedges and Landscaping. No hedge or solid landscaping screen shall be erected, constructed, planted, maintained or rebuilt in the front yard except a hedge or landscaping screen which is less than thirty (30) inches in height may be located in the front yard, provided that the hedge or landscaping screen shall not project over the lot line. A hedge located in a front or side yard may not be closer than three (3) feet from any driveway on an adjacent property. 
E.  Opacity and Structural requirements. 
(1)  Structural Requirements. Fences shall be constructed of an open pattern metal, woven wire, wood or vinyl, in such a manner so that there shall be either horizontal or vertical openings or both, of at least three (3) inches in width provided for the full length or height of the fence, and provided further that said fence shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 50 percent of the total area. The columns or support posts of a fence or wall may exceed the height limit of the fence by no more than eight inches. 
(2)  The opacity of a fence may be reduced or eliminated if: 
(a)  The fence will be located in the rear yard adjacent to a public right-of-way; or 
(b)  The fence will enclose a pool or hot tub if part of the enclosure is in a required side or rear yard. 
F.  Walls. 
(1)  Retaining walls. For the purpose of location and height, retaining wall shall be considered a fence and shall be subject to the provisions of this section if the wall extends more than one (1) foot above the adjacent ground level. Retaining walls shall meet the requirements of the local building code and be approved by the code official. 
(2)  Screening walls up to eight (8) feet in height are permissible along shared side or rear property lines between residential properties and nonresidential property used to store dump trucks, cars or heavy equipment, or upon which salt, sand or other raw materials are stockpiled. 
(3)  Walls on nonresidential property shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations of Section 40-10.02. 
(4)  Walls on residential property shall be constructed in accordance with the following: 
(a)  A wall shall not be constructed in a dedicated easement or within four feet of the location of an underground utility. 
(b)  A wall shall not exceed thirty (30) inches above grade, unless as permitted under Section 40-10.10.F(2). 
G.  Nonconforming existing fences, walls and hedges. Fences and walls already erected as of the date the ordinance may be maintained at their current height so long as such is in compliance with the law existing at the time of erection. However, the height and location of any such fence or wall must be made to comply with this section if any structural alteration is made, or if any structural alteration is necessary to safely or properly maintain the fence or wall. A nonconforming fence or wall that is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty (60%) percent of its replacement cost shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Article. 
H.  Clearance From City Property. 
(1)  City sidewalk. A fence, wall or outer growth of a hedge shall be a minimum of one (1) foot from any city sidewalk. 
(2)  City right-of-way. No fence, wall or hedge may be located in the city's right-of-way, including but not limited to, that area between the street and the sidewalk. For any fence or wall equipped with a gate, such gate shall not swing over the city's right-of-way. 
I.  Other Restrictions. 
(1)  Vacant lots. On a vacant lot, no fence may be erected, other than a temporary fence for construction purposes as deemed necessary by the Building Official. 
(2)  One fence per lot line. Only one fence or wall may be erected along a common lot line in the combined required side and rear yards. 
(3)  Dog runs are prohibited. 
J.  Finished Face of Partition Fences and Walls. The finished face of any fence or wall shall face outside the permit holder's property, with the visible posts or supports being located on the inside of the fence or wall, unless the fence is so constructed that both sides of the fence are the same (such as a board-on-board or shadow box fence). 
K.  Dilapidated or Dangerous Fences and Walls; Blight. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the owner upon whose property the fences or wall are located to ensure that all fences or walls are installed and maintained plumb, with adequate support and footings, and in a safe and sightly manner. If the fences or walls are deemed to be on the lot line and the ownership is not known, it shall be the duty of both adjoining property owners to maintain the fences or walls in a safe and sightly manner. 
(2)  The building official of the city is hereby authorized to order the removal or repair of fences and walls that are dangerous, damaged, paint peeled, dilapidated, or otherwise in violation of this Code or state or federal law. 
L.  Prohibited Materials. 
(1)  No fence or wall shall be constructed, in whole or in part, of barbed wire or in such a manner as to attach any spike, nail, or other sharp point, instrument or material. 
(2)  No fence or wall shall be electrically charged or connected to an electrical current, except for a fence installed below ground as an element of an animal control system. 
(3)  No fence or wall shall be constructed of corrugated plastic or contain woven plastic materials. 
M.  Zoo Fencing and Screening Adjacent to Huntington Road. 
(1)  Applicability. This section shall apply to any zoo fencing or screening along the frontage of Huntington Road that is located within 120 feet of the Huntington Road centerline. 
(2)  Fence and Screening Requirements: 
(a)  Perimeter Fence. 
1.  Definition: Fence directly abutting and parallel to Huntington Road. 
2.  Perimeter Fence shall be a black chain link fence. Barbwire is permitted only at the top of the fence. Razor wire is prohibited. Through a site plan review, the Planning Commission may approve the use of another material. 
3.  No tarp shall be affixed or located within fifteen (15) feet of the Perimeter Fence. 
4.  The maximum permitted Perimeter Fence height is ten (10) feet, including barbwire portion. 
(b)  Operation, Service Area, or Indoor Animal Habitat. 
1.  Definition: An exterior area to the rear of a building that is used for zoo operations, services, or indoor animal habitat, including but not limited to, trash enclosure areas, outdoor storage, concession stands, utility areas, and building for animal habitat. 
2.  Operations, Service Area, or Indoor Animal Habitat areas shall be screened either with a landscape screen located along the existing Huntington Road perimeter fence that provides a minimum of 80% opacity; or a fence of a natural material such as wood or bamboo. 
3.  The maximum permitted fence height for Operation, Service Area, or Indoor Animal Habitat areas is six (6) feet. 
(c)  Outside Animal Habitat. 
1.  Definition: An exterior area in which animals are confined within enclosures, to be displayed, bred, cared for, or rehabilitated. 
2.  Outside Animal Habitat areas may be screened either by a fence of natural material such as wood or bamboo; or a tarp screening if said tarp is supplemented with landscape screening along the existing Huntington Road perimeter fence that provides a minimum 80% opacity. No tarp shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of the perimeter fence. 
3.  The maximum permitted fence height for an Outside Animal Habitat area is ten (10) feet. 
(d)  Construction Area. 
1.  Definition: An exterior area where construction work is being undertaken. 
2.  Screening for a construction area shall only be valid for six (6) months in length. Any period longer than six (6) months in length shall require an extension from the Zoning Administrator. 
3.  The maximum permitted fence height for a Construction Area is eight (8) feet. 
(e)  Other Areas. 
1.  Definition: Portion of zoo adjacent to Huntington Road that does not meet the definition of Operations or Service Area, Animal Habitat, or Construction Area. 
2.  Only landscaping shall be permitted in these areas. 
(f)  For any portion of the zoo adjacent to Huntington Road that meets two or more of the fence type area definitions as set forth in Sections 40-10.12.M(2)(a)-(e), the more restrictive fencing or screening requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-10.11 - Signs 
A.  Intent. The intent of this article is to regulate signs and outdoor advertising within the city to protect public safety, health and welfare; minimize abundance and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction and loss of visibility; promote pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety and minimize negative impacts on surrounding property; promote a quality manner of display which maintains and enhances the character of the city; promotes public convenience; preserves property values; encourages the effective use of signs as a means of communication and support of businesses; and overall enhances the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the City. 
The regulations and standards of this article are considered the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve a substantial governmental interest for public safety, traffic safety, aesthetics, protection of property values, and intended to be content neutral. These regulations are content neutral. These objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction, illumination and other aspect of signs in the city so as to: 
(1)  Protect the public rights to receive messages, especially non-commercial messages such as religious, political, economic, social, philosophical, and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the expression of free speech protected by the First Amendment. 
(2)  Recognize that the principle intent of commercial signs, to meet the purpose of these standards and serve the public interest, should be for identification of an establishment on the premises. 
(3)  Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and non-motorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces desired uniform traffic flow, and creates potential for accidents. 
(4)  Recognize that different areas of the City require different sign regulation due to factors such as their intended audience (pedestrians, drivers, etc.) and their ability to help promote the character of an area. 
(5)  Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or disrepair. 
(6)  Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and placement of signs. 
(7)  Prevent placement of signs that will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses. 
(8)  Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with land uses. 
(9)  Preserve and improve the appearance of the City and road corridors through the City, including Woodward Avenue, by encouraging signs of consistent type and size which are compatible with and complementary to related buildings and uses, and are harmonious with their surroundings. 
(10)  Prohibit portable commercial signs near the road rights-of-way in recognition of their significant negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics. 
B.  Construction Standards. 
(1)  General Requirements. All permanent signs shall be designed and constructed in a safe and stable manner in accordance with the City's adopted Building and Electrical Code. All electrical wiring associated with a freestanding sign shall be installed underground. 
(2)  Building Code Compliance. All permanent signs shall be designed to comply with minimum wind pressure and other requirements set forth in the adopted Building Code. 
(3)  Framework. All signs attached to a structure shall be designed so that the supporting framework, other than the supporting elements on a freestanding sign, is contained within or behind the face of the sign or within the building to which the sign is attached so as to be totally screened from view. 
C.  Illuminated Signs. 
(1)  Indirectly or internally illuminated signs are permitted in non-residential districts provided such sign is so shielded as to prevent direct light rays from being visible from the public right-of-way or any adjacent property. 
(2)  Lighting of off-premises signs must be turned off after 11:00 p.m. Lighting of on-premises signs shall be turned off upon closing, but no later than 11:00 p.m. 
(3)  The backlighting of awnings is prohibited. 
D.  Measurement of Sign Area. 
(1)  The area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within the regular geometric form of a square, rectangle, triangle, or circle. If the sign utilizes more than one (1) separate geometric form, a square or rectangle may be combined with a contiguous circle or triangle. The form(s) shall encompass all the display area of the sign including all elements of the matter displayed. 
(2)  Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two (2) such faces are placed back to back, parallel to one another and less than twenty-four (24) inches apart, the area of the sign shall equal the area of one (1) face. 
(3)  Frames and structural members not bearing copy or display material shall not be included in the computation of sign area. 
E.  Prohibited Signs. 
(1)  Swinging Signs. Signs which swing or otherwise noticeably move as a result of wind pressure because of the manner of suspension or attachment. 
(2)  Blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color, or which are so constructed and operating as to create an appearance of writing or printing. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed as preventing use of lights or decorations related to religious and patriotic festivities. 
(3)  Moving Signs. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any sign or portion thereof which moves or assumes any motion constituting a non-stationary or fixed condition, including pennants, search lights, twirling signs, balloons, feather, or other gas-filled figures. 
(4)  Parking of Advertising Vehicles. No vehicle, or trailer, which has attached thereto, or painted thereon, any sign or advertising device displaying the name of any business, product or service located on the subject premises, shall be parked between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.: 
(a)  On private property, in any non-residential district, between the front line of the structures located thereon and the front property line; and 
(b)  On a public right-of-way, or on public property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way. Vehicles engaged in attended loading activities and otherwise lawful parking shall be exempt from this provision. 
(5)  Abandoned Signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product, or service no longer conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is located. 
(6)  Painted Wall Signs. Signs which are painted directly on to the wall, or any other structural part of a building. 
(7)  Roof Signs. Signs which are erected or constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
(8)  Fence Signs. Signs which are pasted or attached to utility poles or placed upon trees, fences, rocks, or in an unauthorized manner to walls or other signs. 
(9)  Projecting Signs. Signs located in, or which project into or overhang any public right-of-way, except as allowed by local, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(10)  Electronic Message Signs, including LED signs or moving video signs, except as otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. 
(11)  Miscellaneous Signs. 
(a)  Tacking, pasting, or otherwise affixing of signs or posters visible from a public way except "no trespassing", "no hunting", "beware of animal", warning of danger signs, and other legal postings as required by law, located on the walls of buildings, barns, sheds, on trees, poles, posts, or fences. 
(b)  Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal which contains the words "stop", "go", "slow", "caution" "danger", "warning", or similar words except as otherwise provided in this Section. 
(c)  Signs which are of a size, location, content, coloring, or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal or which obstruct the view in any direction at a street or road intersection. 
(d)  Signs which contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, pornographic, or immoral character. 
(e)  Signs which emit audible sound, odor, visible matter. 
F.  Signs Permitted in All Districts without a Permit. Subject to the other conditions of this ordinance, the following signs shall be permitted anywhere within Huntington Woods without a permit: 
(1)  Public Traffic and Directional Signs. 
(a)  Signs which direct traffic movement onto, or within, a property and which do not contain any advertising copy or logo, and which do not exceed six (6) square feet in area for each sign. 
(b)  A directional sign shall be located on the property to which it is directing traffic and shall be located behind the front right-of-way line. 
(c)  A directional sign may bear the logo of a business for which it directs entering and exiting traffic if it is the determination of the Zoning Administrator that such logo is reasonably necessary for the effectiveness of the directional sign on which it is located. 
(2)  Garage and Estate Sales. Garage sale and estate sale signs in residential zoning districts, provided that such signs: 
(a)  Are not attached to public utility poles. 
(b)  Do not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(c)  No more than three signs. 
(d)  Are erected no more than three (3) days before, and are removed within one (1) business day. 
(e)  Signs must be placed behind the sidewalk on private property. If signs are placed on private property other than on the property of the homeowner or occupant sponsoring the garage sale, permission must be obtained. 
(3)  Business Signs. Business signs containing information on credit cards, business affiliations, hours of operation, open/closed, etc. The combined area of all such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet and shall not be included in the maximum window coverage calculation. 
(4)  Construction maintenance or service work being performed. 
(a)  Number. May display one (1) sign on parcel(s) of which work is being completed. 
(b)  Duration. May remain on-site during duration of work. Must be removed when work is complete. 
(c)  Size. Six (6) square feet and maximum of four (4) feet in height. 
(5)  For rent or for lease signs. 
(a)  The sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. (In computing the area of applied lettering, the length and height shall be taken as six inches greater than the overall length and height of lettering.) 
(b)  The sign shall not project above the roofline and shall be attached flat to the building. 
(c)  Any lighting shall be shielded as to prevent direct light rays from being visible from the public right-of-way or any adjacent property. 
(d)  There shall be only one sign per building. 
(6)  Exempt. 
(a)  Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants or premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connections. 
(b)  Legal notices, identification, information, or directional sign erected, or required by governmental bodies. 
(c)  Integral decorative or architectural features of building, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, moving lights, or backlit areas. 
(d)  Signs containing non-commercial messages such as religious, political, economic, social, philosophical, and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
G.  Signs Permitted in TD and BD District. 
(1)  Ground, Wall, Awning and Canopy signs. 
(a)  Number. Up to one (1) ground sign and (1) wall sign per lot. 
(b)  Total Signage Area per Lot. The total permitted wall, ground, canopy, or awning signage per lot shall be not exceed 1.50 square foot of sign area for each 1.0 linear foot of building frontage occupied by a business to a maximum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
1.  All tenants without ground floor frontage, in a given building, shall be permitted one (1) combined exterior wall sign not more than twenty (20) square feet in area. Total additional tenant signage shall not exceed more than one hundred (100) square feet. 
(c)  Ground Sign. 
1.  Total height including base shall not exceed eight (8) feet. 
2.  Setback shall be no closer to street lot line than the height of the sign. 
3.  No ground sign may exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. 
(d)  Wall Sign. 
1.  No sign shall project above the roofline. 
(e)  Canopy and Awning Sign. 
1.  A canopy and awning sign is permitted in lieu of a wall sign. For canopies and awnings upon which a sign is to be displayed, the entire area of such canopy and awning shall be considered to be a sign area. 
(2)  Window. 
(a)  Number and Size. No limit on number but total window sign area cannot occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of each individual window. 
(b)  Window signs must be located inside the window. 
(c)  Window signs shall be placed to allow clear vision into the building by public safety personnel. 
(3)  Menu/Price Boards. In addition to the signs permitted in paragraphs 1, and 2 above, drive-through businesses with automobile pick up windows may have one (1) menu/price board per drive. The total square footage for menu board per drive-aisle shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
(4)  Vehicle Fueling/Multi-Use Stations. 
(a)  Gasoline Price Sign. 
1.  Location. Said sign shall be mounted or attached to business identification ground sign, provided that clear views of street traffic by motorists or pedestrians are not obstructed in any way. 
2.  Number. An automobile service station may have one (1) additional sign for the purpose of advertising gasoline prices and other services provided on the premises. 
3.  Size. Said sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area and shall not advertise the brand name of gasoline or other materials sold on the premises. 
4.  Illumination. Fuel prices may be LED numerals provided the following are met: 
i.  Numerals shall not exceed 12 inches in height. 
ii.  All numerals shall be either red or green in color. LED background may only be black. 
iii.  The numerals may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute a nuisance. 
iv.  The LED light is programed to automatically turn off in the event of a malfunction. 
(b)  Canopy. 
1.  Number. An automobile service station may have one (1) additional sign to be located on the fueling canopy for each public street frontage. 
2.  Size. Said sign can be one-half (1/2) square foot of sign area for each one (1) linear foot of canopy face length adjacent to facing public street frontage. 
(c)  Pump Signage. 
1.  Number. One (1) per fuel pump face. 
2.  Size. Maximum of one (1) square-foot. 
(5)  Miscellaneous Signage. 
(a)  Temporary Banner. 
1.  Permitted a maximum of four (4) times a year, not to exceed thirty (30) days at one time. 
2.  No larger than twenty (20) square feet. 
3.  Banners shall be attached to a building wall or permanent canopy extending from a building, and shall not extend above the roofline. 
(b)  Sandwich Board Signs. 
1.  Sandwich board signs shall only be located on sidewalks contiguous to the business being advertised. They shall not extend beyond the length of the business frontage. In no event shall the sandwich board sign reduce the open portion of the public sidewalk to less than five feet clear of all obstructions (i.e., street lighting, benches, trees, trash receptacles, etc.). 
2.  One per lot. 
3.  The signage area shall be a maximum of six (6) square feet on each face of the sign. The overall sign size shall not exceed 27" wide and/or 42" tall. 
4.  Sandwich board signs may only be displayed during open business hours. 
5.  Sandwich board signs are not permitted on a public sidewalk during times of snow and inclement weather. 
H.  Removal of Signs. 
(1)  Legal Non-Conforming. The Zoning Administrator shall order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this ordinance except for legal non-conforming signs. In the case of permanent signs, written notice shall be given to the owner of such sign or of the building, structure, or premises on which said sign is located ordering removal of the sign or such action as is necessary to bring the sign into compliance with this ordinance and specifying a reasonable period of time for removal and/or compliance. Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with this notice within the specified time, the City may remove the sign immediately and without further notice, at its discretion. Any sign deemed a safety hazard, signs prohibited under the provisions of Section 40-10.11.E, and signs improperly erected in any public right-of-way, may be removed without notice. Any cost of removal incurred by the City may be assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located, and such charge shall be a lien on the property. 
(2)  Expiration. A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located within thirty (30) days after the business which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the City shall remove it in accordance with the provisions stated in Section 40-10.10.I preceding. These removal provisions shall not apply where a subsequent owner or lessee conducts the same type of business and agrees to maintain the signs to advertise the type of business being conducted on the premises and provided the signs comply with the other provisions of this ordinance. 
I.  Violations. 
(1)  Any person or agent who installs or causes any of the following are party to the violations: 
(a)  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way inconsistent with the terms of this Ordinance or that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on which the sign is located. 
(b)  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit. 
(2)  Separate Violation. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this Ordinance shall be considered a separate violation. 
(3)  Right-of-Way. Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance any signs placed within a road right-of-way (ROW) and on utility poles will be considered a violation of this Ordinance and may be removed by the City at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 11 - Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures 

Section 40-11.01 - Intent 
A.  It is the purpose of this Article to provide regulations governing lots, buildings, structures and uses which were lawful prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, but which are regulated under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this Article and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this Article was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. Such uses are declared by this Article to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Article that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same District. 
C.  Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article provided progress has been diligently pursued and substantial construction has occurred. 
D.  The authorization of nonconformities that were legally established prior to enactment or amendment of this Ordinance to continue shall not apply to buildings, structures or uses which were not legally established prior to the enactment or amendment of this Ordinance. Those nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures which have not been legally established shall be declared illegal and shall be discontinued at the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-11.02 - Nonconforming Lots of Record 
A.  Use of Nonconforming Lots. In any District where single-family dwellings are permitted, any single lot of record existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article that fails to meet the applicable Zoning District requirements for area or width, or both, shall be considered to be a nonconforming lot of record. A single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be constructed on a nonconforming lot of record provided the lot is at least 40 feet in width, and all other setbacks and all other requirements of this Ordinance are met. 
B.  Nonconforming Contiguous Lots Under Same Ownership. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots with contiguous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Article, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this Article, the lots or combination of lots involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Article. No portion of said parcel shall be used or occupied in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Article, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which creates a lot width or area below the requirements stated in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-11.03 - Nonconforming Uses 
    A lawful use of land or structure or land in combination existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article that is no longer permissible under the terms of this Article as enacted or amended, shall be considered a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article. 
B.  A nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article. 
C.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
D.  A nonconforming use that is replaced by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the District in which the use is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
E.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status. 
F.  An existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, or to bring the structure into greater conformity with the Ordinance. 
G.  A nonconforming use that is determined to be abandoned shall not be reestablished, and any subsequent use shall conform to this Ordinance. A nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if there is a clear intent to abandon when considering the following conditions: 
(1)  Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property have been disconnected; or 
(2)  The property, building, or grounds have fallen into disrepair in a manner which result in violation of applicable zoning and property maintenance codes, or would otherwise give the appearance of neglect or abandonment; or 
(3)  Signs or other indications of the existence of the nonconforming use have been removed; or 
(4)  Equipment or fixtures necessary for the operation of the nonconforming use have been removed; or 
(5)  Other actions, which in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, constitute an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon the nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-11.04 - Nonconforming Buildings and Structures 
    A lawful structure that existed prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article that is no longer permissible under the terms of this Article as enacted or amended shall be considered a nonconforming structure. A nonconforming structure may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  A nonconforming building or structure may not be extended or enlarged or altered, except as follows: 
(1)  Nonconforming side yards of a residential dwelling may be extended provided said extension is no closer to the side lot lines than the existing dwelling; and 
(2)  A nonconforming residential building or structure may be extended or enlarged provided that said extension or enlargement does not itself violate, increase the violation, or cause the building to violate any provision of this chapter, other than permitted in Section A.(1) above. 
B.  All normal repairs and maintenance work required to keep a nonconforming building or structure in sound condition may be made, but such building or structure shall not be structurally altered in a way inconsistent with the description and purpose of this article. 
C.  A nonconforming building or structure that is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty (60%) percent of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation at the time of destruction, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Article, except that a nonconforming residential building or a residential building on a nonconforming lot may be reconstructed to its former size, shape and location on the lot. 
D.  A nonconforming building or structure that is moved for any reason for any distance whatever, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the District in which it is located after it is moved. 
E.  A nonconforming building or structure that is altered so as to eliminate, remove or lessen any or all of its nonconforming characteristics, shall not be altered or modified and any time thereafter to re-establish the nonconforming characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-11.05 - Repairs and Maintenance 
A.  On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding fifty (50%) percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order to such official. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-11.06 - Change of Tenancy or Ownership 
    There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 12 - Zoning Board of Appeals 

Section 40-12.01 - Board Established 
    A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established, in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3601 et seq.), and in such a way that the objectives of this Zoning Ordinance shall be observed, public health, safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The Zoning Board of Appeals is established to ensure that the objectives of this Ordinance may be more fully and equitably achieved, that a means be provided for competent interpretation of this Ordinance, and that reasonable relief be provided in the application of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-12.02 - Membership and Terms 
A.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the City Commission. Prior to January 1 in each year, one, two or three members, as the case may be, shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
B.  The City Commission may appoint two (2) alternate members for the same term as regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. An alternate member may be called on a rotating basis to serve as a regular member in the absence of the regular member or in the place of the regular member on an appeal in which the regular member abstains for conflict of interest. Once serving, an alternate member shall continue to serve until a final decision on the appeal has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
C.  Each member and alternate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve until that member's successor is appointed and qualifies. Members and alternate members of the board shall serve without compensation. The board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman. 
D.  Removal. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the City Commission for misfeasance, malfeasance or non-feasance in office upon written charges and after a due process hearing. A member shall disclose when there is or may be a conflict of interest prior to the matter being considered by the Zoning Board or Appeals. Failure of a member to disclose that there is or may be a conflict of interest to allow the Board to disqualify that member from a vote may constitute malfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-12.03 - Rules Governing the Zoning Board of Appeals 
A.  Rules. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedures to govern its procedures. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect a Chairperson, and Vice-Chairperson from its membership in accordance with adopted rules of procedure. 
B.  Votes. A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary for any decision related to administrative review, interpretation and variances. A current member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a current member of the Planning Commission shall not participate in a public hearing or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of the Planning Commission. 
C.  Representation. Any applicant may appear on their own behalf at a hearing or may be represented by an agent or attorney. 
D.  Time Limit. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide upon all matters properly before it within a reasonable time. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a resolution containing a full record of its findings and determinations in each case. 
E.  Record of Proceedings. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such times as the Board in its rules and regulations might specify. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members of the Board are present. The Board shall maintain a record of its proceedings, and all its official actions. The vote of each member upon a question, or a member's absence or abstention, shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting, which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
F.  Meetings. 
(1)  Meetings of the board shall be held monthly when there are pending appeals and at such other times as the board shall determine. There shall be a fixed time and place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings, showing the action of the board and the vote of each member upon each appeal considered. The presence of at least four (4) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. 
(2)  A fee shall be charged for all petitions and appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals, the amount of which shall be prescribed by the City Commission by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-12.04 - Duties and Powers of the Zoning Board of Appeals 
A.  General. The Zoning Board of Appeals has the power to act on matters as provided in this Ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3601 et seq.). The specific powers of the Board are enumerated in the following Sections of this Article. 
B.  Delegated Duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide upon the following: 
(1)  Appeals of administrative decisions. 
(2)  Requests for interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map. 
(3)  Requests for dimensional and other non-use variances. 
(4)  All matters upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance. 
(5)  Use Variances as set forth in Section 12.04.G. 
C.  Appeals-Appeals of Administrative Decisions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or body in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
(1)  Appeals shall be filed in writing within thirty (30) days of the written decision in question with the Zoning Administrator. The appellant must have a property interest and standing to be recognized under the law to challenge the decision. The appellant shall submit a clear description of the order, requirement, decision, or determination for which the appeal is made and the grounds of the appeal. The applicant may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals to submit additional information to clarify the appeal. 
(2)  Appeals may be taken by the person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, agency, or bureau of the City or State governments. In addition, a variance in the Zoning Ordinance may be applied for and granted under Section 4 of the Uniform Condemnation Procedures Act, 1980 PA 87, MCL 213.54. 
(3)  An appeal stays all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(4)  An administrative decision may be reversed, in whole or in part, or may be modified. To that end, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall only modify or reverse an administrative decision being appealed if one (1) or more of the following requirements are met: 
(a)  The administrative decision was arbitrary or capricious; 
(b)  The administrative decision was based on an erroneous finding of material fact; 
(c)  The administrative decision constituted an abuse of discretion; or 
(d)  The administrative decision was based on erroneous interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance or zoning law. 
D.  Interpretation. 
(1)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide requests for interpretation of this Ordinance or the Zoning Map, taking into consideration the intent and purpose of the Ordinance and the Master Plan. In an interpretation of the Zoning Map, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be governed by the Rules of Interpretation and Interpretation of District Boundaries. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change zoning district boundaries, except where uncertainty exists as to the location of a boundary, land use classifications of any property, or Zoning Ordinance text. 
(2)  A record shall be kept by the Zoning Board of Appeals of all decisions for interpretation of this Ordinance or Zoning Map. The Zoning Board of Appeals may request the Planning Commission to initiate an Ordinance amendment that shall correct or clarify the Ordinance. 
E.  Dimensional and Other Non-Use Variances. 
(1)  Where a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would involve practical difficulties within the meaning of this Article and existing law, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize such variation of the provisions of this Ordinance with such conditions and safeguards as it may determine as may be in harmony with the spirit of this Article and so that public safety and welfare be secured, and substantial justice done. 
(2)  Dimensional or other non-use variances shall not be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it can be determined that all of the following facts and conditions exist: 
(a)  Exceptional characteristics of property for which the variance is sought make compliance with dimensional requirements substantially more difficult than would be the case for the great majority of properties in the same zoning district. Characteristics of property which shall be considered including, but not limited to, exceptional narrowness, shallowness, smallness, irregular shape, topography, vegetation and other similar characteristics. 
(b)  The characteristics which make compliance with dimensional requirements difficult must be related to the property for which the variance is sought, not some other location. 
(c)  The characteristics which make compliance with the dimensional requirements shall not be of a personal nature. 
(d)  The characteristics which make compliance with dimensional requirements difficult must not have been created by the current or a previous owner. 
(e)  The proposed variance will not be harmful or alter the essential character of the area in which the property is located, will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property value within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
(3)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not find that any of the above criteria have been met without substantial evidence provided by the applicant to that effect. 
(4)  The proposed variance will be the minimum necessary, and no variance shall be granted where a different solution not requiring a variance would be possible. 
F.  Special Variations. In addition to the general powers given in Section 40-12.04.B, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority in specific cases, after public notice and hearing, to authorize, by permit, a variation from the use, height and area district regulations herein established in harmony with their general purpose and intent as follows: 
(1)  The erection and use of a building, or an addition to an existing building of a public service corporation and for public utility purposes, in any location to a greater height or larger area than the district requirements herein established, which the board shall find reasonably necessary for the public convenience. 
(2)  The reconstruction, within a period not to exceed 12 months, of a building location in a district restricted against its use which has been destroyed by fire or other calamity, to the extent of not more than 75 percent of its assessed valuation. 
G.  Use Variance. A use variance may be allowed by the Zoning Board of Appeals only in cases where there is reasonable evidence of unnecessary hardship in the official record of the hearing, and that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant has demonstrated that the site cannot reasonably be used for any of the uses allowed within the current zoning district designation. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require submission of documentation from professionals or certified experts to substantiate this finding. 
(2)  That the condition or situation of the specific parcel of property or the intended use of such property for which the variance is sought is unique to that property and not commonly present in the general vicinity or in the zoning district. The applicant must prove that there are certain features or conditions of the land that are not generally applicable throughout the zone and that these features make it impossible to earn a reasonable return without some adjustment. Such unique conditions or situations include: 
(a)  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure. 
(c)  The use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
(d)  Any other physical situation on the land, building or structure deemed by the Zoning Board of Appeals to be extraordinary. 
(3)  The use variance will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood, be contrary to the intent of the Master Plan, or be a detriment to adjacent properties. 
(4)  The capacity and operations of public roads, utilities, other facilities and services will not be significantly compromised. 
(5)  The immediate practical difficulty causing the need for variance request was not self-created by the applicant. 
H.  Assistance. The board may call upon the Mayor of the City to secure the assistance of any other City department in the performance of its duties and it shall be the duty of such other departments to render such assistance as may be reasonably required. 
I.  Expiration. 
(1)  No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting the erection or alteration of buildings or structures shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, unless a building permit for the erection or alteration is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration is commenced and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the permit. The Zoning Administrator may grant extensions, not to exceed six (6) months for each extension, upon a showing of good cause and good faith effort being made to achieve completion. 
(2)  No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless the use is established within such period; provided, however, that if the use is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, the order shall continue in full force and effect if a building permit is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration is commenced and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-12.05 - Rules and Procedures for Variances 
A.  General. 
(1)  An application for a variance shall be filed by the record owner of the lot in question, or by an agent authorized in writing to act on the record owner's behalf, with the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall provide such information as is required by the Zoning Board of Appeals by way of completed application form, fee and additional information. 
(2)  After a public hearing and upon findings of fact based upon the applicable standards set forth in this Article, the Zoning Board of Appeals may approve the variance(s) as requested, approve variance(s) that better complies with the Ordinance than that requested, or deny the request. 
(3)  The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions with an affirmative decision. The conditions may include those necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare, ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses, and protect and preserve natural features. Any conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals must be related to a valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(4)  A variance which is legally utilized and maintained runs with the property and any subsequent owners may legally continue the variance under its original or amended terms. 
(5)  An application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence not previously discovered at the time the variance was denied or changed conditions found by the Zoning Board of Appeals to be valid. 
B.  Public Hearings and Notification. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on all appeals, interpretations, and requests for variances. Public hearing and notification requirements are set forth in Section 40-3.03 Public Notice Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-12.06 - Site Plan Requirements 
    If an application to the Board of Zoning Appeals requires site plan approval by the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of Article 7, the applicant shall first receive site plan approval as set forth in Article 7. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Article 13 - Amendments 

Section 40-13.01 - Authority 
    The City Commission may amend, supplement, or change the zoning regulations of this chapter and the zoning district boundaries, pursuant to the requirements of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), as amended, after recommendation thereon from the Planning Commission. Amendments to the Ordinance requirements are referred to as text amendments. Amendments to the official zoning map that constitute a change in zoning classification are referred to as rezonings. After receiving the report of the Planning Commission, the City Commission may adopt the proposed amendment, supplement or change with or without amendment, or refer the matter again to the Planning Commission for a further report. 
    Amendments may be initiated by: resolution of the City Commission or the Planning Commission; petition of one (1) or more property owners; or by one (1) or more persons acting on behalf of a property owner(s). 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-13.02 - Amendment Procedure 
    The procedure for making amendments to this Ordinance shall be in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as set forth in Section 40-3.03 of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-13.03 - Rezoning Process 
A.  Procedure for Rezoning of Property. 
(1)  An applicant seeking the rezoning of property within the City of Huntington Woods shall file an application with the Zoning Administrator, together with the appropriate fee, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission. 
(2)  A sign shall be placed on the subject property, at the cost to the applicant, to inform the public that an application for rezoning has been filed, and to indicate the location where the information regarding the request can be obtained. 
(3)  The Planning Commission shall review the application for rezoning, any supplementary materials and reports, and hold a public hearing. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Commission. 
(4)  The application for rezoning, the entire record at the Planning Commission, the review report, and the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the City Manager and subsequently to the City Commission. The City Manager shall establish a date on which the City Commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter. 
(5)  The City Commission shall review the application for rezoning, the Planning Commission recommendation, supplementary materials and reports, and hold a public hearing. The City Commission, after a review of the matter, shall adopt a resolution which shall either: 
(a)  Approve the rezoning application for all or part of the property; 
(b)  Deny the rezoning application; or 
(c)  Postpone the rezoning application. 
B.  Application Requirements. A rezoning shall be submitted on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to provide the information and materials required as a part of the application for rezoning shall render the application deficient and the application shall be held in abeyance until all required items are submitted. The following information shall be submitted: 
(1)  The present zoning classification of the property. 
(2)  The proposed zoning classification. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone of the person applying for the rezoning. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone of the person who owns the subject property. 
(5)  The relationship between the applicant and the property owner. 
(6)  A Certified Survey that meets PA 132. 
(7)  The proposed use of the property shall be indicated on the application. 
C.  Standards for Approval. A rezoning may only be approved upon a finding and determination that all of the following are satisfied: 
(1)  The proposed rezoning is consistent with the Master Plan. If the current zoning is in material conflict with the Master Plan, such conflict is due to one of the following: 
(a)  A change in City policy since the Master Plan was adopted. 
(b)  A change in conditions since the Master Plan was adopted. 
(c)  An error in the Master Plan. 
(2)  The proposed rezoning will not cause nor increase any non-conformity. 
(3)  Public services and facilities affected by a proposed development will be capable of accommodating service and facility loads caused by use of the development. 
(4)  The rezoning will not impact public health, safety or welfare. 
(5)  The rezoning will ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-13.04 - Public Notice of Proposed Rezonings and Text Amendments 
    Public hearing and notification requirements for proposed rezoning and text amendments are set forth in Section 40-3.03, Public Notice Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-13.05 - Conditional Rezoning of Land 
A.  Authorization and Limitations. City Commission shall have the authority to place conditions on a rezoning provided the conditions have been voluntarily offered in writing by the applicant and are acceptable to the City Commission. 
In exercising its authority to consider a conditional rezoning, the City is also authorized to impose the following limitations: 
(1)  An owner of land may voluntarily offer written conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a conditional rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for conditional rezoning is filed, or additional conditions may be offered at a later time during the conditional rezoning process as set forth below. 
(2)  The owner's offer of conditions may not authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which the conditional rezoning is requested. 
(3)  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that requires a special use approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if special use approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that requires site plan approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that requires a variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  Amendment of Conditions. The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of conditional rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner, and confirmed in writing. An owner may withdraw in writing all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the City Commission provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred back to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
C.  Procedure. The procedure for consideration of Conditional Rezoning request shall be the same as provided in Section 40-13.02 for other rezoning requests and the requirements of said Sections shall be applicable to Conditional Rezoning in addition to the following: 
(1)  Application Requirements. A Conditional Rezoning request shall be initiated by the submission of a proposed Conditional Rezoning Agreement. A Conditional Rezoning Agreement shall include the following: 
(a)  A written statement prepared by the applicant that confirms the Conditional Rezoning Agreement was proposed by the applicant and entered into voluntarily. 
(b)  A written statement prepared by the applicant that confirms that the property shall not be used or developed in a manner that is inconsistent with conditions placed on the rezoning. 
(c)  A list of conditions proposed by the applicant. 
(d)  A time frame for completing the proposed improvements. 
(e)  A legal description of the land. 
(f)  A Sketch Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 40-8.03.A. 
(2)  Public Hearing. The Notice of Public Hearing on a Conditional Rezoning request shall include a general description of the proposed agreement being considered. A review of the proposed agreement shall be conducted at the public hearing. The Public Hearing shall be noticed as set forth in Section 40-3.03. 
(3)  Standards for Approval. A Conditional Rezoning may only be approved upon a finding and determination that all of the following are satisfied: 
(a)  The conditions, proposed development, and/or proposed use of the land are designed or proposed for public health, safety, and welfare purposes. 
(b)  The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use are not in material conflict with the Master Plan, or, if there is material conflict with the Master Plan, such conflict is due to one of the following: 
1.  A change in City policy since the Master Plan was adopted. 
2.  A change in conditions since the Master Plan was adopted. 
3.  An error in the Master Plan. 
(c)  The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use are in accordance with all terms and provisions of the zoning district to which the land is to be rezoned, except as otherwise allowed in the Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 
(d)  Public services and facilities affected by a proposed development will be capable of accommodating service and facility loads caused by use of the development. 
(e)  The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use shall insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land. 
(4)  Amendment to Zoning Map. Upon approval by City Commission of a Conditional Rezoning request and a Conditional Rezoning Agreement, as provided by this Section, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect a new zoning classification along with a relevant designation that will provide reasonable notice of the Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 
(5)  Expiration. A Conditional Rezoning Approval shall expire following a period of two (2) years from the effective date of the rezoning unless progress has been diligently pursued and substantial completion has occurred in accordance with permits issued by the City. 
(a)  In the event the conditional rezoning expires, the rezoning and the Conditional Rezoning Agreement shall be void and of no effect. 
(b)  If the Conditional Rezoning becomes void, no development shall be undertaken and no permits for development shall be issued until such time as a new zoning district classification of the property has become effective as a result of one or both of the following actions that may be taken: 
1.  The property owner seeks a new rezoning classification for the property, and/or 
2.  The City initiates a new rezoning request for the property to a reasonable district classification, in accordance with the conventional rezoning procedure. 
(6)  A Conditional Rezoning Approval shall not become effective until the Conditional Rezoning Agreement is recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds and a certified copy of the Agreement is filed with the City Clerk. 
(7)  If development and/or actions are undertaken on or with respect to the property in violation of the Conditional Rezoning Agreement, such development and/or actions shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and deemed a nuisance per se. In such case, the City may issue a stop work order relative to the property and seek any other lawful remedies. Until curative action is taken to bring the property into compliance with the Conditional Rezoning Agreement, the City may withhold, or, following notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke permits and certificates, in addition to or in lieu of such other lawful action to achieve compliance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-13.06 - Protest Petition 
A.  If a protest petition in conformance with State law is presented to the City Commission prior to the final adoption of an amendment to this ordinance, an amendment to this chapter which is the object of the petition shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the City Commission. The protest petition shall be presented to the City Commission before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall be signed by one of the following: 
(1)  The owners of at least twenty (20%) percent of the area of land included in the proposed change. 
(2)  The owners of at least twenty (20%) percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change. 
For purposes of this section, publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20 percent land area requirement. 
B.  The protest petition shall be submitted to the City Clerk by 12:00 p.m. on the day of the City Commission Public Hearing on the proposed amendment, on a form provided by the City. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Section 40-13.07 - Annual Report 
    The Planning Commission shall prepare an annual report for the Huntington Woods City Commission on the administration and enforcement of the zoning ordinance and recommendations for amendment or supplements to the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 1-8-2018) 
Chapter 41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - PROHIBITED LAND USES 

Sec. 42-1. - Parking and storage of recreational equipment. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the term "recreational equipment" means one or more of the following or modifications thereof: travel trailer, camp trailer, tent trailer, camper, pickup camper, folding tent trailer, utility trailer, boat, boat trailer, house trailer, snowmobile, dune buggies, including transportation equipment, motorized home, motor bus, and other similar equipment. The parking and storage of such equipment shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No person shall park overnight or permit the parking overnight of any recreational equipment upon any public highway, street, alley, park or other public place within the city. 
(2)  If the recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a garage, carport or enclosed structure, it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the lot and behind the side yard building line on any corner lot. At no time shall connections be made to electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities, except that a temporary electrical connection shall be permissible for the purpose of recharging batteries and during periods of occupancy permitted pursuant to subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  No such equipment shall at any time be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes, except for a period not to exceed seven days and not often than once in six months on the same property. Permission for such occupancy of recreational equipment on residential lots shall be obtained from the director of public safety prior to such occupancy. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, recreational equipment may be parked on the front yard portion of a driveway for a period of not more than 48 hours, but only for the purpose of loading or unloading such equipment. 
(5)  All recreational equipment must be kept in good repair and carry a prior or current year's license plate and/or registration, as required by law. 
(6)  In the event a provision enacted by this section would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or undue hardship upon the owner of recreational equipment, the city manager may grant a variance from the provisions of this section. If a variance is denied by the city manager, the applicant may appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals which is empowered to grant such a variance pursuant to the provisions chapter 40 of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 5.241) 
Sec. 42-2. - Billboards. 
    The term "billboard," as used in this section, means any structure erected or designed for the purpose of advertising, except signs accessory to the lawful use of the property where located when permitted by this chapter. No person shall erect, construct or maintain any billboard within the city. Any billboard erected or maintained in violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance per se and may be abated in accordance with chapter 14. 
(Code 1988, § 5.242) 
Sec. 42-3. - Billposting in streets. 
    No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or any other matter upon any lamppost, electric light, railway, telegraph or telephone pole, shade tree, fire hydrant, or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, public building or any property or thing belonging to the city, or on any article or thing within any park. Public officers posting any notice required or permitted by law shall be excepted from the provisions of this section. Any person who violates this section shall, upon removal by the city of the unlawfully placed matter, be assessed with the costs of removal, and such assessment shall be separate and apart from the penalties imposed for the violation thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 5.243; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 7-25-1989) 
Appendix A - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix are the franchises granted by the city and currently in force. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. 

ARTICLE I. - CONSUMERS ENERGY COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE 
ORDINANCE NO. 501 
CONSUMERS ENERGY COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE ORDINANCE 
    AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND CHAPTER 22, GAS FRANCHISE, OF TITLE II, UTILITIES AND SERVICES, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS BY REPEALING THE CURRENT GAS FRANCHISE ORDINANCE, SECTIONS 2.300 THROUGH 2.312, INCLUSIVE, IN ITS ENTIRETY, AND ADOPTING A NEW GAS FRANCHISE ORDINANCE, THEREBY GRANTING TO CONSUMERS ENERGY COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT, POWER AND AUTHORITY TO LAY, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE GAS MAINS, PIPES AND SERVICES ON, ALONG, ACROSS AND UNDER THE HIGHWAYS, STREETS, ALLEYS, BRIDGES, WATERWAYS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES, AND TO DO A LOCAL GAS BUSINESS IN THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS, OAKLAND COUNTY, MICHIGAN, FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY YEARS. 
    THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS ORDAINS: 

[Sec.] 2.300. - Short Title. 
    This Article shall be known and cited as the Consumers Energy Company Gas Franchise Ordinance. 
[Sec.] 2.301. - Grant; Term. 
    The City of Huntington Woods, Oakland County, Michigan, hereby grants to the Consumers Energy Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "Grantee," the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places and to do a local gas business in the City of Huntington Woods, Oakland County, Michigan, for a period of twenty years, subject to revocation as hereinafter provided. 
[Sec.] 2.302. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, the Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
[Sec.] 2.303. - Conditions. 
    No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway or other public place used by the Grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of Grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes. 
[Sec.] 2.304. - Hold Harmless. 
    The Grantee shall at all times keep and save the City free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the City on account of the permission herein given, the Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the City and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
[Sec.] 2.305. - Extensions. 
    The Grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within said City and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
[Sec.] 2.306. - Franchise Not Exclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder. 
[Sec.] 2.307. - Rates. 
    The Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said City for gas furnished therein the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which Commission, or its successors, authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service in said City are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said City, acting by its City Commission, or by the Grantee. 
[Sec.] 2.308. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this Article is subject to revocation upon sixty (60) days written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
[Sec.] 2.309. - Michigan Public Service Commission, Jurisdiction. 
    The Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission, or its successors, applicable to gas service in said City. 
[Sec.] 2.310. - Purchase of Property. 
    The City shall have the right, when duly authorized to do so, to purchase from the Grantee all of the property of the Grantee in the streets and highways in the City and elsewhere, used in or used for the operation of the Grantee's gas business in the City, and to acquire property at its current fair value at the time of purchase by the City. Such price and other terms and conditions of sale shall be fixed by agreement of the Grantee and the City. 
[Sec.] 2.311. - Valuation of Purchased Property. 
    The value of this franchise or any extension or renewal thereof shall be excluded in determining the purchase price to be paid by the City to the Grantee in acquiring the Grantee's gas property in the City by purchase, condemnation or otherwise. 
[Sec.] 2.312. - Regulations. 
    The City reserves the right to make all regulations which shall be necessary to secure the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public and the right to make and enforce all such regulations as shall be reasonably necessary to secure adequate, sufficient and proper service, extensions, and accommodations for the people and insure their comfort and convenience. 
[Sec.] 2.313. - [Notification Prior to Work.] 
    Prior to any work by Grantee associated with the installation, construction, maintenance, repair or replacement of any line, main, pipe or other equipment within the City's public rights of way, Grantee shall notify City of the date, time and place of such work and the estimated date and time of completion. Grantee shall further notify City of Grantee's person or persons of contact for all information regarding such notification. 
[Sec.] 3. - Severability. 
    No other portion, paragraph or phrase of the Code of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan shall be affected by this Ordinance except as to the above sections, and in the event any portion, section or subsection of this Ordinance shall be held invalid for any reason, such invalidation shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other part or portion of this ordinance or of the Code of the City of Huntington Woods, Michigan. 
[Sec.] 4. - Effective Date. 
    This Ordinance shall be published as required by the Charter of the City of Huntington Woods and shall become effective twenty (20) days from the date of its adoption or on December 9, 2005, whichever is later; provided, however, that within said period the Grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk and otherwise shall not go into effect. Upon publication and acceptance hereof, this ordinance shall constitute a contract between the City of Huntington Woods and the Grantee. 
    MADE, PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Commission of the City of Huntington Woods on this 14th day of November 2005. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1988 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances, see the table immediately following this table. 
1988 Code 
Section Section   
this Code 1.2 1-13 1.4 1-1 1.5 1-3 1.6 1-16 1.7 1-9 1.8-1.10 1-2 1.11, 1.12 1-10, 1-11 1.13 1-15 1.14 1-12 10-1-10-4 1.20-1.23 32-219-32-222 1.31 2-40 1.32-1.37 2-131-2-136 1.42, 1.43 2-411, 2-412 1.45 2-161 1.61-1.64 2-201-2-204 1.85 2-269 1.87 2-270 1.91 2-289 1.94 2-312 1.97 2-343 1.101-1.107 2-71-2-77 1.121-1.134 2-571-2-584 1.151-1.156 22-1-22-6 1.171-1.179 12-19-12-27 1.201, 1.202 2-621, 2-622 2.1-2.11 30-21-30-31 2.20-2.35 38-19-38-34 2.61-2.66 38-57-38-62 2.67-2.79 38-64-38-76 2.80-1-2.80-13 38-96-38-108 2.81 38-63 2.81-2.87 38-136-38-142 2.100-2.111 6-370-6-381 2.203 2-623 2.234, 2.235 34-101, 34-102 2.400-2.402 34-19-34-21 2.404-2.415 34-22-34-33 2.416 34-33 2.417-2.423 34-35-34-41 2.440-2.444 34-71-34-75 3.1-3.9 26-19-26-27 3.41-3.55 14-167-14-181 3.57-3.59 14-182-14-184 3.70-3.72 2-472-2-474 4.1-4.8 32-19-32-26 4.17, 4.18 32-66, 32-67 4.26, 4.27 32-98, 32-99 4.28, 4.29 32-127, 32-128 4.34 32-155 4.41-4.44 32-27-32-30 4.61-4.72 32-179-32-190 5.1 40-1 5.2, 5.3 40-77, 40-78 5.6-5.9 40-111-40-114 5.12-5.15 40-151-40-154 5.19-5.21 40-177-40-179 5.23-5.29 40-181-40-187 5.39-5.44 40-215-40-220 5.45 40-222 5.46 40-332 5.47 40-221 5.49, 5.50 40-355, 40-356 5.51-5.59 40-51-40-59 5.61-5.65 40-21-40-25 5.68-5.71 40-26-40-29 5.75-5.78 40-386-40-389 5.80-5.84 40-390-40-394 5.191, 5.192 20-19, 20-20 5.193-5.201 20-22-20-30 5.201 20-31 5.221-5.227 2-438-2-444 5.241-5.243 42-1-42-3 6.61-6.67 6-406-6-412 7.1 8-1 7.2-7.12 8-21-8-31 7.12 8-223 7.13-7.25 8-32-8-44 7.31-7.34 8-62-8-65 7.51-7.54 8-89-8-92 7.61 28-19 7.62 28-46 7.62a 28-47 7.62b 28-48 7.62c 28-49 7.63, 7.64 28-50, 28-51 7.64a 28-52 7.64b 28-53 7.65-7.67 28-54-28-56 7.71-7.74 8-113-8-116 7.75-7.81 28-81-28-87 7.83, 7.84 28-88, 28-89 7.91-7.93 8-146-8-148 7.95-7.97 8-149-8-151 7.131-7.136 18-1-18-6 7.141-7.149 8-171-8-179 7.161-7.163 8-197-8-199 7.171 8-222 7.173-7.185 8-224-8-236 7.187-7.191 8-237-8-241 8.1-8.9 6-19-6-27 8.10-8.12 6-58-6-60 8.16-8.18 6-79-6-81 8.20-8.30 6-337-6-347 8.30 16-23 8.31 6-348 16-24 8.33-8.35 16-25-16-27 8.40 6-106 8.50, 8.51 6-107, 6-108 8.53-8.56 6-109-6-112 8.58-8.61 6-113-6-116 8.130-8.138 6-183-6-191 8.161 6-146 8.162 6-156 8.171-8.175 8-261-8-265 8.180, 8.181 6-499, 6-500 8.182 6-503 8.194-8.198 6-476-6-480 8.201-8.209 6-438-6-446 8.301-8.308 6-249-6-256 8.321-8.332 6-276-6-287 9.1 2-730 14-1 9.2 2-731 14-2 9.3-9.6 2-732-2-735 9.6 14-3 9.7 2-736 14-4 9.9 14-23-14-26 9.10 30-1 9.11, 9.12 14-56, 14-57 9.15 24-327 9.16-9.19 14-88-14-91 9.20-9.24 14-111-14-115 9.28-9.33 14-144-14-149 9.35-9.38 4-1-4-4 9.43-9.52 4-27-4-36 9.54, 9.55 4-37, 4-38 9.61 24-1 9.62(1) 24-46 9.62(2), 9.62(3) 24-185, 24-186 9.62(4) 24-226 24-329 9.62(5) 24-328 9.62(7) 24-47 24-187 9.62(9) 24-225 9.62(10), (11), (30) 24-48 9.62(12)-9.62(14) 24-188-24-190 9.62(15) 24-184 9.62(16) 24-330 9.62(17), 9.62(18) 24-227, 24-228 9.62(19) 24-3 9.62(20), 9.62(21) 24-229, 24-230 9.62(22), 9.62(23) 24-191, 24-192 9.62(24) 24-21 9.62(25) 24-98 9.62(26), 9.62(27) 24-127, 24-128 9.62(28) 24-331 9.62(29) 24-332 9.62(31) 24-193 9.62(33) 24-22 9.62(34) 24-49 9.63 24-157 9.64 24-412 9.65, 9.66 24-163, 24-164 9.71 24-165 9.91 24-99 9.92 24-162 9.93 24-129 9.101-9.104 24-371-24-374 9.121, 9.122 24-261, 24-262 9.123 24-263 9.124, 9.125 24-264, 24-265 9.141 24-438 9.143 24-439 9.144, 9.145 24-303, 24-304 9.202-9.204 24-158-24-160 9.205 24-2 9.206 24-161 9.250 24-462 9.301-9.306 2-661-2-666 10.1 36-1 10.4, 10.5 36-4, 36-5 10.51-10.53 36-51-36-53 10.60-10.64 2-704-2-708 10.80-10.83 36-80-36-83 10.215 36-215 10.223-10.225 36-223-36-225 10.251b 36-25b 10.251d 36-251d 10.255, 10.256 36-255, 36-256 10.301 36-301 10.306 36-306 10.311, 10.312 36-311, 36-312 10.319d 36-319d 10.321a 36-321a 10.324-10.328 36-324-36-328 10.602 36-602 10.602a 36-602a 10.603, 10.604 36-603, 36-604 10.606, 10.607 36-606, 36-607 10.611-10.613 36-611-36-613 10.613d 36-613d 10.614-10.616 36-614-36-616 10.617a 36-617a 10.618-10.622 36-618-36-622 10.622a 36-622a 10.623 36-623 10.623a 36-623a 10.624 36-624 10.624a 36-624a 10.625 36-625 10.625-l 36-625l 10.625a 36-625a 10.625m 36-625m 10.626 36-626 10.626a 36-626a 10.626b 36-626b 10.626c 36-626c 10.627 36-627 10.631 36-631 10.633 36-633 10.634-10.640 36-634-36-640 10.640a 36-640a 10.641-10.643 36-641-36-643 10.643a 36-643a 10.644-10.646 36-644-36-646 10.647, 10.648 36-647, 36-648 10.649, 10.650 36-649, 36-650 10.652, 10.653 36-652, 36-653 10.653a 36-653a 10.654 36-654 10.655 36-655 10.655a 36-655a 10.655b 36-655b 10.655c 36-655c 10.655d 36-655d 10.655e 36-655e 10.655f 36-655f 10.656 36-656 10.656a 36-656a 10.657, 10.658 36-657, 36-658 10.659, 10.660 36-659, 36-660 10.661 36-661 10.661a 36-661a 10.662 36-662 10.662a 36-662a 10.664-10.666 36-664-36-666 10.668 36-668 10.669 36-669 10.672 36-672 10.674 36-674 10.674a 36-674a 10.675i 36-675i 10.675a 36-675a 10.675b 36-675b 10.675c 36-675c 10.675d 36-675d 10.675e 36-675e 10.675f 36-675f 10.675g 36-675g 10.675h 36-675h 10.675j 36-675j 10.675k 36-675k 10.675l 36-675l 10.675m 36-675m 10.675n 36-675n 10.676 36-676 10.676b 36-676b 10.676c 36-676c 10.676d 36-676d 10.676e 36-676e 10.676f 36-676f 10.676g 36-676g 10.677 36-677 10.677a 36-677a 10.678 36-678 10.678a 36-678a 10.678b 36-678b 10.679 36-679 10.679a 36-679a 10.679b 36-679b 10.679c 36-679c 10.680-10.682 36-680-36-682 10.682a 36-682a 10.683, 10.684 36-683, 36-684 10.684a 36-684a 10.693 36-693 10.696, 10.697 36-696, 36-697 10.705-10.707 36-705-36-707 10.707a 36-707a 10.707b 36-707b 10.708 36-708 10.708a 36-708a 10.708b 36-708b 10.709, 10.710 36-709, 36-710 10.710d 36-710d 10.710e 36-710e 10.714a 36-714a 10.716 36-716 10.721 36-721 10.724 36-724 10.851-10.853 36-851-36-853 10.861, 10.862 36-861, 36-862 10.864 36-864 10.901 36-901 10.901a 36-901a 10.904 36-904 10.904e 36-904e 10.907 36-907 10.910 36-910 10.942, 10.943 36-942, 36-943 Ch. 38, app. A 38-109  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
this Code 302 12-17-1985 1 24-462 303  9-16-1986 1 20-30, 20-31 305 12-16-1986 1, 2 36-4 306  5-19-1987 1 32-189 307  8-18-1987 1 6-372 308 12- 1-1987 1 2-581 2-583, 2-584 309  1- 5-1988 1 2-581 310  2-16-1988 1 22-2 312  3-17-1988 1 40-215 313  4- 5-1988 1 14-88-14-91 314  5-17-1988 1, 2 40-217, 40-218 315  6-21-1988 1 2-571-2-580 316  6-21-1988 1, 2 40-111 317  6-12-1988 1 6-21  6-21-1988 1 6-19, 6-20 6-22-6-27 318  6-21-1988 1 16-23, 16-24 323 10-18-1988 1 36-4 324 12-13-1988 1, 2 40-112, 40-113 3 40-355 325  4-18-1989 1 30-21, 30-22 30-24-30-26 30-29 326  6-27-1989 1 40-111 40-113 327  6-27-1989 1 6-407 328  7-25-1989 1 38-142 330  7-25-1989 1 32-21 331  7-25-1989 1 40-21 333  7-25-1989 1 20-26 2 20-30, 20-31 335  7-25-1989 1 42-3 336  7-25-1989 1 8-25 2, 3 8-28, 8-29 4 8-31 5 8-34 338  7-25-1989 1 8-90 339  7-25-1989 1 8-116 340  7-25-1989 1 18-2 341  7-25-1989 1 6-26 342  7-25-1989 1 16-26 344  7-25-1989 1 8-262 345  7-25-1989 1 6-440 347  7-25-1989 1 36-4 348  9-19-1989 1 40-114 2 40-154 3 40-187 4 40-222 5 40-332 6 40-221 7 40-356 349  9-19-1989 1 6-338-6-342 2 6-343-6-348 350 10-19-1989 1 8-222-8-241 351 11-21-1989 2 38-57 352  6-19-1990 1 40-394 353  6-19-1990 1 36-4 354  6-19-1990 1 24-161 355  5-21-1991 1 30-30 356  2-18-1992 1 36-4 357  3-24-1992 1 40-394 358  3-24-1992 1 2-704-2-708 359  4- 7-1992 1 30-1 360  5-19-1992 1 40-1 2 40-111 3-5 40-113 6, 7 40-215, 40-216 8 40-355 9 40-22 363 10-13-1992 1 40-111 364 12-15-1992 1 36-4 365 12-15-1992 1 36-80-36-83 367  8-23-1993 1 40-114 2 40-154 3, 4 40-356 369 12-14-1993 1, 2 2-411, 2-412 370  3-22-1994 1 24-462 371  4-19-1994 1, 2 6-338, 6-339 4-6 6-343-6-345 372  5- 3-1994 1 2-661-2-666 373 11- 1-1994 1 40-186 374 11- 1-1994 1 40-1 2 40-112 3-6 40-113 375 11- 1-1994 1 38-31 376 12-13-1994 1 36-4 377  1-17-1995 1 6-106-6-116 379  5- 2-1995 1 6-407 380  9-19-1995 1 6-337 3-6 6-341-6-344 8 6-346 381 10-17-1995 1 2-438-2-444 382 12-19-1995 1-4 8-261-8-264 383  3-18-1996 1-5 14-111-14-115 384  4-16-1996 1 14-56 385 10-15-1996 1 28-19 28-46-28-51 28-53-28-56 386  6-11-1996 1 40-215 387  6-11-1996 1 40-177 388  7-16-1996 1 14-114 389 11-19-1996 1, 2 40-113, 40-114 3 40-154 390 10-15-1996 1 30-25 391 12-17-1996 1, 2 22-2, 22-3 3 22-6 392 12-17-1996 1 6-341 393  2- 4-1997 1 14-56 394  3- 4-1997 1 24-438 3 24-439 395  3- 4-1997 1 26-20 2, 3 26-24, 26-25 396  3-18-1997 1 38-63 397  6-17-1997 1 34-101, 34-102 398  6-17-1997 1 40-77, 40-78 2 40-111-40-114 3 40-332 4 40-282 400  8-19-1997 1 24-159 401  7-15-1997 1 10-1 403 10-14-1997 1 38-141 404  1- 6-1998 1 40-51-40-58 406  3- 3-1998 1 6-146 6-156 407  5- 5-1998 1 6-346 408  5-19-1998 1 2-730-2-736 409  5-19-1998 1 1-15 410  5-19-1998 1 40-25 411  5-19-1998 1, 2 6-23, 6-24 3 6-60 412  5-19-1998 1 6-347 413  5-19-1998 1 16-27 416  5-19-1998 1 8-265 418  5-19-1998 1 30-31 419  5-19-1998 1 14-184 420  5-19-1998 1 32-30 421  5-19-1998 1 32-190 422  5-19-1998 1 14-2 2 14-115 423  5-19-1998 1 4-1-4-4 4-27-4-38 424  9-14-1998 1 34-19-34-33 34-35-34-38 34-71-34-75 426 12-15-1998 1 34-25 427  2- 9-1999 1 40-111-40-113 2 40-114 3 40-151-40-153 4 40-154 5 40-177 40-181-40-187 6 40-217, 40-218 40-220 7 40-282 8 40-356 9 40-393, 40-394 428  3-23-1999 1 24-157 2 24-165 3 24-159 4 24-161 429  6-15-1999 1 40-114 2 40-154 3 40-356 4 40-394 430  6-15-1999 1, 2 2-572, 2-573 3 2-575 4, 5 2-581, 2-582 431  6-15-1999 1 6-476-6-480 433 10-19-1999 1 1-15 434  8-15-2000 1 36-215-36-256 36-301-36-328 36-602-36-604 36-606-36-616 36-617a-36-624 36-624a-36-626c 36-627-36-633 36-634-36-646 36-647, 36-648 36-649-36-653 36-654 36-655-36-655f 36-656-36-658 36-659, 36-660 36-661, 36-661a 36-662a-36-668 36-669 36-672-36-675n 36-676-36-682 36-682a 36-683-36-684a 36-693-36-724 36-851-36-854, 36-861 36-901-36-943 435 11- 8-1999 1 38-63 436 11- 8-1999 1 2-736 437 11-16-1999 1 34-23 438 12-14-1999 1 14-177 439  2- 8-2000 1 40-390 440  3-14-2000 1 40-394 441  3-14-2000 1-8 6-337-6-344 9 6-348 443  5-16-2000 2 6-499, 6-500 6-503 444  6-12-2000 1, 2 14-113, 14-114 445  6-12-2000 1 26-26 446  7-11-2000 1 6-79-6-81 447  8-15-2000 1 36-1 4, 5 36-4, 36-5 448  8-15-2000 1, 2 2-704, 2-705 3 2-707 450  9-12-2000 1 36-674 451  2-20-2001 1 24-304 452  3- 6-2001 1 40-1 2, 3 40-113, 40-114 4 40-154 5 40-282 6 40-356 453  4- 9-2001 1 36-653a 456  5-15-2000 1 8-62-8-65 457  7-17-2001 1 40-282 458  7-17-2001 1 14-144-14-147 14-149 459  9-25-2001 1 6-19 2 6-21 462  9-25-2001 1 6-106 464  9-25-2001 3-8 6-107-6-112 10, 11 6-113, 6-114 465 11-20-2001 1 40-282 466 12-18-2001 1 38-57 467 12-18-2001 1 38-96-38-109 469  7-16-2002 1 26-27 470 10-15-2002 1-14 34-20-34-33 15 34-33 16-22 34-35-34-41 471 12-17-2002 1 40-59 472 12-17-2002 1 40-355 473 12-17-2002 1 36-675g 2 36-675i 474  2-12-2003 1 20-30, 20-31 475  5- 6-2003 1-5 40-1 6 40-282 476  5- 6-2003 1 6-249-6-256 477  6-17-2003 1 36-255 478  7-15-2003 1 36-674 479  8-19-2003 1 6-276-6-287 480  8-19-2003 1 36-625 2 36-625m 481 10-21-2003 1 40-78 482 10-21-2003 1 2-472-2-474 483  9-16-2003 1 6-276 2 6-278 3 6-280 484 11-18-2003 1 2-621-2-623 485 11-18-2003 1 40-114 2 40-154 486 11-18-2003 1 6-276 2 6-278 3 6-280 4, 5 6-283, 6-284 487 11-18-2003 1 36-676 488  8-17-2004 1 40-113 489  8-17-2004 1(2.102) 6-372 3 40-355 4 14-56 490 10-19-2004 1(8.341) 6-308 491  2-22-2005 1 2-472 2 2-474 492  5-10-2005 1 40-356 493  5-10-2005 2 40-282 494  5-10-2005 1 40-1 2 40-114 3 40-154 4 40-355 495  6-21-2005 1 6-146 2 6-156 496  6-21-2005 1-3 6-25-6-27 497  6-21-2005 1 6-58-6-60 498  8-16-2005 1(1.110)-1(1.116) 2-101-2-107 499 10-25-2005 1 2-411 500 10-25-2005 1(1.250)-1(1.255) 2-502-2-507 502 10-25-2005 1 40-111 503 10-25-2005 1(8.180)-1(8.184) 6-499-6-503 504  5- 9-2006 1-3 6-477-6-479 506  5- 9-2006 2 40-1 3 40-111 507  7-18-2006 1, 2 38-99, 38-100 3 38-107 4, 5 38-110, 38-111 508  9-19-2006 1 34-102 2 34-27 4 32-25 5(2.500)-5(2.504) 38-168-38-172 5(2.505(1)) 38-173 5(2.505(2)) 38-174 509 11-21-2006 1, 2 16-23, 16-24 510 11-21-2006 1(8.342) 6-309 511 12-19-2006 2 40-1 3 40-77 4(5.89)-4(5.97) 40-251-40-259 5 40-282 6, 7 40-355 8, 9 40-356 10 40-390 512 12-19-2006 1(5.19)-1(5.30) 40-177-40-188 2 40-282 513 12-19-2006 1 40-1 2 40-111 3 40-113 514  2-13-2007 1, 2 40-111 3, 4 40-215 5 40-356 515  2-13-2007 1 2-411 516  6-19-2007 1(2.500)-1(2.507) 38-168-38-175 519  6-17-2008 1 40-1 2 40-282 520  6-17-2008 1 40-113 2 40-394 521  6-17-2008 1 40-355 522  6-17-2008 1 40-394 524  6-17-2008 1(4.81)-1(4.84) 32-251-32-254 1(4.91)-1(4.93) 32-271-32-273 525  6-17-2008 1 14-56(12) 526  7-15-2008 1 36-675g(b) 527 11-18-2008 1-8 Adopting ord., p. xi 528 12-16-2008 1 40-332(b) 529  8-18-2009 1 40-114(a)(1), (2) 2 40-154(a)(1), (2) 3 40-356(4)b. 530  8-18-2009 1 40-282 531  1-19-2010 1 40-1 2 40-111(3)f. 532  6-15-2010 1       Added 2-521-2-523 533  7-20-2010 1       Added 25-1-25-5 534  9-14-2010 1 8-63 535 12-21-2010 1 2-472-2-474 536  3-22-2011 1 2-472 2 2-474 537  4-26-2011 1 10-1 538  5- 3-2011 1 40-1 2 40-111(3)a. 3 40-111(3)c.1., 7., 9. 4 40-111(3)e. 5 40-111(3)f. 6 40-111(3)g.5., 6.       Added 40-111(3)g.7. 7       Added 40-111(9) 8       Added 40-114(a)(6) 9       Added 40-115 10 40-151 11       Added 40-154(8) 12       Added 40-155 13 40-177(b)(2) 14 40-177(b)(11) 15 40-177(c) 16       Added 40-177(d) 17       Added 40-178(3) 18 40-187 19 40-188 20 40-215(a), 
(b)(10), (11),       Added 40-215(c) 21 40-222(1) 22       Added 40-223 23 40-252(a)(0), (b) 24 40-258(a)(1) 25 40-258(b) 26 50-259 27 Ch. 40, Art. V title 28 40-356(1) 29 40-356(4)a.10. 30       Added 40-357 539  6-14-2011 1 10-1 540  6-14-2011 1 2-571 2       Added 2-571A 3 2-572 4 2-573(a)(1), (2)a.-f. 541 10-18-2011 1       Added Ch. 19, §§ 19-1-19-8 542 10-18-2011 1       Dltd 30-21-30-31       Added 30-21-30-30 543 1-17-2012 1 36-674(a)(1) 544 1-17-2012 1 8-261 2 8-262(a) 545 2-21-2012 1       Added 8-281-8-285 546 2-21-2012 1       Added 8-301-8-306 547 3-20-2012 1       Added 14-201-14-207 548 5-1-2012 1       Added 36-625b. 549 7-17-2012 1       Dltd 2-661-2-666       Added 2-661-2-670 2       Rpld 2-704-2-708 550 8-21-2012 1       Added 24-375, 24-376 551 8-21-2012 1 24-329 552 8-21-2012 1 40-1 2 40-111(5) 3 40-252(a) 4, 5 40-355(a), (m) 6, 7 40-357(b)(2), (b)(4) 8       Added 24-161-34-172 553 10-16-2012 1 32-253 554 10-16-2012 1, 2 6-146, 6-147 3       Added 6-148 555 11-20-2012 1       Added 2-736(b)(7) 556 12-18-2012 1       Dltd 6-183-6-191       Added 6-183-6-191 557 1-15-2013 1 2-521 2 2-523 558 1-15-2013 1 6-500 559 5-21-2013 1 6-337 2 6-341 560  6-18-2013 16-23-16-27 561  7-16-2013 1 24-329 562  8-20-2013 1 14-113 563  4-29-2014 1 1-15(e) 564  6-17-2014       Dltd 14-167-14-184       Added 14-166-14-184 565  6-17-2014 1       Added 8-331-8-337 566  6-17-2014 1 14-56(1)-(3) 569  8-19-2014 1       Dltd 14-166-14-184       Added 14-167-14-184 570  8-19-2014 1 24-439(f) 571 10-21-2014 1 20-24 572 11-18-2014 1 24-261 573  3-17-2015 1 10-1(b) 574  3-17-2015 1 40-1 575  4- 7-2015 1 10-1(a) 576  6-16-2015 1       Dltd 14-56, 14-57       Added 14-56-14-65 577  7-21-2015 1 32-28 2       Dltd 32-271-32-273       Added 32-271-32-278 578  8-18-2015 1 40-1 2       Added 40-30 3 40-111(3)f. 579 10- 6-2015 1 14-88(1) 580 10-20-2015 1 38-63 581  3-15-2016 1 2-106(a)(1) 582  5-24-2016 1 6-348 2       Added 6-349 583  7-19-2016 1 36-675g(b) 584  7-19-2016 1 14-204(4) 585  7-19-2016 1       Added 14-231-14-234 586  8-16-2016 1 20-30 587 10-10-2016 1 36-675g(b)(3) 588 12-20-2016 1 16-23, 16-24 589  3-28-2017 1       Dltd 28-1-28-89       Added 28-1-28-39 592  6-20-2017 1       Dltd 28-1-28-39       Added 28-1-28-30 593  6-20-2017 1 30-23(e) 594  8-15-2017 1 32-186 595  9-19-2017 1 24-439 596 10-17-2017 1 40-1 2       Added 40-253(e), (f) 598 11-21-2017 1 40-1 2 40-355 599 12-19-2017 1 28-2 2 28-16 600  1- 8-2018 1       Dltd 40-1-40-394       Added 40-1.01-40-13.07 601  4-10-2018 1 36-53 602  4-10-2018 1 40-5.04 603  4-10-2018 1 40-2.02 604  4-10-2018 1 40-4.03.C 2 40-4.07.C 3 40-7.02.A(9) 605  6-28-2018 1 32-186  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL 
Section Section   
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.3u 1-6 8.4 1-4 8.4b 1-3 14.301 et seq. Ch. 28 15.181 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 15.231 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II- 
Ch. 2, Art. IV 6-254 22-5 34-25 34-40 15.261 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. IV 2-443 2-474 2-505 2-523 2-623 6-254 6-280 15.321 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. II 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. II 15.401 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 24.201-24.328 36-710d 28.451 et seq. 24-329 29.1 et seq. Ch. 16 29.41 et seq. Ch. 16 29.417 et seq. Ch. 30 30.401 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 12-19 30.411 12-26 35.441 et seq. Ch. 28 37.2102 Ch. 2, Art. III 117.1 et seq. Ch. 2 34-21 117.3(k) 6-146 16-23 117.4i(k) 1-15 117.4l 1-15 117.5 2-582 117.5b 1-1 117.5e 2-582 117.32 10-3 117.56 Adopting ord, 
§ 1 123.51 et seq. Ch. 26 123.305 30-21 123.361 et seq. Ch. 30 124.281 et seq. Ch. 38 125.31 et seq. 2-438 125.538 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. VII 125.1501 et seq. 6-27 40-6.04 125.1508a 6-19 125.1508b 6-19 125.1514 6-25 125.3101 et seq. 2-438 Ch. 40 40-1.02 40-1.06 40-4.02 40-13.01 125.3501 40-8.02 125.3502 40-8.02 125.3601 et seq. 40-12.01 40-12.04 125.3801 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 20-24 Ch. 40 141.101 et seq. 38-142 141.421 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 141.2101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 168.1 et seq. Ch. 10 10-4 211.1 et seq. 2-412 211.28 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 211.43b Ch. 2, Art. V 213.54 40-12.04 247.61 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. V 247.171 et seq. Ch. 32 247.291 et seq. Ch. 32 247.321 et seq. Ch. 32 247.651 et seq. 34-33 256.601-256.612 36-306 257.1 et seq. 14-23 Ch. 36 257.1d 24-329 257.8b 24-329 257.19a 36-674 257.79d(a) 36-627 257.212 36-904 257.240 36-852 257.252i 36-852 36-856 257.252a 14-23 257.252e 36-852 36-854 257.252f 36-852 36-854 257.252f(3)(a) 36-856 257.312a 36-306 257.312e 36-306 257.319 24-439 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 36 257.610 Ch. 36 257.624a 24-439 257.624b 24-439 257.625 24-439 36-625b 257.625(1), (3)-(7) 36-625 36-910 257.625(6) 36-625 257.625b 36-625 257.625k 36-625 257.625l 36-625 257.625m 36-625 36-910 257.625n 36-625 257.628 36-627 257.628(1) 36-627 257.629 36-627 257.629b 36-627 257.675 36-674 257.683 36-854 257.707 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 257.732 36-328 257.801(1)(k) 36-255 257.803a 36-708a 257.803d 36-674 257.811a 36-306 257.904(d) 36-625 257.904d 36-625 36-904 257.907 2-704 36-907 257.941 et seq. 36-942 257.961 36-943 286.452 2-661 287.261 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II 287.266 et seq. 4-28 287.279 et seq. 4-33 287.286a et seq. 4-33 287.288 4-37 287.290 Ch. 4 287.321 et seq. 4-33 287.279287.286a 4-33 323.101 et seq. 2-670 324.101 et seq. Ch. 14 324.3101 et seq. 38-59 38-98 324.4301 et seq. Ch. 30 Ch. 38 324.8901 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 26-21 38-58 324.11101 et seq. Ch. 30 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 30 324.14501 et seq. Ch. 30 324.19101 et seq. Ch. 30 324.20135(1)(b) 2-663 324.36501 et seq. Ch. 4 324.40101 et seq. Ch. 4 324.52701 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. VII 324.80101 et seq. 14-23 324.80176 24-439 324.81134 24-439 324.82127 24-439 333.6230 24-439 333.7101 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 333.7106 40-2.02 333.7109 24-261 333.7201 et seq. 24-261 24-263 24-264 333.7212 36-625 333.7214(a)(iv) 36-625 333.7451 24-263 333.12701 et seq. 6-108 333.26201 et seq. Ch. 30 333.26421 et seq. 24-261 333.26423(d) 40-5.04 338.881 et seq. 6-106 338.971 et seq. 6-108 338.976 6-108 338.2301 et seq. 6-106 338.2301-338.2313 40-2.02 338.3511 et seq. 6-108 339.2401-339.2518       6-183 397.171 et seq. Ch. 22 399.1 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. VIII 399.171 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. VIII 399.201 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. VIII 6-249 6-276 6-282 399.204 Ch. 6, Art. VIII, 
Div. 3 399.205 6-256 399.209 6-256 399.214(3) 40-4.07 40-7.02 400.271 et seq. Ch. 28 400.701 et seq. 40-2.02 400.701-400.737 40-2.02 408.681 et seq. Ch. 26 436.1-436.58 19-5 436.1101 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. VI, 
Div. 3 Ch. 24, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 436.1701 24-438, 24-439 436.1703(1) 24-439 36-624a 436.1703(3) 24-439 436.1703(5) 24-439 436.1707 24-439 436.1915 24-303 26-20 440.2328 Ch. 8, Art. IV 445.111 et seq. Ch. 28 445.371 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. V 445.901 et seq. 34-131 445.903 8-44 446.26 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 446.51 Ch. 8, Art. IV 480.11 et seq. 36-80-36-83 480.15 36-81 484.1201 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. XII 484.2101 et seq. Ch. 34 34-21 484.2102 34-22 484.2251 34-25 484.3101 et seq. Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. II 34-20-34-22 484.3103 34-22 484.3104(2) 34-36 484.3104(3) 34-27 484.3105(1) 34-25 484.3105(3), (4)       34-25 484.3106(1) 34-25 484.3106(1), (2)       34-24 484.3106(5) 34-25 484.3106(7), (8)       34-27 484.3108 34-33 484.3109(4) 34-33 484.3110(5) 34-33 484.3113(1) 34-33 484.3113(4)-(6) 34-33 484.3115 34-24 484.3115(3) 34-29 484.3115(4) 34-24 484.3115(5) 34-29 484.3201 et seq. Ch. 34 484.3301 et seq. Ch. 34 484.3310 34-131 500.3101 36-328 500.3101-500.3179 36-328 500.3102, 500.3103 36-328 559.101-559.276 36-627 560.101 et seq. Ch. 20 20-19 20-25 20-30 560.101-560.293 36-627 560.113 20-21 560.113-560.118 20-21 560.114 20-21 560.115-560.117 20-21 560.118 20-21 560.182 20-27 600.101 et seq. 2-730 600.3801 et seq. 14-1 600.8302 19-7 600.8395 36-51-36-53 600.8396 2-730 2-735 600.8701 et seq. 1-15 Ch. 2, Art. VI 2-730 600.8705 2-733 2-735 600.8707(6) 2-730 600.8709 2-735 691.1402 Ch. 32 691.1408 Ch. 2, Art. III 710.21-710.70 40-2.02 712A.1 et seq. 24-412 722.1 et seq. 24-439 722.111 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. VIII 722.111-722.128 40-2.02 750.1 et seq. Ch. 24 750.49 et seq. Ch. 4 750.50 4-1 750.81 et seq. 24-46 750.92 24-2 750.131 24-159 750.145 24-412 750.167a 24-439 750.167(1)(c) 24-47 750.167(1)(e) 24-185 750.167(1)(f) 24-226 750.167(1)(l) 24-190 750.170 24-191-24-193 750.200 et seq. Ch. 16 750.217a et seq. 24-165 750.234 et seq. 24-328 750.237 24-439 750.240 24-22 750.240 et seq. Ch. 16 750.301 et seq. 8-178 750.335a 24-225 750.356 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 24-157 750.356d(4) 24-161 750.363 24-160 750.364 24-163 750.377a et seq. Ch. 24, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 26-19 38-33 38-75 750.382 24-129 750.411a 24-22 750.437 4-2 750.448 24-3 750.448 et seq. 24-227 750.479 24-21 750.493d 24-327 750.535 24-158 750.540e 24-49 750.546 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 26-25 750.547 24-162 750.552 24-99 752.541 et seq. 24-189 769.1j 24-439 770.9a 40-2.02 771.3 24-439  
