
Howell, MI, Code of Ordinances


HOWELL, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Local legislation current through December 31, 2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202-3909
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CERTIFICATION



   We, Nickolas Proctor, Mayor, and Jane L. Cartwright, City Clerk, hereby
certify that the general and permanent legislation of the City of Howell,
Michigan, as revised, arranged, compiled, numbered, codified and printed
herewith in component codes, is correctly set forth and constitutes the
Codified Ordinances of the City of Howell, Michigan, 1982, complete to
December 31, 2018.



                  /s/ Nickolas Proctor             
 
                      Mayor



                  /s/ Jane L. Cartwright 
                      City Clerk



CHARTER



EDITOR'S NOTE: The Charter of the City of Howell, Michigan, was adopted at a
special election held on November 8, 1955. Dates appearing in parentheses
following a chapter or section heading indicate that the chapter or section
was enacted or amended on the date given. Because of changes in law since the
adoption of the Charter, some sections of the Charter may be superceded.
Where possible, editor notes shall be supplied informing the reader of
notable changes to the Charter.



PREAMBLE



CHAPTER 1   BOUNDARIES AND SUBDIVISIONS OF THE CITY



   Section 1.1   Name. 



   Section 1.2   Boundaries.



   Section 1.3   Wards.



   Section 1.4   Election Precincts.



CHAPTER 2   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION



   Section 2.1   Definitions.



CHAPTER 3   GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS



   Section 3.1   Powers of the City.



   Section 3.2   Specific Powers of the City.



   Section 3.3   Exercise of Powers.



   Section 3.4   Continuation of Rights and Liabilities.



CHAPTER 4   GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING OFFICERS OF THE CITY



   Section 4.1   Officers to be Elected.



   Section 4.2   The Administrative Officers.



   Section 4.3   Terms of Elective Officers.



   Section 4.4   Administrative Officers; Appointment, Terms and
Remuneration.



   Section 4.5   Eligibility for Office in City. (Nov. 8, 1988)



   Section 4.6   Vacancies in Office.



   Section 4.7   Resignations.



   Section 4.8   Filling Vacancies.



   Section 4.9   Term of Office Cannot Be Shortened or Extended.



   Section 4.10   Increase or Decrease of Compensation.



   Section 4.11   Oath and Bond of Office.



   Section 4.12   Surety and Fidelity Bonds.



   Section 4.13   Delivery of Office and Its Effects by Officer to His
Successor.



CHAPTER 5   THE CITY COUNCIL



   Section 5.1   City Governing Body.



   Section 5.2   Council to Judge Qualifications of Its Members.



   Section 5.3   Salaries of Members of the Council.



   Section 5.4   Duties of Mayor.



   Section 5.5   Mayor Pro Tem.



   Section 5.6   Meetings of the Council.



   Section 5.7   Health.



   Section 5.8   Restriction on Powers of the Council.



   Section 5.9   Investigations.



   Section 5.10   Publication of Council Proceedings.



CHAPTER 6   CITY LEGISLATION



   Section 6.1   Prior City Ordinances and Regulations.



   Section 6.2   Ordinance Enactment.



   Section 6.3   Penalties.



   Section 6.4   Publication of Ordinances.  (Amended Nov. 8, 1966)



   Section 6.5   Technical Codes.



   Section 6.6   Franchises and Contracts.



   Section 6.7   Compilation or Codification.



   Section 6.8   Initiative and Referendum.



   Section 6.9   Petitions.



   Section 6.10   Council Procedure.



   Section 6.11   Submission to Electors.



   Section 6.12   Ordinance Suspended.



   Section 6.13   Amendment of Ordinance Adopted by Initiative
Procedure.



CHAPTER 7   THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE



   Section 7.1   City Manager.



   Section 7.2   City Clerk.



   Section 7.3   City Attorney.



   Section 7.4   City Treasurer.



   Section 7.5   Deputy Clerk or Treasurer.



   Section 7.6   Assessor.



   Section 7.7   Police Department.



   Section 7.8   Fire Department.



   Section 7.9   Nepotism.



   Section 7.10   Civil Service.



   Section 7.11   Pension Plan.



   Section 7.12   Employee Welfare Benefits.



CHAPTER 8   MUNICIPAL COURT



   Section 8.1   Municipal Court.



CHAPTER 9   SUPERVISORS



   Section 9.1   Supervisors.



CHAPTER 10   ELECTIONS



   Section 10.1   Qualifications of Electors.



   Section 10.2   Election Procedure.



   Section 10.3   Primary Election.



   Section 10.4   Regular City Elections.



   Section 10.5   Special Elections.



   Section 10.6   Election Commission.



   Section 10.7   Notice of Election.



   Section 10.8   Voting Hours.



   Section 10.9   Nomination Petition.



   Section 10.10   Approval of Petitions.



   Section 10.11   Public Inspection of Petitions.



   Section 10.12   Form of Ballots.



   Section 10.13   Canvass of Votes.



   Section 10.14   Tie Vote.



   Section 10.15   Recount.



   Section 10.16   Recall.



CHAPTER 11   GENERAL FINANCE; BUDGET PROCEDURE



   Section 11.1   Fiscal Year.



   Section 11.2   Budget Procedure.



   Section 11.3   Budget Document.



   Section 11.4   Adoption of Budget; Tax Limit.



   Section 11.5   Transfer of Appropriations.



   Section 11.6   Budget Control.



   Section 11.7   Depository.



   Section 11.8   Contractual Claims Against City.



   Section 11.9   Notice to City of Claims for Injuries.



   Section 11.10   Independent Audit.



CHAPTER 12   TAXATION



   Section 12.1   Power to Tax.



   Section 12.2   Subjects of Taxation.



   Section 12.3   Tax Procedure.



   Section 12.4   Exemptions.



   Section 12.5   Personal Property; Jeopardy Assessment.



   Section 12.6   Assessment.



   Section 12.7   Assessment Procedure.



   Section 12.8   Time for Making Assessment Rolls.



   Section 12.9   Notice of Change of Assessments.



   Section 12.10   Board of Review.



   Section 12.11   Notice of Meetings of Board of Review.



   Section 12.12   Notice of Assessment Charges.



   Section 12.13   Confirmation of Assessment Roll.



   Section 12.14   Records of the Board of Review.



   Section 12.15   Validity of Assessment Roll.



   Section 12.16   Clerk to Certify Levy.



   Section 12.17   City Tax Roll.



   Section 12.18   Taxes Lien on Property.



   Section 12.19   Tax Roll Certified for Collection.



   Section 12.20   Notification of Taxes Due.



   Section 12.21   Tax Payment Schedule.



   Section 12.22   Procedure for Collecting Taxes on Personal Property.



   Section 12.23   State, County and School Taxes.



   Section 12.24   Lien for Taxes, Assessments, and Charges.



   Section 12.25   Proportioning of Tax on Portion of Taxed Items.



   Section 12.26   Protection of City Lien.



CHAPTER 13   BORROWING POWER



   Section 13.1   General Borrowing.



   Section 13.2   Special Assessment Bonds.



   Section 13.3   Mortgage Bonds.



   Section 13.4   Other Bonds.



   Section 13.5   Preparation and Record.



   Section 13.6   Unissued Bonds.



CHAPTER 14   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



   Section 14.1   General Powers Relative to Special Assessments.



   Section 14.2   Petitions for Public Improvements.



   Section 14.3   Preliminary Resolution for Public Improvement.



   Section 14.4   Assessments on Single Lots.



   Section 14.5   Special Assessment Procedure by Ordinance.



   Section 14.6   Poverty Provisions.



   Section 14.7   Special Assessment Accounts.



   Section 14.8   Contested Assessments.



   Section 14.9   Reassessment for Benefits.



CHAPTER 15   CONTRACTS; FRANCHISES; PERMITS



   Section 15.1   City May Perform Public Work.



   Section 15.2   Plans and Specifications.



   Section 15.3   Contracts.



   Section 15.4   Modifications in Contracts.



   Section 15.5   Franchises.



   Section 15.6   Licenses and Franchises Remain in Effect.



   Section 15.7   Right of Regulation.



   Section 15.8   Regulation of Rates.



   Section 15.9   Revocable Permits.



   Section 15.10   Use of Streets by Utility.



CHAPTER 16   MUNICIPAL UTILITIES



   Section 16.1   General Powers Respecting Utilities.



   Section 16.2   Rates.



   Section 16.3   Utility Charges; Collection.



   Section 16.4   Accounts.



   Section 16.5   Disposal of Plants.



CHAPTER 17   CITY LIBRARY



CHAPTER 18   MISCELLANEOUS



   Section 18.1   Vested Rights and Liabilities Continued.



   Section 18.2   City Records to be Public.



   Section 18.3   Trusts.



   Section 18.4   Quorum.



   Section 18.5   Sundays and Holidays.



   Section 18.6   Penalties for Violations of Charter.



   Section 18.7   Chapter and Section Headings.



   Section 18.8   Amendments.



   Section 18.9   Severability of Charter Provisions.



SCHEDULE



   Section 1   Election to Adopt Charter.



   Section 2   Form of Ballot.



   Section 3   Officers of City Under Previous Charter.



   Section 4   Administrative and Other Officers.



   Section 5   Board of Review.



   Section 6   Status of Schedule Chapter.



   Section 7   Council Action.



PREAMBLE



   We, the People of the City of Howell, in order to secure the benefits
of efficient self government and otherwise to promote our common welfare, do
ordain and establish this Charter for the government of our City, pursuant to
authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan.



CHAPTER 1
BOUNDARIES AND SUBDIVISIONS OF THE CITY



Section 1.1  Name.



   The City shall be a body corporate under the name, "City of Howell."



Section 1.2  Boundaries.



   The City shall embrace the territory constituting the City of Howell,
on the effective date of this Charter, together with such annexations thereto
and less any detachments therefrom that may be made from time to time. Upon
annexation or detachment of territory, the boundaries shall be deemed thereby
to be changed without amendment of this section. The Clerk shall maintain and
keep available in his office for public inspection and distribution an
official description of the current boundaries of the City.



Section 1.3  Wards.



   The City shall consist of one ward.



Section 1.4  Election Precincts.



   The City shall be divided into election precincts in the manner
required by law.



CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION



Section 2.1  Definitions.



   Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context
of this Charter:



   (1)   "Charter" means this Charter, as amended from time to time;



   (2)   "City" means the City of Howell;



   (3)   "Assessor, Attorney, Clerk, and Treasurer" mean the persons
occupying, holding the offices, or performing the duties of City Assessor,
City Attorney, City Clerk, and City Treasurer, respectively, as the same are
required or contemplated by law;



   (4)   "Council" means the City Council of the City of Howell and
includes any term employed in any State or Federal law referring to or
denoting governing bodies of cities;



   (5)   "Law" means this Charter, the Constitution and statutes of
Michigan, and applicable common law;



   (6)   "Person" includes corporations, both public and private,
partnerships, and associations, as well as individuals;



   (7)   "Printed" and "printing" include reproductions by printing,
engraving, stencil duplication, lithographing, or any similar method;



   (8)   "Publication" means publication by posting in five (5) public
places in the City, including the office of the Clerk of the City, or by
publishing in a legal newspaper having a general weekly circulation within
the County, or both, provided that if publication is made by posting in five
(5) public places in the City, including the office of the Clerk, notice of
such postings shall be printed in a newspaper having general circulation
within the County. (Amended in 1966)



   (9)   "Written" and "in writing" include hand written script,
printing, typewriting, and teletype or telegraphic communications;



   (10)   The singular number includes the plural, the plural number
includes the singular and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender
and the neuter;



   (11)   All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited
to the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include
the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is
made in this Charter.



CHAPTER 3
GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS



Section 3.1  Powers of the City.



   Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the City of
Howell and its officers shall be vested with any and all powers, privileges,
and immunities, expressed and implied, which cities and their officers are,
or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their
charters under the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, and of the
United States of America, including all the powers, privileges, and
immunities which cities are permitted to or may provide in their charters by
Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, as fully and completely
as though these powers, privileges, and immunities were specifically
enumerated in and provided for in this Charter, and in no case shall any
enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this Charter
be held to be exclusive. The City and its officers shall have power to
exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal
government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act
to advance the interests of the City, the good government and prosperity of
the Municipality and its inhabitants; and, through its regularly constituted
authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances, and resolutions relating
to its Municipal concerns, subject to the provisions of the law.



Section 3.2  Specific Powers of the City.



   Without limiting the general grant of powers contained in Section 3.1.,
the City shall have power to manage and control the finances, rights,
interests, buildings, and property belonging to the City, to enter into
contracts, and to protect the public peace, morals, health, safety, and
general welfare. In the exercise of the City's powers, the Council may enact
ordinances, rules, and regulations, and take such other action as may be
required, not inconsistent with law, to:



   (1)   Declare as a hazard or nuisance any act or condition which is
or may be dangerous to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; to provide for the abatement thereof; and to provide
that the costs of such abatement shall be charged as a special assessment
against the real property on which the hazard or nuisance is located;



   (2)   Provide for the public welfare by:



      (a)   Regulating trades, occupations, and amusements within
the City, and prohibiting trades, occupations, and amusements which are
detrimental to the safety, health, morals, or welfare of its inhabitants;



      (b)   Regulating the preparation, storage, transportation and
sale of foods, drugs, and beverages for human consumption; 



      (c)   Collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish;



      (d)   Licensing, regulating, and limiting the number and
locations of oil and gasoline stations;



      (e)   Licensing, regulating, and limiting the number of
vehicles which carry persons or property for hire, fixing the rates of fare
and charges, and determining the location of stands for such vehicles;



      (f)   Licensing, regulating, and limiting the number and
locations of billboards and advertising signs;



      (g)   Directing and regulating the construction, erection,
alteration, equipment, repair, moving, removal, demolition, occupancy, and
maintenance of buildings and structures and their appurtenances and service
equipment;



      (h)   Establishing zones within the City and regulating
therein the use and occupancy of lands or structures; the height, area, size,
and location of buildings; the required open spaces for light and ventilation
of buildings; and the density of population;



      (i)   Regulating, limiting, and prohibiting the construction
and use of buildings and lands in order to promote the public safety and to
prevent and suppress fires;



      (j)   Regulating and controlling the use of streams, waters,
and watercourses within the City;



   (3)   Establish and control streets, alleys, bridges, and public
places, and the space above and beneath them, and the use thereof by:



      (a)   Creating and vacating the same and acquiring and
disposing of the land, or any interest in land, required therefor;



      (b)   Providing a plan of streets and alleys within the City
and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits;



      (c)   Requiring the owners of real property to build and
maintain public sidewalks abutting upon such property, and upon the failure
of any owner to do so, constructing and maintaining such sidewalks and
assessing the cost thereof, or such part of such cost as the Council shall
establish by ordinance, against such property as a special assessment; 



      (d)   Compelling all persons to care for the space between
street curbs and the sidewalks which abut upon premises owned, controlled, or
occupied by them, and to keep the same free from weeds and from objects which
are offensive or hazardous to public health and safety;



      (e)   Compelling persons to keep sidewalks which abut upon
premises owned, con trolled, or occupied by them, free from snow, ice, dirt,
wood, or any other object which obstructs such sidewalks, or which makes the
same offensive or hazardous to the public health or safety;



      (f)   Providing for the grade of streets and requiring public
utility users of the streets to conform thereto with respect to their tracks
or facilities located on, above, or under the streets; requiring railroads or
street railroads to keep their tracks and the street surface between, and for
a distance of one foot on each side of them and other utility facilities in
the streets, in reasonable repair at all times; and requiring railroads to
give warning by person or automatic signal of the approach of trains upon or
across the streets and to light all such crossings at night;



      (g)   Regulating the speed of vehicles, trains, and
locomotives upon or across the streets within the provisions and limitations
of law, and the stopping and parking of the same upon the streets and at
street crossings;



      (h)   Providing for and regulating the lighting of streets and
alleys;



      (i)   Preventing and abating the encumbering of streets and
alleys or any part thereof;



      (j)   Providing for and regulating the numbering of buildings
upon property abutting the streets and alleys and compelling the owners and
occupants thereof to affix numbers thereto;



      (k)   Providing for the use by others than the owner thereof
of any property located on, or under, or above streets, alleys, and other
public property, which is devoted to public utility purposes, upon the
payment of a reasonable compensation therefor to the owner;



   (4)   Undertake any public work or make any public improvement or
any repair or replacement thereof either directly or by contract with private
persons; and to participate in any public work or public improvement under
any lawful plan by which the whole or partial support of such work or
improvement is provided by another governmental unit or agency;



   (5)   Construct, provide, maintain, extend, operate, regulate, and
improve:



      (a)   Within the City; a City Hall; community buildings;
police stations, fire stations; a civic auditorium; and polling places; and,



      (b)   Either within or without the corporate limits of the
City or of Livingston County; public parks; recreation grounds and stadiums;
Municipal camps; public grounds; zoological gardens; museums; airports and
landing fields; cemeteries; public wharves and landing upon navigable waters;
levees and embankments for flood control and other purposes related to the
public health, safety, and welfare; electric light and power plants and
systems; gas plants and systems; public heating plants and systems;
waterworks and



   water treatment plants and systems; sewage disposal plants and systems;
storm sewers; garbage disposal facilities; refuse and rubbish disposal
facilities; market houses and market places; facilities for the storage and
parking of vehicles; hospitals; facilities for the docking of pleasure crafts
and hydroplanes; and any other structure or facility devoted to or intended
for public purposes within the scope of the powers of the City.



      (6)   Acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, construction,
lease, or otherwise, property, and interests in property, either within or
without the corporate limits of the City or of Livingston County, for any
public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, including, but not by
the way of limitation, the uses and purposes set forth in clause (5) of this
section, including the necessary lands therefor;



      (7)   Join with any municipal corporation or with any other
unit of government, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract,
or otherwise, as may be permitted by law, in the ownership, operation, or
performance, jointly, or by one or more on behalf of all, of any property,
facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or
perform separately;



      (8)   Provide for the public peace and health and for the
safety of persons and property.



Section 3.3  Exercise of Powers.



   Where no procedure is set forth in this Charter for the exercise of any
power granted to or possessed by the City and its officers, resort may be had
to any procedure set forth in any statute of the State of Michigan which was
passed for the government of cities or townships, or in any other statute of
the State of Michigan. If alternate procedures are to be found in different
statutes, then the Council shall select that procedure which it deems to be
most expeditious and to the best advantage of the City and its inhabitants.
Where no procedure for the exercise of any power of the City is set forth,
either in this Charter or in any statute of the State of Michigan, the
Council may prescribe by ordinance a reasonable procedure for the exercise
thereof.



Section 3.4  Continuation of Rights and Liabilities.



   The adoption of this Charter shall not be regarded as discharging,
impairing, or limiting any right vested in or liability incurred by the City
of Howell at the time of the adoption of this Charter.



CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING OFFICERS OF THE CITY



Section 4.1  Officers to be Elected.



   The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor, six Councilmen,
three members of the Board of Review, and one Municipal Judge, each of whom
shall be elected from the City at large.



[Editor's Note] The provision for a Municipal Court still remains a part of
this Charter but has been superseded by Michigan State Legislative Action.



Section 4.2  The Administrative Officers.



   The administrative officers of the City shall be the City Manager,
Assessor, Attorney, Chief of Police, Clerk, Fire Chief, Health Officer, and
Treasurer. The Council may, by resolution, upon the recommendation of the
City Manager, create such additional administrative offices, or combine any
administrative offices, in any manner not inconsistent with State law, and
prescribe the duties thereof as it may deem necessary for the proper
operation of the City government. No creation of any administrative office,
or combination thereof one with another, shall abolish the office of City
Manager nor diminish any of the duties or responsibilities of that office as
set forth in this Charter.



Section 4.3  Terms of Elective Officers.



   The terms of office of Councilmen shall be for four years. The term of
office of the Mayor shall be for two years. The term of office of the
Municipal Judge shall be for six years. The terms of office of all elected
officers of the City except the Municipal Judge, shall commence on and date
from the Monday following the regular City election at which they are
elected. The term of office of the Municipal Judge shall commence on and date
from the first of January next following his election.



[Editor's Note] The provision for a Municipal Court still remains a part of
this Charter but has been superseded by Michigan State Legislative Action.



Section 4.4  Administrative Officers; Appointment, Terms, and Remuneration.



   (a)   The City Manager, Assessor, Attorney, Clerk, Treasurer and
Health Officer shall hold office by virtue of appointment by the Council
which body shall also set their salaries. They shall hold office at the
pleasure of the Council.



   (b)   All administrative officers of the City except the City
Manager, Assessor, Attorney, Clerk, Treasurer and Health Officer shall be
appointed or selected by the City Manager, subject to the confirmation of
each appointment by the Council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the City
Manager who shall set their salaries and wages in accordance with budget
appropriations.



   (c)   All personnel employed by the City who are not elected
officers or members of a board created by this Charter or declared to be
administrative officers by or under authority of this section shall be deemed
to be employees of the City.



Section 4.5  Eligibility for Office in City.



   No person shall be elected or appointed to any office who is in default
to the city. The election or appointment of any such  defaulter shall be
void.  No person shall be eligible to any office of the city, other than
that of City Manager, unless he shall be a registered elector of and a
taxpayer to the city, and shall have been a resident of the city or of any
territory comprising the city for at least one year for elective office
immediately prior to the date of the election at which he is a candidate for
office, or two years immediately prior the date of his appointment to office.



(Amended in 1988)



Section 4.6  Vacancies in Office.



   Every City office shall become vacant upon the happening of any of the
following events before the expiration of the term of such office:



   1.   The death of the incumbent;



   2.   His resignation;



   3.   His removal from office;



   4.    His conviction of any infamous crime or of any offense
involving a violation of his oath of office;



   5.    His conviction of a violation of this Charter;



   6.    The decision of any competent tribunal, declaring his election
or appointment to be void;



   7.   If the officer of the City shall absent himself continuously
from the City for more than sixty days without the permission of the Council;



   8.   In the case of the Mayor and members of the Council, where such
officer shall miss four consecutive regular meetings of the Council or
twenty-five per cent of such meetings in a fiscal year of the City, unless
such absence shall be excused by the Council at the time of the absence and
the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council;



   9.   If the officer shall be convicted of any act constituting
misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter.



(Amended in 1966)



Section 4.7  Resignations.



   Resignations of elective officers and of the City Manager, Assessor,
Attorney, Clerk, and Treasurer shall be made in writing and filed with the
Clerk or Mayor, and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular
meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk or Mayor, as the case may be.
Resignations of appointive officers, other than the City Manager, Assessor,
Attorney, Clerk, and Treasurer, shall be made in writing to the City Manager,
and shall be immediately acted upon by him.



Section 4.8  Filling Vacancies.



   (a)   If a vacancy occurs in any elective office or in the office of
Assessor, Attorney, Clerk, or Treasurer, the Council shall, within thirty
days after such vacancy occurs, appoint a person who possesses the
qualifications required of holders of the office in which the vacancy exists
to fill such vacancy for the balance of the term of the person whose office
is so filled. A vacancy in the office of City Manager shall be filled within
ninety days.



   (b)   If a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, other than that
of City Manager, Attorney, Assessor, Clerk, or Treasurer, the Council shall,
within thirty days thereafter, appoint a qualified person to fill such
vacancy in the manner required for making the original appointment.



Section 4.9  Term of Office Cannot Be Shortened or Extended.



   Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of the elected
officials of the City and of officers of the City appointed for a definite
term shall not be shortened. The terms of officers of the City may not be
extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected or
appointed except that, with the consent of the Council, an elective officer
of the City may, after his term has expired, continue to hold office,
provisionally, until his successor is elected and has qualified.



Section 4.10  Increase or Decrease of Compensation.



   The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any City
officer, elective or appointive, or to any employee, agent, or contractor,
after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. Nor shall
the salary of any officer, elective or appointive, be increased or decreased
after his election or appointment to a fixed term of office.



Section 4.11  Oath and Bond of Office.



   Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of
his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by Section 2 of Article
XVI of the Constitution of the State and shall file the same with the Clerk,
together with any bond which he may be required by this Charter or by the
Council to give. The oath and bond of the Clerk shall be filed with and kept
by the Treasurer. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this
section within ten days from the date of his election or appointment, such
officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall
thereupon become vacant, unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the
time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth.



Section 4.12  Surety and Fidelity Bonds.



   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Council may require
any officer or employee to give a bond, to be approved by the Council,
conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of his
office or employment, in such sum as the Council shall determine. All such
officers or employees receiving, disbursing, or responsible for the City
funds shall be bonded. The resignation or removal of any bonded officer or
employee shall not, nor shall the appointment of another to the office or
employment, exonerate such officer or employee or his sureties from any
liability incurred by him or them. All official bonds shall be corporate
surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City, except as
otherwise provided in this Charter. No bond required by this section shall be
renewed upon its expiration or in the event of the reappointment of any
officer or employee to a position for which a bond is required, but a new
bond shall be furnished. No bond, except that of the Municipal Judge, shall
be issued for a term exceeding two years. The requirements of this section
may be met by the purchase by the City of one or more blanket corporate
surety bonds covering all or any group or groups of the officers and
employees of the City.



Section 4.13  Delivery of Office and Its Effects by Officer to His Successor.



   Whenever any officer or employee shall resign, be removed from office
or employment, or the term for which any officer has been elected or
appointed has expired, he shall, on demand, deliver to his successor in
office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys, and effects in his
custody as such officer or employee, and which in any way appertain to his
office or employment. Every person violating this provision shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Charter, and may be proceeded against in the
same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the general
laws of the State, now or hereafter in force and applicable thereto. Every
officer and employee of the City shall be deemed an officer within the
meaning and provisions of such general laws of the State for the purposes of
this section.



CHAPTER 5
THE CITY COUNCIL



Section 5.1  City Governing Body.



   All powers of the City shall be vested in and all matters of policy of
the City shall be exercised and determined by a Council of seven members
composed of the Mayor and six Councilmen.



Section 5.2  Council to Judge Qualification of Its Members.



   The Council shall be the judge of the eligibility and qualifications of
its own members.



Section 5.3  Salaries of Members of the Council.



   The Mayor shall receive as remuneration for his services to the City
the sum of $500 per year and each Councilperson shall receive the sum of $10
per Council meeting attended for a sum not to exceed $400 per year. Such
remuneration shall be payable semiannually, and, except as otherwise provided
in this Charter, shall constitute the only salary or remuneration which may
be paid for services performed by the Mayor or any Councilperson for the
discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the City during their term
of office. Upon authorization of the City Council, reasonable expenses may be
allowed when actually incurred on behalf of the City.



(Amended in 1966)



[Editor's Note] The provision for salaries has been superseded by Michigan
State Legislative Action.



Section 5.4  Duties of Mayor.



   (a)   Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes,
the Mayor shall be recognized as the executive head of the City. He shall
have an equal voice and vote in the proceedings of the Council, but shall
have no veto power.



   (b)   He shall be a conservator of the peace, and may exercise
within the City the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder, and
shall have the power to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to
aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the City, and to suppress riot
and disorderly conduct.



   (c)   He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as the
Council, this Charter, or the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United
States shall require.



Section 5.5  Mayor Pro Tem.



   The Council shall, at its first regular meeting following each regular
biennial City election, select one of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor when, on account of
absence from the City, disability or otherwise, the Mayor is temporarily
unable to perform the duties of his office, and, in case of vacancy in the
office of Mayor, until such vacancy is filled by the Council. In the event of
a vacancy occurring in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, the Council shall appoint
from its membership to fill such vacancy and, in the time of emergency,
members of the Council may act as Mayor Pro Tem in the order of the number of
votes received by them at their election, until a Mayor Pro Tem is so
appointed.



Section 5.6  Meetings of the Council.



   (a)   The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place
of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular meetings in each
month. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the Council
shall fall on a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same
time and place on the next secular day which is not a holiday.



   (b)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Clerk on
the written request of the Mayor or of any two members of the Council, on at
least six hours written notice to each member of the Council, designating the
time, place, and purpose of any such meeting and served personally or left at
his usual place of residence by the Clerk or someone designated by him.
Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements for the calling of special
meetings, any special meeting of the Council at which all members of the
Council are present or have, in writing, waived the requirement that notice
be given at least six hours prior to the time specified for the holding of
such meeting and at which a quorum of the Council is present, shall be a
legal meeting.



   (c)   No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the
Council, unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting.
However, if notice of the special meeting is duly given and if all the
members of the Council are present at any special meeting of the Council,
then any business which might lawfully come before a regular meeting of the
Council may be transacted at such special meeting.



   (d)   All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open
to the public and the rules of order of the Council shall provide that
citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard.



   (e)   Four members of the Council shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business at all meetings of the Council, but, in the absence
of a quorum, two members or more may adjourn any regular or special meeting
to a later date.



   (f)   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of
business and shall keep a journal in the English language of all of its
proceedings, which shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk. The vote upon
the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all resolutions,
shall be taken by "Yes" and "No" votes and entered upon the record, except
that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. Any
citizen or taxpayer of the City shall have access to the minutes and records
of all regular and special meetings of the Council at all reasonable times.



   (g)   The Council may, by a vote of not less than two of its
members, compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the City
at its regular and special meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein; and
any member of the Council or other officer of the City who refuses to attend
such meetings or conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat shall be deemed
guilty of misconduct in office. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, his
assistant in command of the City police shall serve as the Sergeant-at-arms
of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section.



Section 5.7  Health.



   The Council, together with the City Manager, shall constitute the Board
of Health of the City. The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations
for their own government and shall possess all powers, privileges, and
immunities granted to boards of health by State law. The Board of Health
shall have supervision of all matters relating to the sanitary condition of
the City and the preservation of life and health of its inhabitants. The
Mayor shall be President and the Health Officer shall be the executive
officer of the Board of Health. The City Clerk shall be the Secretary of the
Board of Health.



Section 5.8  Restriction on Powers of the Council.



   (a)   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager,
and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinate of the City Manager either publicly or privately. Any violation
of the provisions of this section by a Councilman shall constitute misconduct
in office.



   (b)   There shall be no standing committees of the Council.



   (c)   The Council shall not have the power to make any contract with
or give any official position to any person who is in default to the City.
Further, the Council shall not have the power to sell any park, cemetery, or
any part thereof, except where such park is not required under an official
master plan of the City, or engage in any business enterprise requiring an
investment of money in excess of ten cents per capita, unless approved by
three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special
election. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no ordinance or
resolution shall be adopted or passed except by the affirmative vote of at
least four members of the Council.



Section 5.9  Investigations.



   The Council, or any person or committee authorized by it for the
purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department,
office~ or officer of the City and to make investigations as to Municipal
affairs, and for that purpose may require the appearance of witnesses,
administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other
evidence. Failure on the part of any person to appear as so required or to
produce books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of
this section shall constitute a violation of this Charter and shall be
subject to such punishment or other procedures as are permitted by law.



Section 5.10  Publication of Council Proceedings.



   The proceedings of the Council shall be published at least once within
fifteen days after each meeting of the Council. The publication of a synopsis
of such proceedings, prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Mayor, showing
the substance of each separate proceeding of the Council shall be a
sufficient compliance with the requirements of this section.



CHAPTER 6
CITY LEGISLATION



Section 6.1  Prior City Ordinances and Regulations.



   All by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the
City of Howell which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter, in force and effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter,
shall continue in full force as by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and
regulations of the City of Howell, until repealed or amended by action of the
proper authorities.



Section 6.2  Ordinance Enactment.



   All legislation of the City of Howell shall be by ordinance or by
resolution. The word "resolution" as used in this Charter shall be the
official action of the Council in the form of a motion, and such action shall
be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by resolution by this
Charter or by State or Federal law and to matters pertaining to the internal
affairs or concerns of the City government. All other acts of the Council,
and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by
ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title.
Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The
style of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be, "The City of Howell
Ordains:. " Except in the case of ordinances which are declared to be
emergency ordinances, no ordinance shall be finally passed by the Council at
the same meeting at which it is introduced. No ordinance shall be revised, or
amended by reference to its title only, but the section or sections of the
ordinance revised, or amended shall be re-enacted and published at length,
and all ordinances, when enacted, shall be immediately recorded by the Clerk
in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book"; and it shall be the duty of the
Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures
thereon.



Section 6.3  Penalties.



   The Council shall provide in each ordinance for the punishment of those
who violate its provisions. No punishment for the violation of any City
ordinance or for the commission by any officer of the City of any act
declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office shall exceed a
fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for ninety days, or both, in the
discretion of the court, except that any officer of the City found guilty of
any act declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office, shall,
in addition to such fine or imprisonment, or both, forfeit his office.



Section 6.4  Publication of Ordinances.



   Each ordinance passed by the Council shall be published at least once,
within fifteen days after its adoption by the Council. All ordinances of the
City shall become effective immediately upon the publication thereof, unless
a date upon which an ordinance shall become effective, which is subsequent to
the date of its publication, is specifically provided in the ordinance
itself. The publication of any ordinance in full, after its final passage, as
a part of the published proceedings of the Council shall constitute
publication of such ordinance as required herein. An ordinance which is
declared by the Council to be an emergency ordinance may be published by the
posting thereof as provided in Section 2.1(8) of this Charter, provided a
notice of such publication by posting be published in a newspaper meeting the
requirements of such section within ten days after such posting.



(Amended Nov. 8, 1966)



Section 6.5  Technical Codes.



   The Council may adopt any provision of State law or any code permitted
by law as a City ordinance or code by reference thereto in an adopting
ordinance and without publishing such code in full, provided that such code
is clearly identified in the ordinance adopting the same, and the purpose of
the code shall be published with the adopting ordinance and printed copies
thereof be kept in the office of the Clerk, available for inspection by and
distribution to the public at all times, and notice to that effect be
published with the publication of the adopting ordinance.



Section 6.6  Franchises and Contracts.



   Every ordinance or resolution granting any irrevocable franchise or
right to occupy or use the streets, highways, bridges, or public places in
the City for any purpose shall be complete in the form in which it is finally
passed, and remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection for at least
two weeks before the final passage or adoption thereof.



Section 6.7  Compilation or Codification.



   (a)   Copies of all ordinances enacted after the effective date of
this Charter, and all amendments to this Charter, shall be available at the
office of the Clerk.



   (b)   At least once in every ten years the Council shall direct the
compilation or codification and the publication of the Charter and of all
ordinances of the City, then in force, in loose-leaf or pamphlet form, and
may provide for a reasonable charge for copies thereof. No further
publication of any such compilation or codification shall be required for the
validity thereof. In case the compilation or codification of the ordinances
of the City shall have been maintained current and up-to-date during any ten
year period, no re-compilation or re-codification of the ordinances of the
City shall be required during or at the end of such period.



   (c)   The copies of ordinances and of any compilation, code, or
codes referred to in this chapter may be certified by the Clerk and, when so
certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established
tribunals as to the matters contained therein.



Section 6.8  Initiative and Referendum.



   An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an
ordinance enacted by the Council may be had, by a petition, as hereinafter
provided.



Section 6.9  Petitions.



   An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less
than fifteen percent of the registered electors of the City who have signed
said petition within ninety days before the date of filing the petition with
the Clerk. No such petition need be on one paper, but may be aggregate of two
or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name in ink
or indelible pencil, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and
his place of residence by street and number. To each petition paper there
shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the
number of signers thereto and that each signature thereon is the genuine
signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in
the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who
shall, within ten days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the
sufficiency thereof. Any signatures obtained more than ninety days before the
filing of such petition with the Clerk shall not be counted. E found to
contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the
City, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this
section, the Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition,
and ten days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of
supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk
shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting.



Section 6.10  Council Procedure.



   Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk,
the Council shall, within thirty days, either:



   (a)   If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as
submitted in the petition or determine to submit the proposal to the electors
of the City;



   (b)   If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which
the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of
the City.



Section 6.11  Submission to Electors.



   Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it
shall be submitted at the next election held in the City for any purpose, or,
in the discretion of the Council, at a special election. The result shall be
determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases
where otherwise required by the Constitution or laws of the State of Michigan.



Section 6.12  Ordinance Suspended.



   The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary
petition within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance to which such
petition refers shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in
question pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors
as the case may be.



Section 6.13  Amendment of Ordinance Adopted by Initiative Procedure.



   An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings
shall not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of two years
after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Should two or more
ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the
one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions.



CHAPTER 7
THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE



Section 7.1  City Manager.



   (a)   The City Manager shall be the administrative agent of the
Council, shall perform the duties of his office under its authority, and
shall be accountable to the Council for the performance of his duties. He
shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and administrative
qualifications.



   (b)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to:



      (1)   Supervise, and coordinate the work of the Clerk, except
insofar as his work relates to that of Clerk of the Council; the Treasurer;
the Assessor; the Police Department; the Fire Department; the Department of
Public Works; the Water Department; and such additional administrative
offices and departments as the Council may, from time to time create;



      (2)   Assemble the budgets prepared by the several
administrative officers and departments of the City and present the same to
the Council, with his recommendations;



      (3)   Establish and maintain a central purchasing service for
the City;



      (4)   Maintain a City employment and central personnel service
for City offices and departments;



      (5)   Maintain an inventory of City-owned property;



      (6)   Keep informed and report to the Council concerning the
work of the several offices and departments of the City and, to that end, he
may secure from the officers and heads of all administrative departments such
information and periodical or special reports as he or the Council may deem
necessary;



      (7)   In case of conflict of authority between officers and
administrative departments, or in case of absence of administrative authority
occasioned by inadequacy of Charter or ordinance provisions, resolve the
conflict or supply the necessary authority, so far as may be consistent with
law, this Charter, and the ordinances of the City, and direct the necessary
action to be taken in conformance therewith; making a full report
immediately, to the Council of the problem and his action thereon, with his
recommendation for corrective action by the Council;



      (8)   Attend all meetings of the Council, with the right to
take part in all discussions, but without the right to vote;



      (9)   Recommend to the Council, from time to time, such
measures as he deems necessary or appropriate for the improvement of the City
or its services;



      (10)   Furnish the Council with information concerning City
affairs and prepare and submit such reports as may be required, including an
annual report, which shall consolidate the reports of the several departments;



      (11)   Possess such further powers and perform such additional
duties as may be granted to or required of him, from time to time, by the
Council, so far as may be consistent with State law and this Charter; and



      (12)   Do everything necessary and proper to execute the
foregoing powers.



Section 7.2  City Clerk.



   (a)   The Clerk shall be Clerk of the Council. He shall attend all
meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings
in the English language. He shall keep a record of all ordinances,
resolutions, and actions of the Council;



   (b)   He shall have power to administer all oaths required by State
law, this Charter and the ordinances of the City;



   (c)   He shall be custodian of the City seal, and shall affix it to
all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same.
He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining
to the City of Howell, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by
this Charter. All records of the City shall be public and the Clerk and other
officers entrusted with such records shall so maintain and keep the same that
they may be available to the public at all reasonable times. He shall give to
the proper officials of the City ample notice of the expiration or
termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts, or agreements to
which the City is a party;



   (d)   He shall certify by his signature all ordinances and
resolutions enacted or passed by the Council and perform any other duties
required by him by State or Federal law, this Charter, or by the Council and
ordinances of the City;



   (e)   He shall be the general accountant of the City, shall keep the
books of account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of the City, and
shall keep the Council and the City Manager informed as to the financial
affairs of the City. The system of accounts of the City shall conform to such
uniform systems as may be required by law;



   (f)   He shall examine and audit all accounts and claims against the
City. No withdrawal shall be made from any City fund which, after deducting
all withdrawals therefrom, has not a sufficient amount therein to pay such
proposed withdrawal;



   (g)   He shall, at least quarterly, and at any time upon direction
of the City Manager, examine and audit all books of account kept by any
official, board, or department of the City. He shall examine and audit all
books of account of the Treasurer at least once each month;



   (h)   He shall balance all the books of account of the City at the
end of each calendar month, and shall make a report thereon to the City
Manager;



   (i)   He shall perform such other duties in connection with his
office as may be required of him by State or Federal law, this Charter, the
resolutions or ordinances of the Council, or by the Council.



Section 7.3  City Attorney.



   (a)   The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney
and counsel for the Council and shall be responsible solely to the Council.
He shall advise the City Manager concerning legal problems affecting the
administration of the City government and the Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor
concerning their statutory and Charter duties, when so requested, and shall
file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him.



   (b)   He shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent
the City in cases before courts and other tribunals. He shall file with the
Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may
direct.



   (c)   He shall prepare or review all ordinances, regulations,
contracts, bonds, and such other instruments as may be required by this
Charter or by the Council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the
legality thereof.



   (d)   He shall attend all meetings of the Council.



   (e)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for
him by this Charter or the Council.



   (f)   Upon the Attorney's recommendation, or upon its own
initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter
in which the City has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the Attorney
therein.



Section 7.4  City Treasurer.



   (a)   The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the
City, the Clerk's bond, and all evidences of value belonging to the City or
held in trust by the City;



   (b)   He shall receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the
City, including license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges
belonging to and payable to the City and shall, in all cases, give a receipt
therefor;



   (c)   He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner
and only in such places as the Council may determine. He shall report the
same in detail to the Clerk;



   (d)   He shall have such powers, duties, and prerogatives in regard
to the collection and custody of State, County, school district, and City
taxes and moneys as are conferred by law to enforce the collection of State,
County, Township, and school district taxes upon real and personal property.



   (e)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for
him by State or Federal law, this Charter, or by the Council.



Section 7.5  Deputy Clerk or Treasurer.



   The Clerk and the Treasurer may appoint their own deputies, subject to
the written confirmation of the Council. The Clerk and the Treasurer may
terminate the status of their respective deputies at pleasure, upon the
filing of a statement of such termination with the Mayor. Each deputy shall
possess all the powers and authorities of his superior officer except as the
same may be from time to time limited by his superior or by the Council.



Section 7.6  Assessor.



   (a)   The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in and shall
be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by the general
laws of the State.



   (b)   He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment
rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter and the general laws of the
State.



   (c)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for
him in this Charter or by the Council.



Section 7.7  Police Department.



   (a)   The Police Department shall be in the immediate charge of the
Chief of Police, who shall be responsible directly to the City Manager.



   (b)   Police officers shall have all the powers, immunities, and
privileges granted to peace officers by law for the making of arrests, the
preservation of order, and the safety of persons and property in the City.
Any person arrested shall be taken before the proper magistrate or court for
examination or trial, without unnecessary delay. Police officers shall make
and sign complaints to or before the proper officers and magistrates against
any person known to be, or, upon complaint or information, believed to be
guilty of any violation of this Charter or ordinances of the City, or of the
penal laws of the State or of the United States. For the purposes of this
section, violations of the Charter or of ordinances, for which a penalty is
provided, shall be deemed to be misdemeanors.



Section 7.8  Fire Department.



   (a)   The Fire Department shall be in the immediate charge of the
Fire Chief, who shall be responsible directly to the City Manager.



   (b)   The Fire Department shall be responsible for the prevention
and extinguishment of fires and the protection of persons and property
against damage and accident resulting therefrom. The Fire Chief shall be
responsible for the use, care, and management of the City's fire fighting
apparatus and property. He shall conduct supervisory and educational programs
to diminish the risk of fires within the City. He, or any of his authorized
subordinates, may command any person present at a fire to aid in the
extinguishment thereof and to assist in the protection of life or property.
If any person willfully disobeys any such lawful requirement, he shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter.



   (c)   The Fire Chief or any of his authorized subordinates, with the
concurrence of the Mayor, or of the City Manager, or of any two Councilmen,
may cause any building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed necessary
in order to arrest the progress of a fire. In such case no action shall be
maintained against the City or any person therefor. If any person having an
interest in such a building shall apply to the Council, within three months
after the fire, for damages or compensation for such building, the Council
may pay him such compensation as it may deem just. The Council may ascertain
the amount of such damage or compensation by agreement with the owner of the
property or by the appraisal of a jury selected in the same manner as in the
case of juries selected to appraise damages for the taking of property for
public use. No compensation shall be paid on account of any loss which would
probably have occurred to a building, if it had not been pulled down or
destroyed under authority of this section.



Section 7.9  Nepotism.



   Except and unless relatives by blood or marriage of the Mayor, any
Councilman, or the City Manager, within the second degree of consanguinity or
affinity, are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the City at the
time of election of such officers or appointment of such City Manager, such
relatives shall be disqualified from holding any appointive office or from
being employed by the City, during the term for which such Mayor or
Councilman was elected, or during the tenure of office of such City Manager.
If the status of relationship between any employee of the City and any
officer of the City changes to a relationship prohibited hereby following the
employment of such person or election or appointment of such officer, the
provisions of this section shall not apply.



Section 7.10  Civil Service.



   The Council may provide, by ordinance, for a merit system of personnel
management for employees in the service of the City.



Section 7.11  Pension Plan.



   The City may participate in any Statewide or Federal pension plan
available to Municipal employees.



Section 7.12  Employee Welfare Benefits.



   The Council shall have power to make available to the administrative
officers and employees of the City and its departments and boards, any
recognized standard plan of group, life, hospital, health, or accident
insurance, either independently of, or as a supplement to, any pension plan
provided by the City for its employees.



CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL COURT



Section 8.1  Municipal Court.



   [Editor's Note] The provision for a Municipal Court still remains a
part of this Charter but is omitted due to being superseded by Michigan State
Legislative Action. Copies of that portion of the Charter are available in
the City Clerk's office, including a Charter Amendment in 1960.



CHAPTER 9
SUPERVISORS



Section 9.1  Supervisors.



   [Editor's Note] The provision for Supervisors still remains a part of
this Charter but is omitted due to being superseded by Michigan State
Legislative Action. Copies of that portion of the Charter are available in
the City Clerk's office.



CHAPTER 10
ELECTIONS



Section 10.1  Qualifications of Electors.



   Each person who has the constitutional qualifications of an elector in
the State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications at the next
ensuing regular or special City election, shall be entitled to register as an
elector of the City of Howell in the voting district in which he resides.



Section 10.2  Election Procedure.



   The general election laws of the State shall apply to and control, as
near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and City elections,
except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan
procedure, or require more than one publication of notice, and except as
otherwise provided by this Charter.



Section 10.3  Primary Election.



   A non-partisan City primary election shall be held on the date
prescribed by State law for the holding of general spring primary elections.
If, upon the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for the
officers of the City with respect to which elections are to be held at the
next regular City election, it appears that petitions have been filed for no
more than twice the number of candidates for such office, then no primary
election shall be held and the Clerk shall publish notice of such fact. It is
the intent of this section that if a primary is required for any office, it
shall be held for all offices which are to be filled at the next regular City
election. The candidates for nomination for each City office to be filled at
the next City election, in number equal to twice the number of persons to be
elected to such City office, receiving the highest number of votes at any
such City primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the
respective offices for which they are candidates for election and their
names, or the names of persons filing petitions, or in whose behalf petitions
have been filed, in cases where no primary election was held, shall be
certified to the Election Commission to be placed upon the ballot for the
next subsequent regular City election. No person whose name is not printed on
the primary election ballot, but whose name is written on or appears on the
ballot on a sticker pasted thereon by the voter at such election, shall be
nominated for election to any office unless he shall receive at least
twenty-five votes nominating him for such office. To the extent that voting
machines are used in City elections, the provisions of law pertaining to
voting on voting machines shall apply to and govern the conduct of such
elections.



[Editor's Note]  The provision for a spring election has been superseded by
Michigan State Legislative Action.



Section 10.4  Regular City Elections.



   Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, a non-partisan regular
City election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday
in April in each odd numbered year.



[Editor's Note] The provision for an April election has been superseded by
Michigan State Legislative Action. Currently such elections are in November.



Section 10.5  Special Elections.



   Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the
Council at least forty-five days in advance of such election, or when
required by this Charter or the general laws of the State. Any resolution
calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No
more than two special City elections shall be held in any one calendar year.



[Editor's Note] The provision for the time for notice for special City
elections has been superseded by Michigan State Legislative Action.



Section 10.6  Election Commission.



   An Election Commission is hereby created, consisting of the Clerk,
Treasurer, and City Attorney. The Clerk shall be Chairman. The Commission
shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by State law
and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The
compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the
Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election
Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed.



Section 10.7  Notice of Election.



   Notice of the time and place of holding any City primary or election
and of the officers to be elected and the questions to be voted upon, shall
be given by the Clerk by publication at least once in some newspaper
published or of general circulation in the City and, if deemed advisable by
the Council, by posting in five or more conspicuous places in the City not
less than ten days prior to such election. Notice of all other elections in
the City shall be given in the same manner and at the same times as provided
in the State election laws for the giving of notices in State elections.



Section 10.8  Voting Hours.



   The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time
prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at State elections.



Section 10.9  Nomination Petition.



   Persons desiring to qualify as candidates for any elective office under
this Charter shall file a petition therefor with the Clerk, signed by not
less than twenty-five nor more than fifty registered electors of the City,
accompanied by the sworn affidavit of the circulator thereof as to the
genuineness of the signatures thereon, not later than 5:00 o'clock p. m., on
the seventh Friday prior to the date of the regular City primary. Official
blank petitions in substantially the same form as required by State law for
State and County officers, except for references to party, shall be prepared
and furnished by the Clerk. Before the Clerk shall furnish any nomination
petitions to any person, he shall place his initials thereon and enter
thereon in ink or typewriter the name of the person in whose behalf the
petition is to be circulated, and the name of the office for which he is to
be a candidate. The Clerk shall keep a record of all petitions issued from
his office. Nomination petitions for the purpose of filling a vacancy shall
so state in connection with the name of the office for which the petition is
to be circulated. The Clerk shall publish notice of the last day and time for
filing nomination petitions at least one week before, and not more than three
weeks before that date. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of
petitions for any one office than there will be persons elected to said
office. Where any name appears on more petitions than there are candidates to
be elected to said office, such name shall not be counted upon any petition
for that office.



[Editor’s Note] The provision for the time for filing the Nominating
Petition and the date for filing Nominating Petition has been superseded by
Michigan State Legislative Action.



Section 10.10  Approval of Petitions.



   The Clerk shall accept for filing only nomination petitions on official
blanks which were initialed by him at the time of issuance from his office
and which contain the required number of signatures for candidates having
those qualifications required for elective City officers by this Charter.
When petitions are filed by persons other than the person whose name appears
thereon as a candidate, they may be accepted for filing only when accompanied
by the written consent of the person in whose behalf the petition or
petitions were circulated. The Clerk shall, within five days after receipt
thereof, determine the sufficiency of the signatures on each petition filed,
and if he finds that any petition does not contain the required number of
legal signatures of registered electors, he shall immediately notify the
candidate in writing of the insufficiency of his petition.



Section 10.11  Public Inspection of Petitions.



   All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the
office of the Clerk.



Section 10.12  Form of Ballots.



   The form of the ballot used in any City primary or election shall
conform as nearly as may be to that prescribed by the general laws of the
State, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear upon any City
ballot. In all other respects, the printing and numbering of ballots shall
conform to the general laws of the State relating to elections.



Section 10.13  Canvass of Votes.



   The Election Commission shall be the board of canvassers to canvass the
votes cast at all primaries and elections under this charter. The Election
Commission shall meet at 7:30 o'clock p.m., in the city hall on the day next
following each city primary and election and publicly canvass the returns of
such election, and shall determine the vote upon all questions and
propositions and declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected and
what persons have been nominated for election or elected at such primary or
election. The candidate, or candidates, where more than one are to be elected
to the same office, who shall receive the greatest number of votes, shall be
declared to be nominated or elected, as the case may be. 



[Editor's Note]  This section was eliminated per Public Act 65 of 1968.



Section 10.14  Tie Vote.



   If, at any City primary or election, there shall be no choice between
candidates by reason of two or more persons having received an equal number
of votes, then the Council shall name a time and place for the appearance of
such persons for the purpose of determining the nomination or election of
such candidate by lot as provided by State law. Such determination shall be
final.



Section 10.15  Recount.



   A recount of the votes cast at any City primary or election for any
office, or upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general
election laws of the State.



Section 10.16  Recall.



   Any elective official may be removed from office by the electors of the
City in the manner provided by the general laws of the State. A vacancy
created by the recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner
prescribed by law.



CHAPTER 11
GENERAL FINANCE; BUDGET PROCEDURE



Section 11.1  Fiscal Year.



   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July and
end on the 30th day of June of the following year. Such year shall constitute
the budget year of the City government.



Section 11.2  Budget Procedure.



   On or before the second Monday in February, each City officer shall
submit to the City Manager an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the
next fiscal year, for the department or activities under his control. The
City Manager shall prepare a complete itemized budget for the next fiscal
year and shall submit it to the Council on or before the second Monday in
April.



Section 11.3  Budget Document.



   The budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the
ensuing fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information:



   (a)   Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each
department and office of the City, showing the expenditures for corresponding
items for the current and last preceding fiscal years, with reasons for
increases and decreases recommended, as compared with appropriations for the
current year;



   (b)   Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City,
showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized
and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any;



   (c)   Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the City from
sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the
amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the
last preceding and current fiscal years;



   (d)   A statement of the estimated balance or deficit, as the case
may be, for the end of the current fiscal year;



   (e)   An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current
and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues, which,
together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the
proposed expenditures;



   (f)   Such other supporting schedules as the Council may deem
necessary.



Section 11.4  Adoption of Budget; Tax Limit.



   Not later than the third Monday in May, the Council shall, by
resolution, adopt the budget for the next fiscal year and shall, in such
resolution appropriate the money required for such budget and provide for a
levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal
property for Municipal purposes, which levy shall not exceed two per cent of
the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation
in the City.



Section 11.5  Transfer of Appropriations.



   After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the
treasury of the City nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be
incurred, except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The Council may
transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from
one department fund, or agency to another. The balance in any appropriation,
which has not been encumbered, at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to
the General Fund and be reappropriated during the next fiscal year.



Section 11.6  Budget Control.



   At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and
more often if required by the Council, the City Manager shall submit to the
Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and
expenses to date, and if it shall appear that the income is less than
anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required
for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep
expenditures within the cash income.



Section 11.7  Depository.



   The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for City
funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City moneys. The
Council shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized or
permitted by the general laws of the State, except that personal surety bonds
shall not be deemed proper security.



Section 11.8  Contractual Claims Against City.



   (a)   All contractual claims against the City shall be filed with
the Clerk, who shall transmit them to the Council.



   (b)   The Clerk shall verify the correctness of each claim and,
subject to further procedures established by the Council for auditing and
approving claims, he shall approve for payment each claim so verified, if a
sufficient appropriation is available for the purpose, and, upon the approval
of the payment thereof by the Council, shall draw and sign a check therefor.
Each such check shall be countersigned by the Treasurer, who shall make a
proper entry thereof in his books of accounts. Any officer who signs or
countersigns a check on any funds of the City, except as herein provided,
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter.



Section 11.9  Notice to City of Claims for Injuries.



   The City shall not be liable in damages for injury to persons or
property by reason of negligence of the City, its officers, or employees, or
by reason of any defective highway, public work, public service improvement,
or facility of the City, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow, or other
encumbrance thereon, unless, within sixty days after such injury occurred,
the person damaged or his representative causes to be served upon the Clerk a
written notice, stating that such person intends to hold the City liable for
such damages. Such notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of
the injury, the manner in which it occurred, the nature of the act or defect
complained of, the extent of the injury so far as known, and the names and
addresses of witnesses known to the claimant. No person shall bring action
against the City for damages to person or property arising out of any of the
reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless brought within the period
prescribed by law, nor unless he has first presented to the Clerk a claim in
writing and under oath, setting forth specifically the nature and extent of
the injury and the amount of damages claimed. Such claim shall be presented
to the Council for action. It shall be a sufficient bar to any such claim
that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim required by this
section were not filed within the time and in the manner herein provided.



Section 11.10  Independent Audit.



   The Council shall provide for an independent audit of all the City
government at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the
Council. Such audit shall be made by auditors experienced in municipal
accounting. The results of such audit shall be made public in such a manner
as the Council may determine. An annual report of the City's business shall
be made available to the public by the City Manager, either in pamphlet form
or by publication in a newspaper, setting forth pertinent facts concerning
the activities and finances of the City government, as determined by the
Council.



CHAPTER 12
TAXATION



Section 12.1  Power to Tax.



   In order to carry out its purposes, powers, and duties of the City
government established by this Charter, the City may assess, levy, and
collect ad valorem taxes, rents, tolls, and specific or excise taxes.



Section 12.2  Subjects of Taxation.



   The subjects of ad valorem taxation for Municipal purposes shall be the
same as for State, County, and school purposes under the general law.



Section 12.3  Tax Procedure.



   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, City taxes shall be
levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by law. In the event
of failure of any tax through the defective procedure of any assessment,
collection, or sale, the Council may provide for its reassessment upon the
property chargeable therewith in the first instance.



Section 12.4  Exemptions.



   The power of taxation shall not be surrendered or suspended by any
grant or contract to which the City shall be a party. No exemptions from ad
valorem taxation shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or
permitted by law.



Section 12.5  Personal Property; Jeopardy Assessment.



   If the Treasurer finds that any person, who is or may be, liable for
taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in the City on
tax day, intends to depart from the City or to remove therefrom personal
property, which is, or may be, liable for taxation, or intends to conceal
himself or his property, or intends to do any other act tending to prejudice,
or to render wholly or partly ineffectual, the proceedings to collect the
tax, unless proceedings therefor cannot be brought without delay, he shall
cause notice of his finding to be given such person, together with a demand
for the immediate payment of the tax. Thereupon, the tax shall become
immediately due and payable and the Treasurer shall have and exercise all the
powers granted by law to township and city treasurers for the collection
thereof. If the exact amount of any such tax has not, at the time of such
finding, been determined because the same has not been spread upon the tax
roll, the Treasurer shall estimate the amount of the tax upon such personal
property and the estimate shall be presumed to be the amount of tax upon such
property which, together with other taxes which have accrued thereon, shall
become payable as hereinabove provided. The tax so estimated by the Treasurer
shall, upon the giving of the notice herein provided, become a lien upon the
property liable for the tax. The lien shall be of the same type and legal
effect as the lien upon personal property provided in Section 12.18 of this
chapter. If the estimate of the Treasurer is in excess of the amount of tax
spread against such property upon the tax roll, he shall refund the excess
upon the demand of the person from whom it was collected or his legal
representative. If such person furnishes evidence, satisfactory to the
Treasurer, by bond or otherwise, that he will duly pay the tax or taxes to
which the Treasurer's finding relates, then such tax or taxes shall not be
payable prior to the time otherwise fixed for payment thereof.



Section 12.6  Assessment.



   The Assessor shall, annually, prepare an assessment roll of all
property in the City and shall place a value, in accordance with law, upon
all taxable property, both real and personal, in the City. The value shall be
determined by the Assessor in accordance with established assessment rules,
techniques, and procedures. The value shall be determined according to the
facts existing of the date fixed by law as tax day, for the assessment of
property throughout the State, for the year for which the roll is made, and
no change of the status or of the location of any such property, after that
day, shall be considered by the Assessor or the Board of Review.



Section 12.7  Assessment Procedure.



   The process of assessment of property within the City for the purpose
of taxation shall be continuous, but all assessments, as the same shall
appear on the annual assessment and tax rolls of the City, shall be corrected
by the Assessor to and shall stand as of the tax day of the year to which
they apply.



Section 12.8  Time for Making Assessment Rolls.



   On or before the first day of the meeting of the Board of Review in
each year, the Assessor shall complete and certify an assessment roll in the
manner and form required by law. In making such assessment roll, the Assessor
shall possess all the powers and immunities vested in, and shall be charged
with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by law. On the date and
at the time of convening of the Board of Review in each year the Assessor
shall deliver the completed assessment roll to the Board of Review. Such roll
may be divided into two or more volumes, which shall be identified by the
Assessor, for the purpose of convenience. The attachment of any certificate
or warrant, required by this chapter, to any volume of the roll, either as an
assessment roll or as a tax roll, shall constitute the attachment thereof to
the entire roll, provided the several volumes thereof are identified in such
certificate or warrant.



Section 12.9  Notice of Change of Assessments.



   The Assessor shall give notice by first class mail to each owner of
property which has been added to the assessment roll or the value of which
has been increased or decreased on such roll. The notice shall be addressed
to the owner according to the records of the Assessor's office and mailed not
less than ten days before the date of the convening of the Board of Review.
Neither the failure of the Assessor to give notice nor the failure of a
person to receive notice shall invalidate any assessment roll or any
assessment thereon.



Section 12.10  Board of Review.



   (a)   The Board of Review shall be composed of three members as
provided for in Section 4.1 of this Charter. The terms of office of each
member of the Board of Review shall be for four years. At each City election
held in a year following a presidential election year, two members of the
Board of Review shall be elected. At each other regular City election, one
member of the Board of Review shall be elected. The Council shall fix the
compensation of the members of the Board of Review.



   (b)   The Board of Review shall convene at nine o'clock in the
forenoon on the third Monday in March in each year at the Council Chambers
and shall continue in session for six hours during that day and each of the
following three days for the purpose of examining and reviewing the
assessment roll of the City. The Council may, by appropriate action, extend
this period. On the first day of its meeting in each year, the Board shall
elect one of its members Chairman. The Board shall have all powers vested in
and be charged with all duties imposed by law upon boards of review in
townships.



Section 12.11  Notice of Meetings of Board of Review.



   The Council shall provide for giving notice to the public of the time
and place of the meeting of the Board of Review. Such notice shall be given
not less than ten days before the convening of the Board and as often
thereafter as the Council deems fit. If, for any reason, the meetings of the
Board are not held, as in this chapter required, the Council shall give such
further notice as time and circumstances warrant.



Section 12.12  Notice of Assessment Changes.



   The Board of Review shall give notice, prior to adjournment, to each
owner of property according to the records of the Assessor's office, whose
property is added to the assessment roll by it, or the value of whose
property is increased or decreased thereon by it. Neither the failure on the
part of the Board of Review to so give notice in any particular case, nor the
failure of a person to receive notice, shall invalidate the assessment roll
or any assessment thereon.



Section 12.13  Confirmation of Assessment Roll.



   The Board of Review shall hold a meeting on the Monday following the
date of its first session, and, at that meeting, shall complete the review of
the assessment roll submitted to it by the Assessor and shall endorse and
approve the same as provided and required by law. The omission of such
endorsement shall not affect the validity of such assessment roll. If, for
any cause, a quorum of the Board of Review does not assemble, or in the event
that the Board fails or refuses to act during the days set for the meeting
thereof, the roll as prepared by the Assessor shall stand as if approved by
the Board of Review, without further formality. After the review of the
assessment roll has been completed and the roll endorsed and signed, as
required by law, the Board of Review shall redeliver the roll to the Assessor.



Section 12.14  Records of the Board of Review.



   The Assessor shall be the Secretary of the Board of Review, shall
attend its meetings with the privilege of participating therein, but without
the right to vote upon any decision made by the Board, shall give the Board
information relating to matters under consideration by it, and shall keep a
permanent record of all proceedings of the Board, which record shall be filed
with the Clerk within thirty days after the adjournment of the Board.



Section 12.15  Validity of Assessment Roll.



   Upon the completion of the roll and from and after midnight ending the
last day of the meeting of the Board of Review, the same shall be the
assessment roll of the City for County, school, and City taxes on real and
personal property that may be authorized by law, and shall be conclusively
presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside
except for causes set forth in the general laws of the State.



Section 12.16  Clerk to Certify Levy.



   Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the
ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which
the Council determines shall be raised by general tax, together with such
assessments and other lawful charges as the Council shall authorize to be
spread against or charged to property and persons appearing upon the roll.



Section 12.17  City Tax Roll.



   Upon receiving the certification of the amount to be raised, as
provided in the preceding section, the Assessor shall proceed to spread the
amounts of the general City tax upon the assessment roll according to and in
proportion to the several valuations set forth therein. To avoid fractions in
computation on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the
several taxes to be raised not more than the amount permitted by law, which
added amount when collected shall be credited to the General Fund of the
City. Assessments and other lawful charges authorized by the Council to be
spread against or charged to property or persons upon the roll shall also be
spread and charged thereon as directed by the Council.



Section 12.18  Taxes Lien on Property.



   The City taxes thus assessed against personal property shall become at
once a debt due to the City from the persons to whom they are assessed, and
the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall on the first day
of July become a lien upon such real property, and the lien for such amounts
and for all interest and other charges thereon shall continue until payment
thereof. All personal taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior, and
paramount, upon all personal property of the person so assessed from and
after the first day of July in each year and shall so remain until paid. Such
tax liens shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and
liens upon the said personal property, whether created by chattel mortgage,
execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after
the assessment of said personal property taxes, and no transfer of personal
property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to divest or destroy the
lien, except where the personal property is actually sold in the regular
course of retail trade.



Section 12.19  Tax Roll Certified for Collection.



   (a)   After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than the
second Monday in June in each year, the Assessor shall certify the tax roll,
and shall annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to
collect from the several persons named in the roll the several sums mentioned
therein opposite their respective names as a tax, assessment, or charge, and
granting to and vesting in him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes,
assessments, and charges on the roll, all the power and immunities granted by
law to township treasurers for the collection of taxes.



   (b)   The Assessor shall, at the same time, deliver to the Clerk a
statement showing the amount of the taxes assessed upon the roll and the
Clerk shall make an entry thereof in the books of his office and charge the
gross amount thereof to the Treasurer.



Section 12.20  Notification of Taxes Due.



   The Treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the
payment of taxes, but, upon receipt of the City tax roll by him, he shall
forthwith mail a tax statement to each person named in the tax roll and shall
give at least six days' notice of the date upon which City taxes are due, by
publication in a newspaper of the City, which notice shall be sufficient
demand for the payment of all taxes assessed in the City tax roll. Neither
the failure on the part of the Treasurer to give notice or to mail a tax
statement, nor the failure of any person to receive the notice or the tax
statement, shall invalidate the taxes on the tax roll or release any person
or property assessed from the penalty provided in this chapter in case of
nonpayment.



Section 12.21  Tax Payment Schedule.



   The taxes, charges and assessments on each City tax roll shall be due
and payable on the first day of July of the fiscal year in which levied. All
such taxes, charges, and assessments which are paid on or before the
thirty-first day of July of such year shall be collected by the Treasurer
without the addition of any fee or charge for the collection thereof. There
shall be added to all taxes, charges, and assessments on such tax roll which
remain unpaid after the said thirty-first day of July a collection fee of
one-half of one per cent during the month of August and an additional
one-half of one per cent per month during each and every month or fraction of
a month which shall elapse thereafter before the payment of such taxes,
charges, or assessments is made, until the twentieth day of February next
following the date that such taxes, charges or assessments became due and
payable. All such collection charges, when paid, shall be paid into the
City's treasury for the use and benefit of the City. Upon all City taxes,
charges, and assessments returned to the County Treasurer upon any delinquent
tax roll, a charge of three and one-half per cent shall be added and the same
shall be collected by the County Treasurer in like manner as and together
with the taxes, charges, and assessments so returned.



Section 12.22  Procedure for Collecting Taxes on Personal Property.



   Respecting taxes levied against personal property, the Treasurer shall
have power to levy upon and sell at public sale the personal property of a
person refusing or neglecting to pay the tax, in the manner provided by law
and shall have the same powers respecting the property assessed and the
person who is the owner or custodian thereof as provided by law for the
collection of such taxes.



Section 12.23  State, County, and School Taxes.



   For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes in the City for
State, County, and school purposes, the City shall be considered the same as
a township, and all provisions of law relative to the collection of such
taxes, the accounting therefor to the appropriate taxing units, and the
returning of taxes to the County Treasurer for nonpayment thereof shall apply
to the performance thereof by the Treasurer, who shall perform the duties and
have the powers granted to a township treasurer by law. Collection fees
charged and collected for the collection of such taxes shall be paid into the
General Fund of the City.



Section 12.24  Lien for Taxes, Assessments, and Charges.



   All taxes, assessments, and charges spread on tax rolls shall, until
paid, be a lien upon the property against which they were levied.



Section 12.25  Proportioning of Tax on Portion of Taxed Items.



   Any person owning an undivided share or other part of any parcel of
real property, assessed as one description, may pay the taxes assessed
against such description or may pay the share or part owed by him by paying
an amount having the same relation to the whole tax as the value of the part
on which payment is made bears to the value of the whole description. The
receipt given and the record of the Treasurer shall show the payment and the
interest with respect to which it was made.



Section 12.26  Protection of City Lien.



   Consistent with the provisions of law, the City shall have power to
acquire any premises within the City, either by purchase at any tax or other
public sale, or by purchase from the State or the fee owner, when the
purchase of such property is necessary to protect the lien of the City for
any City taxes, assessments, and charges. The City may hold, lease, or sell
the property so acquired. Any such acquisition shall be deemed for a public
purpose.



CHAPTER 13
BORROWING POWER



Section 13.1  General Borrowing.



   Subject to the applicable provisions of law, the Council, by proper
ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose
within the scope of the powers vested in the City and the issuance of bonds
of the City or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the
full faith, credit, and resources of the City for the payment of the
obligation created thereby; provided, that the net bonded indebtedness
incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten percentum
of the assessed value, of all the real and personal property in the City. The
provisions of this section shall include and be subject to the powers
permitted and the limitations set forth in Sections 4(a), 4(b), 4(c), 4(d),
and 5 of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended.



Section 13.2  Special Assessment Bonds.



   The Council shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general
laws of the State, having authority to borrow money in anticipation of the
payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of
any public improvement or in anticipation of the payment of any combination
of such special assessments and to issue bonds therefor. Such special
assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or
districts or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or
districts and a general obligation of the City. All collections on each
special assessment roll or combination of rolls, to the extent that the same
are pledged for the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds issued
in anticipation of the payment thereof, shall be set apart in a separate fund
for the payment of such principal and interest and shall be used for no other
purpose.



Section 13.3  Mortgage Bonds.



   When the City is authorized to acquire, own, or operate any public
utility, it may issue mortgage bonds therefor beyond the general limit of
bonded indebtedness prescribed by law in accordance with the provisions of
law pertaining thereto.



Section 13.4  Other Bonds.



   The City shall have power to issue revenue or other types of bonds in
the manner and for the purposes permitted by the Constitution and general
laws of the State of Michigan.



Section 13.5  Preparation and Record.



   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be
unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any
other purpose except that whenever the proceeds of any bond issue, or any
part thereof, shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for
which said bond issue was made, the Council may, by the affirmative vote of 5
members, authorize the use of such unexpended and unencumbered funds for the
retirement of such bond issue, or, if such bond issue shall have been fully
retired or if any of such funds remain after such retirement, then for the
retirement of other bonds or obligations of the City. All bonds and other
evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the Clerk under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may
be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Treasurer. A complete and
detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by
the City shall be kept by the Clerk. Upon the payment of any bond or other
evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "cancelled." Any officer
who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of
misconduct in office.



Section 13.6  Unissued Bonds.



   No unissued bonds of the City shall be issued or sold to secure funds
for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized,
and if any such bonds are not issued or sold within five years after
authorization, such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void.



CHAPTER 14
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



Section 14.1  General Powers Relative to Special Assessments.



   The Council may determine the necessity for any public improvement, and
determine that the whole or any part of the cost thereof shall be defrayed by
special assessment upon the property especially benefited. The Council may
authorize public improvements other than those for which petitions have been
filed, whether the cost thereof is to be defrayed from the General Fund of
the City or by special assessments upon the property especially benefited.



Section 14.2  Petitions for Public Improvements.



   Petitions for making public improvements, any part of the expense of
which is to be borne by special assessments, shall be filed with the Clerk.
All such petitions filed during any calendar year shall be considered by the
Council not later than January 31st of the next calendar year.



Section 14.3  Preliminary Resolution for Public Improvement.



   No contract or expenditure, except for the necessary procedures of the
Council and for the preparing of necessary profiles, plans, specifications,
and estimates of cost, shall be made for any public improvement, the cost of
which is to be paid by special assessment upon the property especially
benefited thereby, until the Council has passed a resolution determining to
proceed with such public improvement.



Section 14.4  Assessments on Single Lots.



   When any expenditure is made on account of any separate or single lot,
parcel of land, or lands, or premises, which, by the provisions of this
Charter or by law, the City is authorized to charge and collect as a special
assessment against the same, and which assessment is not of that class of
special assessment required to be made pro rata upon lots or parcels of land
in a special assessment district, a statement of the labor or services for
which such expenditure was incurred, verified by the City Manager, with a
description of the lot and the name of the owner or person chargeable
therewith, if known, shall be reported to the Council in the manner
prescribed by it. The Council shall determine the part of such expenditure
that shall be charged, and the person against whom, if known, and the
premises upon which the same shall be levied, as a special assessment. As
often as the Council deems expedient, the Clerk shall give notice of the
several amounts so determined and reported to the several persons chargeable
therewith. Such notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last known
addresses of such persons as shown on the assessment roll of the City, or by
publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, and the
amount thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, not less than thirty days,
within which payment shall be made to the Treasurer. In all cases where
payment is not made within the time set, the fact shall be reported by the
Treasurer to the Assessor, who shall charge such amounts, together with a
penalty of ten per cent of such amounts, against the persons or real property
chargeable therewith, on the next tax roll.



Section 14.5  Special Assessment Procedure by Ordinance.



   The Council shall, by general ordinance, prescribe a complete special
assessment procedure.



Section 14.6  Poverty Provisions.



   In any instance where, in the opinion of the Council, the owner of any
property which is assessed to defray any part of the cost of making any
public improvement benefiting such property is unable to contribute toward
the cost thereof because of poverty, the City may take from the owner a trust
deed or assignment of the property so assessed, in lieu of the payment of
such assessments in cash. Such trust deed shall not deprive the owner of such
property of full right to use and occupy such property so long as he shall
live and shall contain a clause to the effect that such deed shall cease to
be effective upon the payment of the assessments which have accrued and
become payable upon the property.



Section 14.7  Special Assessment Accounts.



   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, moneys raised by special
assessment to defray the cost of any public improvement shall be held in a
special fund to pay only such cost and, to the extent required, to repay any
money borrowed or advanced therefor and the accrued interest thereon.



Section 14.8  Contested Assessments.



   No suit or action shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of
contesting or enjoining the collection of a special assessment unless written
notice, stating an intention to contest the collection thereof and setting
forth the grounds of such contest, is filed with the Clerk. Such notice shall
be filed within fifteen days after the date of the resolution of the Council
confirming the assessment roll for such improvement, or, in the case of an
assessment upon a single lot or premises, ordering the special assessment.
Any such suit or action must be commenced within ninety days following the
giving of notice.



Section 14.9  Reassessment for Benefits.



   Whenever the Council deems any special assessment invalid or defective,
or whenever a court adjudges an assessment to be illegal in whole or in part,
the Council may cause a new assessment to be levied for the same purpose,
whether or not the improvement or any part thereof has been completed, or any
part of the special assessment collected. In reassessment proceedings
hereunder, it shall not be necessary for the Council to redetermine the
necessity of the improvement or to hold a hearing thereon. If any portion of
the original special assessment is collected and not refunded, it shall be
applied upon the reassessment, and the reassessment shall, to the extent, be
deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed is collected, the
balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment.



CHAPTER 15
CONTRACTS; FRANCHISES; PERMITS



Section 15.1  City May Perform Public Work.



   The Council shall have power to do any public work or make any public
improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the
necessary supplies and materials, with separate accounting as to each
improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after
competitive bidding. Where competitive bids are secured, the City, or any
City department qualified to do the work, may, at the direction of the
Council, enter a bid on an equal footing with other bidders. The Council, in
its discretion, shall have the power to reject any or all bids. On all jobs
where the plans thereof are required by law to be prepared by a professional
engineer, or the total cost thereof exceeds $2000. 00, each contractor shall
be required to file a performance bond, to be approved by the City Attorney,
covering labor and material and for the proper completion of the work. Copies
of all contracts shall be filed in the office of the Clerk. The Council shall
also have power to do any public work or make any public improvement under
any legally constituted plan under which the labor is furnished by any other
governmental unit, department, or agency of the United States or the State of
Michigan, or which is wholly or in part financed by them or either of them.



Section 15.2  Plans and Specifications.



   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the responsibility for
the preparation of plans and specifications, estimating of the cost,
advertising for bids, supervision and approval of the work upon or for any
public work or public improvement is vested in the City Manager.



Section 15.3  Contracts.



   The letting and making of contracts is hereby vested in the Council.
Whenever it becomes desirable for the City to enter into a contract with a
second party for any purpose whatever, such instrument shall be drawn or
approved as to form by the City Attorney and certified to by the Clerk as to
sufficiency of funds appropriated for the purpose thereof.



Section 15.4  Modifications in Contracts.



   When it becomes necessary in the prosecution of any work or improvement
done under contract to make alterations or modifications in such contract,
such alterations or modifications shall be made only upon resolution of the
Council. No order for such alterations or modifications shall be effective
until the price to be paid for the material and work, or both, under the
altered or modified contract shall have been agreed upon in writing and
signed by the contractor and the City Manager upon authority of the Council,
and a copy thereof and of the proceedings authorizing such alteration or
modification certified by the Clerk, and attached by him to the original
contract on file in his office.



Section 15.5  Franchises.



   No franchise, license, right, or privilege which is not revocable at
the will of the Council shall be granted or become operative until the same
has been referred to the people at a regular or special election and has
received the approval of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at such
election. All irrevocable public utility franchises and all renewals,
extensions, and amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No
such ordinance shall be adopted before thirty days after application therefor
has been filed with the Council, nor until a full public hearing has been
held thereon. No such ordinance shall be submitted to the electors at an
election to be held less than thirty days after the grantee named therein has
filed with the Clerk its unconditional acceptance of all of the terms of such
franchise, and it shall not be submitted to a special election, unless the
expense of holding the election, as determined by the Council, shall have
been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. No exclusive franchise, license,
right, or privilege shall ever be granted and no franchise shall be granted
for a longer term than thirty years.



Section 15.6  Licenses and Franchises Remain in Effect.



   All franchises, licenses, rights, and privileges granted by the City of
Howell and in force within the City on the effective date of this Charter
shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the time for
which they were respectively granted, has lapsed under conditions contained
in the franchise, license, right, or privilege granted, or until the same may
have been taken over by the City by purchase, condemnation, grant,
revocation, or otherwise.



Section 15.7  Right of Regulation.



   All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this
Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be
subject to the right of the City:



   (1)    To repeal the same for misuse, non-use, or for failure to
comply with the provisions thereof;



   (2)    To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service
and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;



   (3)    To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;



   (4)    To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public
in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;



   (5)   To impose such other reasonable regulations as may be
determined by the Council to he conducive to the safety, welfare, and
accommodation of the public.



Section 15.8  Regulation of Rates.



   All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing
rates, fares, and charges, and for readjustments thereof at periodic
intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for
fixing such rates, fares, and charges shall in no event include a value
predicated upon the franchise, good will, or prospective profits.



Section 15.9  Revocable Permits.



   Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the
will of the Council, may be granted by the Council by ordinance on such terms
and conditions as it shall determine.



Section 15.10  Use of Streets by Utility.



   Every public utility franchise shall be subject to the right of the
City to use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges,
and public places and the space above and beneath them. Every public utility
shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets,
alleys, bridges, and public places, as shall arise from its use thereof and
shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said
use; and may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property and
appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of
the City, by the City, and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be
reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor;
provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by any public
utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and
conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which
award shall be final.



CHAPTER 16
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES



Section 16.1  General Powers Respecting Utilities.



   The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers
granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve,
enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate
limits, public utilities, including, but not by the way of limitation, public
utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, and sewage treatment,
and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the Municipality and the
inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power,
gas, and other public utilities and services, without its corporate limits to
an amount not to exceed the limitations set by or under authority of law.



Section 16.2  Rates.



   The Council shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such just
and equitable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants
of the City and others with water, with electricity for light, heat, and
power and with such other utility services as the City may provide.



Section 16.3  Utility Charges; Collection.



   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of all
public utility charges made by the City and, for such purpose, shall have all
the power granted to cities by Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939 or any
other provision of law. When any person shall fail or refuse to pay to the
City any sums due on utility bills, the utility service upon which such
delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued and suit may be instituted
by the City for the collection of the same in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



Section 16.4  Accounts.



   Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or
operated by the City, distinct from other City accounts, and in such manner
as to show the true and complete financial result of such City ownership or
operation, or both, including all assets, liabilities, revenues, and
expenses. They shall show, as nearly as possible, the value of any service
furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or to any other City
department. The Council shall annually cause to be made a report showing the
financial results of such City ownership or operation, or both, which report
shall give for each utility, the information specified in this section, and
such further information as the Council shall deem expedient. Such report
shall be on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection.



Section 16.5  Disposal of Plants.



   The City shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way alien or
dispose of the property, easements, income or other equipment, privilege, or
asset belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may own or
acquire, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have
been submitted to the electors of the City who are qualified to vote on
questions involving the direct expenditure of money or the issuance of bonds,
at an election held for the purpose in the manner provided in this Charter,
and approved by them by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors voting
thereon. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or other
forms of transfer in violation of this provision, shall be void and of no
effect as against the City. The provisions of this section shall not,
however, apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of equipment of any
City-owned utility as are worn out or useless, or which could, with advantage
to the service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment.



CHAPTER 17
CITY LIBRARY



   [Editor's Note] The provision for a City Library still remains a part
of this Charter but is omitted due to being superseded by the establishment
of the Howell District Library by the voters on October 4, 1988. See
Resolution 88-24, passed September 26, 1988, which established a Board of
Trustees for such District Library.  Copies of that portion of the Charter
are available in the City Clerk's office, including a Charter Amendment in
1960.



CHAPTER 18
MISCELLANEOUS



Section 18.1  Vested Rights and Liabilities Continued.



   After the effective date of this Charter, the City shall be vested with
all property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, and the records,
files, books, and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of its previous
Charter. No right or liability, contract, lease, or franchise, either in
favor of or against the City, and no suit or prosecution of any character,
shall be affected in any manner by any change resulting from the adoption of
this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed, as if no change had been
made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be its debts
and liabilities, and all debts to it and fines and penalties, imposed and
existing at the time of such change, shall be collected by the City. All
trusts, established for any Municipal purpose, shall be continued in
accordance with the terms thereof, subject to the cy pres doctrine.



Section 18.2  City Records to be Public.



   All records of the City shall be public, shall be kept in City offices,
except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to
be elsewhere, and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times.
No person shall dispose of, mutilate, or destroy any record of the City,
except as provided by law, and any person who shall do so contrary to law
shall be guilty of a violation of this Charter.



Section 18.3  Trusts.



   The Council may, in its discretion, receive and hold any money or
property in trust for any Municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the
execution of such trust and for no other purpose, except in cases where the
cy pres doctrine applies.



Section 18.4  Quorum.



   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Charter, a quorum of any
board created by or under authority of this Charter shall consist of a
majority of its members, and the concurring vote of a majority of the members
of each such board shall be necessary for official action by it.



Section 18.5  Sundays and Holidays.



   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Charter, whenever the
date fixed by law or ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls
on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next
succeeding day, which is not a Sunday or legal holiday.



Section 18.6  Penalties for Violations of Charter.



   Any person found guilty of an act constituting misconduct in office or
a violation of this Charter may be punished by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days, or both, in
the discretion of the court. This section shall not operate to limit or
prejudice the power to remove officers or discharge employees as provided in
this Charter.



Section 18.7  Chapter and Section Headings.



   The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for
convenience only, and shall not be considered as part of this Charter.



Section 18.8  Amendments.



   This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law.
Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting
provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote shall
prevail as to those provisions.



Section 18.9  Severability of Charter Provisions.



   If any provision, section, or clause of this Charter, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the
Charter, which can be given effect without the invalid portion or
application, and, to this end, this Charter is declared to be severable.



SCHEDULE



Section 1.  Election to Adopt Charter.



   This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of
the City of Howell at a special City election to be held on Tuesday, November
8, 1955. If this Charter is adopted at such election, it shall take effect
and become the Charter of the City of Howell on Sunday, January 1, 1956, at
12:00 o'clock noon.



Section 2.  Form of Ballot.



   The form of the ballot on submission of this Charter shall be as
follows:



   Instruction - A cross (X) in the square before the word "Yes" is in
favor of the proposed charter, and a cross (X) in the square before the word
"No" is against the proposed charter.



   "Shall the proposed charter of the City of Howell, drafted by the
Charter Commission which was elected on November 2, 1954, be adopted?"



            /___/      Yes



            /___/      No



Section 3.  Officers of City Under Previous Charter.



   The Mayor and each Councilman who held office on the effective date of
this Charter shall be the Mayor and Councilmen of the City under this Charter
and shall perform their duties under and otherwise be subject to its
provisions. Each such officer shall hold and continue in the office held by
him, until he or his successor is re-elected or elected or appointed in the
case of a vacancy, under the provisions of this Charter. At the City election
held in April, 1957, a Municipal Judge shall be elected for a six year term
under the provisions of this Charter. The Municipal Judge who held office on
the effective date of this Charter shall continue in office and his term
shall terminate on the 1st day of January, 1958, at which time the office
shall be filled by the person elected to that office at the April, 1957,
regular City election. The terms of office specified in this section are for
the purpose of bringing the transition from the schedule of terms of office
in the former Charter of the City and those provided in this Charter.



Section 4.  Administrative and Other Officers.



   If this Charter is adopted at the election thereon, the terms of office
of the City Clerk, City Treasurer, and City Assessor under the former Charter
of the City, shall terminate on January 2, 1956, at 12:00 noon. The persons
holding these offices under the former Charter of the City shall thereupon
qualify for and assume the offices of Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor,
respectively, under this Charter and shall hold such offices on the same
basis as though they had been appointed thereto in the manner provided in
this Charter. All other administrative officers and employees of the City
shall continue in the respective offices and employment held by them at the
time this Charter becomes effective, and shall be subject to the provisions
thereof.



Section 5.  Board of Review.



   A Board of Review shall be elected at the election on the adoption of
this Charter. No primary shall be held in connection with these officers.
Nomination petitions for such officers shall be filed with the City Clerk at
or before 5:00 o'clock, p. m., on the 21st day of October 1955. Such
nomination petitions shall conform to the requirements for the nomination of
City officers contained in the Charter of the City which is in effect at the
time of filing the petitions. The person receiving the highest number of
votes for this office shall hold office from January 1, 1956, until the
second Monday in April of 1959. The two persons elected to such office who do
not receive the highest number of votes shall hold office from January 1,
1956, until the second Monday in April, 1957.



Section 6.  Status of Schedule Chapter.



   The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of
the City of Howell under this Charter and it shall constitute a part of this
Charter to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end.



Section 7.  Council Action.



   In all cases not covered by this Charter, the Council shall supply
necessary details and procedures for the transition from the government of
the City under the previous Charter to that under this Charter and may adopt
such rules, resolutions, and ordinances as may be required therefor.



PART TWO - ADMINISTRATION CODE



   TITLE TWO - General Provisions



      Chap. 202   Codified Ordinances.



      Chap. 204   Official Standards.



      Chap. 206   Wards and Boundaries.



      Chap. 208   Municipal Civil Infractions.



      Chap. 209   Anti-Discrimination.



   TITLE FOUR - Legislation



      Chap. 210   Council.



      Chap. 212   Mayor.



      Chap. 214   Ordinances and Resolutions.



   TITLE SIX - Administration



      Chap. 220   City Manager.



      Chap. 222   City Clerk.



      Chap. 224   City Attorney.



      Chap. 226   City Treasurer.



      Chap. 228   City Assessor.



      Chap. 230   Purchasing Agent.



      Chap. 232   Department of Public Safety.



      Chap. 234   Building Department.



      Chap. 236   Police Department.



      Chap. 238   Fire Department.



      Chap. 239   Department of Parks and Cemetery.



      Chap. 240   Department of Public Works.



      Chap. 242   Water Department.



      Chap. 243   Wastewater Treatment Department.



      Chap. 244   Economic Development Corporation.



      Chap. 246   Civil Defense.



      Chap. 248   Employees Generally.



   TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Authorities



      Chap. 260   Planning Commission.



      Chap. 262   Board of Zoning Appeals.



      Chap. 264   Board of Review.



      Chap. 266   Cemetery Commission. (Repealed)



      Chap. 268   Local Officers Compensation Commission.



      Chap. 272   Park and Recreation Commission.



      Chap. 274   Board of Health.



      Chap. 276   Library Board.



      Chap. 278   Thompson Lake Board.



      Chap. 280   Howell Historical Preservation Commission.



      Chap. 282   Election Commission.



      Chap. 283   Building Authority.



      Chap. 284   Board of Building Code Appeals.



      Chap. 285   Downtown Development Authority.



      Chap. 286   Tax Increment Finance Authority.



      Chap. 287   Local Development Finance Authority.



      Chap. 288   Cable Television Commission.



      Chap. 289   Brownfield Redevelopment Authority.



   TITLE TEN - Judiciary



      Chap. 290   Municipal Court.



TITLE TWO - General Provisions



CHAPTER 202
Codified Ordinances



202.01   Designation; citation; headings.



202.02   Amendments and supplements; numbering.



202.03   Definitions and interpretation.



202.04   Separability of provisions.



202.05   Sections and ordinances repealed.



202.06   Exemptions from repeal.



202.98   Fees.



202.99   General Code penalty; fines for Municipal civil infractions;
equitable remedies.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Compilation or codification - see CHTR. Sec. 6.7



   Publication of codes of municipal ordinances - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 117.5b



   Ordinances and resolutions - see ADM. Ch. 214



202.01  DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.



   (a)   This volume consists of all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature of the Municipality, as revised, codified, arranged,
numbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and
sections, and as such shall be known and designated as the Codified
Ordinances of Howell, Michigan, 1982, for which designation "Codified
Ordinances" or "City Code" or "Howell City Code" may be substituted.  Code,
title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the Codified Ordinances.



   (b)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to
such components  of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any
component code may be referred to and cited by its name, as the "Traffic
Code." Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "section"
followed by the number, such as "Section 202.01."



202.02  AMENDMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTS; NUMBERING.



   (a)   The Codified Ordinances of Howell may be amended or
supplemented at any time and, when any amendment or supplement is adopted in
such form as to indicate the intention of Council to make the same a part
thereof, such amendment or supplement shall be incorporated in, and deemed a
part of, the Codified Ordinances, 90 that a reference to the Codified
Ordinances shall be understood and construed as including the Codified
Ordinances of Howell and any and all such amendments and supplements.



   (b)   All amendments and supplements enacted as a part Of the
Codified Ordinances shall be integrated therewith by following the form of
arrangement and plan set forth in the original Codified Ordinances as
follows: each Code shall be subdivided into titles and/or chapters, and each
chapter shall be subdivided into sections, which shall be numbered in
accordance with the decimal numbering system. The numbering of all sections,
except penalty sections, shall be consecutive within each chapter commencing
with the first section of Chapter 202, which shall be numbered 202.01, the
first "2" signifying Code 2, and the two figures "02" before the decimal
signifying the chapter within the Code, and the two figures "01" after the
decimal signifying the first section in Chapter 202 of the Code. Penalty
sections shall be designated "99" and shall be the last section of a chapter.



202.03  DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.



   In the construction of these Codified Ordinances, or any provision
thereof, the following rules and definitions shall control, except those
which are inconsistent with the manifest intent of Council as disclosed in a
particular provision, section or chapter:



   (1)   Adopting Ordinance. "Adopting Ordinance" means the ordinance
of the Municipality adopting the Codified Ordinances of Howell in conformity
with Section 6.7 of the City Charter and M.S.A. Section 5.2084(2).



   (2)   Authority. Whenever in the Codified Ordinances authority is
given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority may
be exercised and such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer,
by a deputy or subordinate, unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of
any such particular provision.



   (3)   Calendar-Computation of Time. The terms "month" and "year"
mean the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an
act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the
first and including the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday, in which
case it shall be excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday
shall be excluded.



   (4)   City Council. "City Council" or "Council" means the
legislative authority of the Municipality.



   (5)   Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and, " if
the sense so requires.



   (6)   County. "County" means the County of Livingston, Michigan.



   (7)   Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be
applied to the feminine and neuter genders.



   (8)   General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
words and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of the
language, provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed
according to such technical or special meaning.



   (9)   Joint Authority. Words giving authority to a board,
commission, authority or to three or more officers or employees or other
persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof, unless
otherwise specifically provided.



   (10)   Keeper and Proprietor. "Keeper" and "proprietor" mean
persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether
acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.



   (11)   Land and Real Estate. "Land" and "real estate" include rights
and easements of an incorporeal nature.



   (12)   Law. "Law" means all applicable laws of the United States of
America, the State of Michigan and the City of Howell.



   (13)   Manager. "Manager" means the City Manager of the Municipality.



   (14)   Municipality or City. "Municipality" or "City" means the City
of Howell, Michigan.



   (15)   Number. Words in the plural include the singular and words in
the singular include the plural number.



   (16)   Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required
or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person
having conscientious scruples about taking an oath. An affirmation shall have
the same force and effect as an oath.



   (17)   Ordinance. "Ordinance" means and includes any ordinance of
the Municipality, including any provision of these Codified Ordinances.



   (18)   Owner. "Owner," when applied to property, includes a part
owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or any part of such
property.



   (19)   Person. "Person" includes any individual, copartnership,
corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust and any other
group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such
group or unit.



   (20)   Premises. "Premises," when used as applicable to property,
extends to and includes land and buildings.



   (21)   Property. "Property" includes real and personal property and
any mixed and lesser estates or interests therein. "Personal property"
includes every kind of property except real property; "real property"
includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   (22)   Public Place. "Public place" means any place to or upon which
the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by
the City or any agency of the State or is a place to or upon which the public
resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or implied.



   (23)   Publish. "Publish" means to print in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality the entire document or a brief summary
thereof with a listing of places where copies have been filed and times when
they are available for inspection.



   (24)   Reasonable Time. In all cases where provision is made for an
act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance
of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (25)   Residence. "Residence" means an abode in which a person
permanently resides.



   (26)   Shall and May. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.



   (27)   Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between
the curb lines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines, which is intended
for the use of pedestrians.



   (28)   State. "State" means the State of Michigan.



   (29)   Street, Highway and Alley. "Street," "highway" and "alley"
mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right of way, or
owned in fee by the City, County or State, of every way or place, of whatever
nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" means any
such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a
property.



   (30)   Tenant and Occupant. "Tenant" and "occupant," as applied to
buildings or land, shall extend and be applied to any person holding a
written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or any part of, a
building or land, alone or with others.



   (31)   Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the
future.



   (32)   Time. Whenever any time established in the Codified
Ordinances for the taking of any action expires on a Sunday or a legal
holiday, such time shall not expire on such day but shall expire on the next
week day.



   (33)   Responsibility,. Whenever any act is prohibited by a
provision of these Codified Ordinances or by any rule or regulation adopted
thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing,
securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act.



202.04  SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   Each section and each part of each section of the Codified Ordinances
is hereby declared to be an independent section or part of a section and
notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby
declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any such section or
part of a section, or any provision thereof, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or
parts of sections and the application of such provision to any other person
or circumstance, other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not
be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent
that the Codified Ordinances would have been adopted independently of such
section or part of a section so held to be invalid.



202.05  SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Municipality,
and parts of the same, in conflict with any of the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances, are hereby repealed.



202.06  EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL.



   The repeal provided for in Section 202.05 shall not affect:



   (a)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before
the adoption of these Codified Ordinances;



   (b)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the
payment of money by or to the Municipality, or authorizing the issuance of
any bonds of the Municipality, or any evidence of the Municipality's
indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the Municipality;



   (c)   The administrative ordinances and resolutions of Council not
in conflict or inconsistent with any provision of these Codified Ordinances; 



   (d)   Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of Council on any person;



   (e)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing, naming, relocating
or vacating any street or other public way;



   (f)   Any ordinance or resolution or part thereof providing for the
establishment of positions, for salaries or compensation;



   (g)   Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any
judgment rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these Codified Ordinances;



   (h)   Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing taxes or
assessments;



   (i)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing or changing the
boundaries of the Municipality; or



   (j)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by Council after the
adoption of these Codified Ordinances.



202.98  FEES.



   All present and future fees and charges imposed by the City of Howell
shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Howell City Council.



(Ord. 663.  Passed 10-27-97.)



202.99  GENERAL CODE PENALTY; FINES FOR MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS;
EQUITABLE REMEDIES.



   (a)   Except in those cases where a violation of these Codified
Ordinances is specifically designated as a Municipal civil infraction, and
except in those cases where a different penalty is prescribed for a specific
violation of a provision of these Codified Ordinances, whoever violates any
provision of these Codified Ordinances is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the costs of
prosecution, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not to exceed
ninety days, or both, for each offense.



   (b)   The sanctions for a violation of these Codified Ordinances
designated as a Municipal civil infraction shall include all remedies
authorized by Act 12 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, including, but
not limited to, fines of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus all costs incurred by the City in
enforcing the Municipal civil infraction, including actual attorneys’ fees
and all other damages and equitable remedies as ordered by the Court and
authorized by Act 12 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended.  Civil fines
may be increased for repeat violations of these Codified Ordinances, and each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.  Specific fines for Municipal civil
infractions shall be as provided in subsection (c) hereof.



   (c)   The following schedule of fines for Municipal civil
infractions, payable at the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as provided
for in Chapter 208, for admissions of responsibility by persons served with
Municipal civil infraction citations and/or violation notices, is hereby
established as follows:



      (1)   Chapter 622      First
offense               $  50.00



         "Health, Safety   Any repeat
offense            250.00



         And Sanitation"



      (2)   Chapter 652      First
offense               $ 50.00



         "Nuisances"      Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (3)   Chapter 872      First
offense               $ 50.00



         "Street Vendor"   Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (4)   Chapter 1020      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Streets and      Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Excavations"



      (5)   Chapter 1022      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Sidewalks"      Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (6)   Chapter 1024      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Trees"      Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (7)   Chapter 1040      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Water"      Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (8)   Chapter 1042      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Sewers"      Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (9)   Chapter 1043      First
offense            $ 1,000.00



         "Industrial Waste   Any repeat
offense            1,000.00



         Water Pretreatment



         Regulations"



      (10)   Chapter 1044      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Water and       Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Sewerage Rates



         and Management"



      (11)   Chapter 1060      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Garbage and      Any repeat
offense         250.00



         Rubbish Collection



         And Disposal"



      (12)   Chapter 1062      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Parks and      Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Recreational



         Facilities"



      (13)   Chapter 1066      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Fire and Burglar   Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Alarm Systems"



      (14)   Chapter 1216      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Land Divisions"   Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (15)   Chapter 1240.01   First
offense               $ 50.00



         "Appendix A      Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Howell Zoning Code"



      (16)   Chapter 1410      First
offense            $50.00



         "State Construction   Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Code"



      (17)   Chapter 1450      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Fees for Permits,    Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Certificates and



         Inspections"



      (18)   Chapter 1460      First
offense            $50.00



         "Residential Rental   Any repeat
offense            250.00



         Properties"



      (19)   Chapter 1480       First
offense            $50.00



         "Property Maintenance"   Any repeat
offense         250.00



      (20)   Chapter 1614       First
offense            $500.00



         "Fireworks Code"   Any repeat
offense            500.00



      (21)   Chapter 1620      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Fire Lanes"      Any repeat
offense            250.00



      (22)   Chapter 1630      First
offense            $ 50.00



         "Life Safety Code"   Any repeat
offense            250.00



   (d)   A repeat offense is one in which the same or a similar
violation has been committed within one year of the first offense.



   (e)   Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance
continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or
sanctions as a separate offense.



   (f)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the City may
bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to
restrain, prevent or abate any violation of these Codified Ordinances or any
City ordinance. 



(Ord. 663.  Passed 10-27-97; Ord. 722. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 753.  Passed
1-12-04; Ord. 795. Passed 3-26-07; Ord. 879.  Passed 8-26-13; Ord. 918. 
Passed 10-8-18.)



CHAPTER 204
Official Standards



   EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 204. This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   State Seal - see Mich. Const. Art. 3, Sec. 3; M.C.L. Secs. 2.41 et seq.



   Fiscal year - see CHTR. Sec. 11.1



   Seal of municipal sewage disposal authority - see M.C.L. Sec. 124.284



   Seal of municipal water supply authority - see M.C.L. Sec. 124.284



   Weights and measures - see M.C.L. Secs. 290.601 et seq., 750.561 et seq.



CHAPTER 206
Wards and Boundaries



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 206. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Boundaries of City - see CHTR. Sec. 1.2



   Wards - see CHTR. Sec. 1.3



   Equal representation - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.3



   Incorporated city or village annexed to home rule city - see M.C.L.
Sec. 117.13



   Apportionment - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.27a



CHAPTER 208
Municipal Civil Infractions



208.01   Short title.



208.02   Definitions.



208.03   Designation of authorized City officials.



208.04   Municipal civil infraction action; commencement.



208.05   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service.



208.06   Municipal civil infraction citations; contents.



208.07   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.



208.08   Failure to appear; penalty.



208.09   Severability.



208.10   Savings.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Authority of Council re penalties - see CHTR. Sec. 6.3



   General Code penalty - see ADM. 202.99(a)



   Municipal civil infraction schedule of fines - see ADM. 202.99(c)



   Penalties for parking violations - see TRAF. 430.05



   Penalties for violations of Zoning Code - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240
(Zoning Code)



208.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Civil
Infraction Ordinance." 



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



208.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words
and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings as set forth herein,
unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:



   (a)   "Act" means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended.



   (b)   "Authorized City official" means a police officer or other
personnel of the City of Howell authorized by this chapter or any ordinance
to issue Municipal civil infraction citations or Municipal civil infraction
violation notices.



   (c)   "Bureau" means the City of Howell Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau as established in this chapter.



   (d)   "Municipal civil infraction" means a civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.



   (e)   "Municipal civil infraction citation" means a written
complaint or notice prepared by an authorized City official, directing a
person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a
Municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited.



   (f)   "Municipal civil infraction violation notice" means a written
notice prepared by an authorized City official, directing a person to appear
at the City of Howell Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the
fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil
fines adopted by the City, as authorized under Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of
the Act.



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



208.03  DESIGNATION OF AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The following personnel of the City of Howell have the authority to
issue Municipal civil infraction citations and Municipal civil infraction
violation notices pursuant to this chapter:



   (a)   Police Officers



   (b)   Fire Chief



   (c)   Building/Zoning Inspector



   (d)   Code Enforcement Officer



   (e)   Assistant City Manager



   (f)   Department of Public Service Director



   (g)   City Manager



   (h)   Deputy Chief of the Howell City Fire Department



   (i)   City of Howell Fire Inspector



   (j)   Department of Public Works Superintendent.



   (k)   Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent.



   (l)   Wastewater Treatment Plant Inspector.



(Ord. 669.  Passed 3-2-98; Ord. 754.  Passed 1-12-04.)



208.04  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION; COMMENCEMENT.



   A Municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized City official of:



   (a)   A Municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court; or



   (b)   A Municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the
alleged violator to appear at the City of Howell Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau.



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



208.05  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; ISSUANCE AND SERVICE.



   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized City officials as follows:



   (a)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be
within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.



   (b)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the
53rd District Court.



   (c)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in
a form approved by the State court administrator. The original citation shall
be retained by the City and issued to the alleged violator as provided by
Section 8705 of the Act.



   (d)   A citation for a Municipal civil infraction signed by an
authorized City official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately
above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties
of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information,
knowledge and belief."



   (e)   An authorized City official who witnesses a person commit a
Municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.



   (f)   An authorized City official may issue a citation to a person
if:



      (1)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable
cause to believe that the person is responsible for a Municipal civil
infraction; or



      (2)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who
allegedly witnessed the person commit a Municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for
an infraction and if the City attorney approves in writing the issuance of
the citation.



   (g)   Municipal civil infractions citations shall be served by an
authorized City official as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided by paragraph (g)(2) hereof, an
authorized City official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon
the alleged violator.



      (2)   If the Municipal civil infraction action involves the
use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but
may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by
posting the copy of the citation on the land or attaching the copy to the
building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by
first-class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the
owner's last known address.



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



208.06  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; CONTENTS.



   (a)   A Municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name
and address of the alleged violator, the Municipal civil infraction alleged
to have been violated, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in
court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the
appearance shall be made.



   (b)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that
he or she may do one of the following:



      (1)   Admit responsibility for the Municipal civil infraction
by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.



      (2)   Admit responsibility for the Municipal civil infraction
"with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in person
or by representation.



      (3)   Deny responsibility for the Municipal civil infraction
by doing either of the following:



         i.   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before
a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is
requested by the City.



         ii.   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a
judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



   (c)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of
the following:



      (1)   That if the alleged violator desires to admit
responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged
violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time for an appearance.



      (2)   That if the alleged violator desires to deny
responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by
mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing,
unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.



      (3)   That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a
formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the City.



      (4)   That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must
appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



      (5)   That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must
appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by
an attorney.



   (d)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a
misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the
alleged violator on the Municipal civil infraction.



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



208.07  MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (a)   Bureau Established. The City hereby establishes a Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau ("Bureau"), as authorized under Section 8396 of
the Act, to accept admissions of responsibility for Municipal civil
infractions in response to Municipal civil infraction violation notices
issued and served by authorized City officials, and to collect and retain
civil fines and costs as prescribed by this chapter or any other ordinance.



   (b)   Location; Supervision; Employees; Rules and Regulations. The
Bureau shall be located at the City of Howell Police Department and shall be
under the supervision and control of the City of Howell Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police, subject to the approval of City Council, shall adopt rules
and regulations for the operation of the Bureau.



   (c)   Disposition of Violations. The Bureau may dispose only of
Municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and
for which a Municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a
citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a
particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation
at the Bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the City
from issuing a Municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from
prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person
shall be required to dispose of a Municipal civil infraction violation at the
Bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate
jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at
the Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's
rights, privileges and protection afforded by law.



   (d)   Bureau Limited to Accepting Admissions of Responsibility. The
scope of the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for Municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the
offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event
shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of
any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation.



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



   (e)   Municipal Civil Infraction Violation Notices. Municipal civil
infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized City
officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided
for citations in Section 208.05 and subsection (g) hereof. In addition to any
other information required by this chapter or other ordinance, the notice of
violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear
at the Bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address
and telephone number of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is
open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the
consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the
required time. 



(Ord. 664.  Passed 12-22-97.)



   (f)   Appearance; Payment of Fines and Costs. An alleged violator
receiving a Municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the
Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for
appearance in the Municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance
may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.



   (g)   Procedure Where Admission of Responsibility Not Made or Fine
Not Paid. If an authorized City official issues and serves a municipal
ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made
and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for
the violation are not paid at the Bureau, a Municipal civil infraction
citation may be filed with the District Court and a copy of the citation may
be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged
violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not
need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as
provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn
complaint containing the allegations stated in the Municipal ordinance
violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond
to the citation.



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



208.08  FAILURE TO APPEAR; PENALTY.



   A person served with a Municipal civil infraction citation as provided
in Section 208.05(g) who fails to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Failure to appear will also result in the entry of a default
judgment on the Municipal civil infraction.



(Ord. 664.  Passed 12-22-97.)



208.09  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent portion of this chapter and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.  (Ord. 660.  Passed
9-29-97.)



208.10  SAVINGS.



   All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing,
acquired or incurred at the time this chapter takes effect are saved and may
be consummated according to the law in force when they are commenced.



(Ord. 660.  Passed 9-29-97.)



CHAPTER 209
Anti-Discrimination



209.01   Intent, purpose and construction.



209.02   Definitions.



209.03   Discriminatory housing practices.



209.04   Discriminatory public accommodation practices.



209.05   Discriminatory employment practices.



209.06   Other prohibited practices.



209.07   Nondiscrimination by City contractors.



209.08   Discriminatory effects.



209.09   Exceptions.



209.10   Information and investigation.



209.11   Conciliation agreements.



209.12   Injunctions.



209.13   Prosecution.



209.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCE



   Residential rental properties, see B. & H. Ch. 1460



209.01  INTENT, PURPOSE AND CONSTRUCTION.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   It is the intent of the City that no person be denied the
equal protection of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of
his or her civil rights or be discriminated against because of his or her
actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height,
weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual
orientation, or gender identity.



   (b)   The prohibitions against discrimination as provided for in
this chapter shall not be deemed preempted by Federal or State law, but are
intended to supplement State and Federal civil rights law prohibiting
discrimination in the areas of employment, public accommodations, and
housing. Provided, however, this chapter shall be construed and applied in a
manner consistent with First Amendment jurisprudence regarding the freedom of
speech and exercise of religion.



   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall require preferential treatment
of any person or group on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following words and phases have the
following meanings:



   (a)   "Affected person" means a person who has filed a complaint
pursuant to below Section 209.10(a) and who the City Manager, or his or her
designee, has entered into a Conciliation Agreement pursuant to below Section
209.11 as a result of the affected person's complaint.



   (b)   "Age" means chronological age.



   (c)   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Howell.



   (d)   "Contractor" means a person who by contract furnishes
services, materials or supplies. "Contractor" does not include persons who
are merely creditors or debtors of the City.



   (e)   "Discriminate" means to make a decision, offer to make a
decision or refrain from making a decision based in whole or in part on the
actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height,
weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual
orientation, or gender identity of another person.



      (1)   Discrimination based on sex includes sexual harassment,
which means unwelcome sexual advances, request for sexual favors, and other
verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature when:



         (A)   Submission to such conduct or communication is
made a term or condition, either explicitly or implicitly, to obtain
employment, public accommodations, or housing.



         (B)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct or
communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting
such individual's employment, public accommodations or housing.



         (C)   Such conduct or communication has the purpose or
effect of substantially interfering with individual's employment, public
accommodations or housing, or creating an intimidating hostile, or offensive
employment, public accommodations, or housing environment.



      (2)   Discrimination based on actual or perceived physical or
mental limitation includes discrimination because of the use by an individual
of adaptive devises or aids.



   (f)   "Employer" means any person employing one or more persons.



   (g)   "Employment agency" means a person who undertakes to procure
employees for an employer or procures opportunities for individuals to be
employed by an employer.



   (h)   "Family status" means the state of being in a family.



   (i)   "Family" includes either of the following:



      (1)   An individual who is pregnant; or



      (2)   Two or more individuals related by blood within three
degrees of consanguinity, marriage, adoption, in a foster care relationship
or legal custody relationship.



   (j)   "Gender identity" means a person's actual or perceived gender,
including a person's self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior, whether
or not that self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior is different from
that traditionally associated with the person's biological sex as assigned at
birth as being either female or male.



   (k)   "Housing facility" means any dwelling unit or facility used or
intended or designed to be used as the home, domicile or residence of one or
more persons, including, but not limited to, a house, apartment, rooming
house, housing cooperative, hotel, motel, tourist home, retirement home or
nursing home.



   (l)   "Labor organization" means an organization of any kind or
structure in which employees participate or are members and which exist for
the purpose, in whole or part, of dealing with employers concerning the terms
and conditions of employment of its participants or members, whether or not
such organization is subordinate to or affiliated with a national or
international labor organization.



   (m)   "Marital status" means the state of being married, never
married, divorced, or widowed.



   (n)   "Perceived" refers to the perception of the person who acts,
and not to the perception of the person for or against whom the action is
taken.



   (o)   "Person" includes an individual, association, partnership,
agency, organization, or corporation, public or private, including all
employees thereof as well as any natural person. The term, when applied to
partnerships, associations, and corporations, includes members and officers.



   (p)   "Physical or mental disability" means a determinable physical
or mental characteristic resulting from disease, injury, congenital condition
of birth, or functional disorder and is unrelated to one's ability to safely
perform the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for
hire or promotion; or unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and
maintain property; or unrelated to one's ability to utilize and benefit from
the goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of a place of
public accommodation. "Physical or mental disability" does not include any
condition caused by the current illegal use of a controlled substance or the
use of alcoholic liquor by an individual.



   (q)   "Place of public accommodation" means an educational,
governmental, health, entertainment, cultural, recreational, refreshment,
transportation, financial institution, business or facility of any kind,
whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations
are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public.



   (r)   "Religious organization" means an organization, church, group,
or body of communicants that is organized not for pecuniary profit that
regularly gathers for worship and religious purposed, and includes a
religious-based private school that is not organized for pecuniary profit.



   (s)   "Sexual orientation" means male or female homosexuality,
heterosexuality or bisexuality, whether by orientation or practice. Sexual
orientation does not include the physical or sexual attraction to a minor by
an adult.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.03  DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:



   (a)   No person shall discriminate in leasing, selling or otherwise
making available any housing facilities.



   (b)   No person shall discriminate in the terms, conditions,
maintenance or repair in providing any housing facility.



   (c)   No person shall refuse to lend money for the purchase or
repair of any real property or insure any real property solely because of the
location in the City of such real property.



   (d)   No person shall promote real estate transactions by
representing that changes are occurring or will occur in an area with respect
to race, religion or national origin.



   (e)   No person shall place a sign or other display on any real
property which indicates that the property is for sale or has been sold when
it is not for sale or has not recently been sold.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.04  DISCRIMINATORY PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION PRACTICES.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall
discriminate in making available full and equal access to all goods,
services, activities, privileges, and accommodations of any place of public
accommodation.



   (b)   Nothing in this chapter permits or requires access to any
place of public accommodation for the purpose or intent of engaging in
criminal conduct.



   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall require the construction or
provision of unisex, single-user restrooms, changing rooms, locker rooms or
shower facilities.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.05  DISCRIMINATORY EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:



   (a)   No employer shall discriminate in the employment,
compensation, work classifications, conditions or terms, promotion or
demotion, or termination of employment of any person.



   (b)   No labor organization shall discriminate in limiting
membership, conditions of membership, or termination of membership of any
person in any labor union or apprenticeship program.



   (c)   No employment agency shall discriminate in the procurement or
recruitment of any person for possible employment with an employer.



(Ord. 901.  Passe3d 6-27-16.)



209.06  OTHER PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   (a)   No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or
requirement, or publish, post or broadcast any advertisement, sign or notice
which discriminates or indicates discrimination in providing housing,
employment or public accommodations.



   (b)   No person shall discriminate in the publication or
distribution of advertising material, information or solicitation regarding
housing, employment or public accommodations.



   (c)   No agent, broker, labor organization, employment agency or any
other intermediary shall discriminate in making referrals, listings or
providing information with regard to housing, employment or public
accommodations. A report of the conviction of any such person for a violation
of this chapter shall be made to the applicable licensing or regulatory
agency for such person or business.



   (d)   No person shall coerce, threaten or retaliate against a person
for making a complaint or assisting in the investigation regarding a
violation or alleged violation of this chapter, nor require, request,
conspire with, assist or coerce another person to retaliate against a person
for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation.



   (e)   No person shall conspire with, assist, coerce or request
another person to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this chapter.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.07  NONDISCRIMINATION BY CITY CONTRACTORS.



   (a)   All contractors proposing to do business with the City of
Howell shall satisfy the nondiscrimination administrative policy adopted by
the City Manager in accordance with the



guidelines of this section. All contractors shall receive approval from the
City Manager prior to entering into a contract with the City, unless
specifically exempted by administrative policy.



   (b)   A contractor shall, as a condition of being deemed a
responsible bidder, at the time of its submission to the City in responding
to an invitation for bids or request for proposals, certify in writing that
it is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (c)   All City contracts shall provide further that breach of the
obligations not to discriminate shall be a material breach of the contract.



   (d)   In addition, the contractor shall be liable for any costs or
expenses incurred by the City in obtaining from other sources the work and
services to be rendered or performed or the goods or properties to be
furnished or delivered to the City under the contract.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.08  DISCRIMINATORY EFFECTS.



   No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement
which has the effect of creating unequal opportunities according to actual or
perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age height, weight,
family status, sexual orientation, marital status, physical or mental
disability, or gender identity for a person to obtain housing, employment or
public accommodation, except for a bona fide business necessity. Such a bona
fide business necessity does not arise due to a mere inconvenience or because
of suspected or actual objection to such a person by neighbors, customers, or
other persons but shall require a demonstration that the policy or
requirement is reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the person's
business.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.09  EXCEPTIONS.



   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, the following
practices shall not be violations of this chapter:



   (a)   For a religious organization to restrict the occupancy of any
of its housing facilities or accommodations which are operated as a direct
part of religious activities to persons of the denomination involved or to
restrict employment opportunities for officers, religious instructors and
clergy to persons of that denomination. It is also permissible for a
religious organization to restrict employment opportunities, educational
facilities, housing facilities, and homeless shelters or dormitories that are
operated as a direct part of its religious activities to persons who are
members of or who conform to the moral tenets of that religious organization.



   (b)   For the owner of an owner-occupied, one-family or two-family
dwelling, or a housing facility or public accommodation facility,
respectively, devoted entirely to the housing and accommodation of
individuals of one sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex.



   (c)   To limit occupancy in a housing project or to provide public
accommodations or employment privileges or assistance to persons of low
income, persons over 55 years of age or disabled persons.



   (d)   To engage in a bona fide effort to establish an affirmative
action program to improve opportunities in employment for minorities and
women consistent with applicable State and Federal law.



   (e)   To discriminate based on a person's age when such
discrimination is required by State, Federal or local law.



   (f)   To refuse to enter into a contract with an unemancipated minor.



   (g)   To refuse to admit to a place of public accommodation serving
alcoholic beverages a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages.



   (h)   To refuse to admit to a place less than 18 years of age to a
business providing entertainment or selling literature which the operator of
said business deems unsuitable for minors.



   (i)   For an educational institution to limit the use of its
facilities to those affiliated with such institution.



   (j)   To provide discounts on products or service to students, or on
the basis of age.



   (k)   To discriminate in any arrangement for the shared ownership,
lease or residency of a dwelling unit.



   (l)   For a governmental institution to restrict any of its
facilities or to restrict employment opportunities based on duly adopted
institutional policies that conform to Federal and State laws and regulations.



   (m)   To restrict participation in an instructional program,
athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age, sex, height, or
weight.



   (n)   To restrict membership in a private club that is not open to
the public except to the extent that private clubs which permit members to
invite guest on the premises are not exempted as it concerns a member's guest.



   (o)   To the employment of an individual by one's family.



   (p)   To the use of marital status or family status limitations in a
health or pension plan if such limitations conform to Federal and State laws
and regulations.



   (q)   To the rental of housing facilities in a building which
contains dwelling units for not more than two families living independently
of each other if the owner of the building or a member of the owner's family
resides in one of the dwelling units, or to the rental of a room or rooms in
a single-family dwelling by an individual if the lessor or a member of the
lessor's family resides in the dwelling.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.10  INFORMATION AND INVESTIGATION.



   (a)   Any person claiming a violation of this chapter shall file a
signed, written complaint with the City Manager, or his or her designee,
setting forth the details, including the names, dates, witnesses and other
factual matters relevant to the claim, within 180 days of the incident
forming the basis of the complaint.



   (b)   No person shall provide false information to any authorized
employee investigating a complaint regarding a violation of this chapter.



   (c)   In the course of the investigation, the City Manager, or his
or her designee, may request a person to produce books, papers, records or
other documents which may be relevant to a violation or alleged violation of
this chapter. If said person does not comply with such request, the City
Attorney may apply to the Livingston County Court for an order requiring
production of said materials.



   (d)   Within 30 days of written complaint being filed, the City
Manager, or his or her designee, shall undertake an investigation of any
complaint filed, the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall undertake an
investigation of any complaint filed in accordance with this section alleging
a violation of this chapter not currently recognized or proscribed by
Michigan or Federal anti-discrimination statutes, and cause all other
complaints to be referred to an appropriate state or federal agency for
review. After the completion of an investigation, the City Manager, or his or
her designee, shall give written notice of the results of the investigation
to the person who filed the complaint and the person accused of the
violation. If the investigation establishes that a violation of this chapter
occurred, the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall attempt to resolve
the matter by conciliation and persuasion or refer the complaint to the City
Attorney for prosecution in a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.11  CONCILIATION AGREEMENTS.



   In cases involving alleged violations of this chapter, the City
Manager, or his or her designee, may enter into agreements whereby persons
agree to methods of terminating discrimination or to reverse the effects of
past discrimination. Violations of such agreements shall be violations of
this chapter.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.12  INJUNCTIONS.



   The City Attorney may commence a civil action to obtain injunctive
relief to prevent discrimination prohibited by this chapter, to reverse the
effects of such discrimination, or to enforce a conciliation agreement.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.13  PROSECUTION.



   (a)   Prosecution for violation of this chapter may only be
initiated by complaint of the affected person due to the alleged violation of
a conciliation agreement made pursuant to above Section 209.11, or by the
City Manager, or his or her designee, on the basis of an investigation
undertaken by the City Manager, or his or her designee.



   (b)   Violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted by the City
Attorney as a municipal civil infraction pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 202.99 of the Howell City Code.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



209.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   A violation of any provision of this chapter is a municipal
civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), plus all costs of the action. The court may issue and enforce any
judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce this chapter. This may 
include reinstatement, payment of lost wages, hiring and promotion, sale,
exchange, lease or sublease, of real property, admission to a place of public
accommodation, and other relief deemed appropriate.



   (b)   Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate and new violation.



   (c)   A violation proved to exist on a particular day shall be
presumed to exist on each subsequent day unless it is proved that the
violation no longer exists.



   (d)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit
in any way the remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the City
or any person for the prevention or correction of discrimination.



(Ord. 901.  Passed 6-27-16.)



TITLE FOUR - Legislation



CHAPTER 210
Council



210.01   Rules of Council.



210.02   Audio tape of Council meetings.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Council - see CHTR. Ch. 5



   Legislative body in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.3



   Mayors in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.3



   Administration and enforcement of Subdivision Regulations - see P. & Z.
1222.01, 1222.03



210.01  RULES OF COUNCIL.



   Rule 1.  The Council shall provide by annual resolution for the time
and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular
meetings in each month. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting
of Council falls on a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the
same time and place on the next business day which is not a holiday.



   Rule II.  Special meetings of Council may be called by the City Clerk
on the written request of the Mayor or any two members of Council. Public
notice stating the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting shall be
posted at least eighteen hours before the meeting.  Such public notice shall
contain the name, address and telephone number of the public body to which
the notice applies and shall be posted at City Hall and any other location
considered appropriate by the City. Notice of such meeting shall be
personally served on each member of Council or left at his or her usual place
of residence at least six hours prior to the meeting by the Clerk or someone
designated by him or her.  A Council member may waive the right to receive
such six-hour personal notice either by filing a written waiver with the
Clerk or by attending such special meeting.



   Rule III.  Four members of Council shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business at all meetings of Council, but, in the absence of a
quorum, two members or more may adjourn a regular or special meeting to a
later date.



   Council may, by a vote of not less than two of its members, compel the
attendance of its members and other officers of the City at its regular and
special meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein. A member of Council or
an officer of the City who refuses to attend such meetings or conduct himself
or herself in an orderly manner thereat shall be deemed guilty of misconduct
in office.



   Rule IV.  Members of the public shall be permitted to address a
meeting of Council upon recognition by the Mayor.  Each person shall begin
by stating their name and address and shall be permitted to speak once on
each agenda item for three minutes.  The Mayor may allow additional time at
his or her discretion.



   (a)   PUBLIC HEARING COMMENT: Where the Agenda provides Public
Hearing comment, each person addressing the Council shall be limited to five
minutes regarding the specific agenda Public Hearing item.



   (b)   CALL TO THE PUBLIC: Call to the Public, as specified under
Rule XIII Order of Business, shall be restricted to comment on Non-Agenda
items with a three minute time restriction.



   (c)   ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL:  Members of the public desiring to
address the Council by oral communication shall first secure the permission
of the Mayor. Preference will be given to those persons who have notified the
City Clerk in advance of a regular Council Meeting of their desire to speak
in order that their name may be placed on the agenda.  They will be
recognized by the Mayor without further action.



   (d)   MANNER OF ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL:  Each person addressing the
Council shall approach the lectern, and may give their name in an audible
tone of voice for the record. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council
as a body, and not to any member. No person, other than members of the
Council and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any
discussion, either directly or through the members of the Council. No
questions shall be asked the Council Members, except through the Mayor.



   (e)   PERSONAL AND SLANDEROUS REMARKS: Any person making personal,
impertinent or slanderous remarks, or who shall become boisterous, while
addressing the Council, may be requested to leave the lectern.



   (f)   WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS: Interested parties, or their
authorized representatives, may address the Council by written communication
in regard to any matter concerning the City's business or over which the
Council has control at anytime by direct mail or by addressing the City
Clerk, and copies will be distributed to Council Members.



   The Police Chief or, in their absence, the assistant in command of the
Police Department, shall serve as the Sergeant-at-Arms of Council in the
enforcement of this section.



   Rule V. Council shall keep a journal in the English language of all its
proceedings, which shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk. A citizen
or taxpayer of the City shall have access to the minutes and records of all
regular and special meetings of Council at all reasonable times.



   Rule VI.  Every Council member present when a question is stated or a
vote is called for on a resolution, motion, question or ordinance shall vote
"yes" or "no".  A roll call shall be taken any time the vote is not
unanimous.



   Roll call votes shall be conducted by the City Clerk, or designee, in
such sequence so as to rotate the requirement of voting first to each Council
member clockwise around the Council table, provided that the Mayor always
votes last. All votes shall be recorded either as unanimous or as stating how
each Council member voted if there was a call of the roll.



   A Council member having a pecuniary interest in the outcome of the vote
shall abstain from voting and state this as their reason.



   Rule VII. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of Council and
maintain order. In his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside. The
Mayor may speak on all points and shall decide questions of order, subject to
an appeal. He or she shall be entitled to vote on all questions. He or she
shall put all questions for a vote of Council. If both the Mayor and the
Mayor Pro Tem are absent, the remaining Council members may, by majority
vote, elect one of their members to preside at the meeting.



   Rule VIII. The City Clerk, or someone designated by the City Manager,
shall attend all meetings of Council and cause to be kept correct minutes of
the proceedings. The Clerk shall cause such minutes to be typed, with copies
thereof to be placed in the files of the Mayor and the Council members. Upon
approval of the minutes by Council, one copy, certified by the Mayor and the
Clerk, shall be kept by the Clerk as and for the official record of the
proceedings of Council.



   Rule IX. The City Clerk shall publish and/or post all ordinances or
notices in accordance with the requirements of the statutes of the State and
the City Charter and as directed by Council. The Clerk is hereby designated
as the person to post notices of all meetings of Council.



   Rule X. All ordinances or resolutions shall be filed in the City
Clerk's office by 12:00 noon on Wednesday of the week before the meeting at
which they are to be considered by Council. The Clerk shall prepare a list
for each Council member, setting forth the order of business for the meeting
and the matters to come before the meeting, together with a copy of each
resolution or ordinance to be considered by Council at such meeting, which
list shall be available and delivered to each Council member not later than
midnight on the Thursday prior to the regular meeting each week.



   Rule XI. All ordinances shall be in writing and shall be introduced in
the following manner:



   (a)   Any member of Council may, at the time provided for the
introduction of ordinances in the regular order of business, or at any time
agreed to by the rest of Council, request the City Clerk to read the title of
the proposed ordinance. After the Clerk has read the title of the proposed
ordinance, any member may introduce the ordinance. An ordinance may be
referred to by reference to the entire title of the ordinance or by a short
title.



   (b)   No ordinance shall be adopted unless it has been introduced
within sixty days of the date it is to be adopted. Unless otherwise provided
by law, an ordinance shall be adopted when approved by a majority vote of
Council after it has been moved and seconded that the ordinance, in its
entirety and as amended, be adopted, and it may be referred to in such motion
by its short title. However, an ordinance may not be adopted during the same
meeting during which it was introduced unless it was declared an emergency
ordinance.



   (c)   All resolutions considered by Council shall be in writing and
numbered sequentially each year, and the resolution or a summary thereof
shall be read before a vote is taken. Resolutions, motions and questions
shall require a second before a vote is taken and shall require an
affirmative vote of a majority of Council for adoption or passage, unless
otherwise provided by law.



   Rule XII.  The Mayor or a Council member may request that an ordinance
or resolution be prepared by the City Attorney and that it be placed on the
agenda for consideration by Council in accordance with this section.  Upon
receipt of such a request, the Attorney shall prepare such ordinance or
resolution and file it with the City Clerk to be placed on the agenda for the
meeting at which it is to be considered in accordance with such request.



   Rule XIII.  The order of business at meetings of Council shall be as
follows, except when otherwise agreed to by the Council members:



   (a)    Call to order and invocation;



   (b)    Approval of minutes;



   (c)    Call to the public;



   (d)    Introduction of new ordinances;



   (e)    Unfinished business;



   (f)    New Business;



   (g)    Resolutions;



   (h)    Consideration/passage of previously introduced ordinances;



   (i)    Reports from the City Manager and/or department heads;



   (j)    Approval of bills and payroll; and (k) Adjournment.



   Rule XIV. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be
entertained except the following, and they shall have precedence in the order
in which they are set forth herein:



   (a)    To adjourn;



   (b)    To lay on the table;



   (c)    For the previous question;



   (d)    To postpone to a certain day;



   (e)    To refer;



   (f)    To amend; and



   (g)    To postpone indefinitely.



   Rule XV.  Insofar as Robert's Rules of Order are not inconsistent with
the statutes of the State, the City Charter or this section, Robert's Rules
of Order shall govern the proceedings of Council when applicable. The
official edition of such Robert's Rules of Order shall be maintained at the
office of the City Clerk.



   Rule XVI.  This section may be amended from time to time by a majority
vote of Council.



   Rule XVII.  This section or any part thereof may be temporarily
suspended only after an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of
Council.



   Rule XVIII.  At the first meeting of each new Council following each
regular biennial City election, the City Clerk shall call the meeting to
order and shall preside. The Clerk shall, after calling the meeting to order,
proceed to administer the oath of office to the Mayor and to all newly
elected Council members, who shall thereupon assume their duties and places
as Council members. Council shall thereupon select one of its members to
serve as Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the
Mayor when, on account of absence from the City, disability or otherwise, the
Mayor is temporarily unable to perform the duties of his or her office, and,
in case of vacancy in the office of Mayor, until such vacancy is filled by
Council. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, Council shall
appoint from its membership to fill such vacancy and, in a time of emergency,
members of Council may act as Mayor Pro Tem in the order of the number of
votes received by them at their election, until a Mayor Pro Tem is so
appointed.



   Rule XIX.  Whenever a board, committee, authority, council, agency or
organization requests or recommends that Council take action with respect to
a matter, whether it be by motion, resolution or ordinance, such request
shall be in writing and shall include satisfactory evidence showing that such
request or recommendation has been approved by such board, committee,
authority, council or the governing board of such agency or organization.



(Res. 07-06.  Passed 3-26-07.)



210.02  AUDIO TAPE OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   Council meetings shall be recorded by audio tape as follows:



   (a)   All Council meetings shall be taped by audio tape over the
current public address system.



   (b)   The audio tape shall be used, where necessary, to compile the
written minutes of Council.



   (c)   Copies of the audio tape will be available to members of the
general public, at cost, upon request.



   (d)   The audio taped proceedings of all Council meetings shall not
be used in lieu of, nor in substitution for, the written minutes of Council.



   (e)   The audio tapes shall be kept by the City and may be destroyed
no sooner than ninety days after approval of the written minutes.



(Res. 95-3.  Passed 2-6-95; Res. 07-06.  Passed 3-26-07.)



CHAPTER 212
Mayor



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 212. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Duties of Mayor - see M.C.L. Sec. 5.4



   Mayor Pro Tem - see M.C.L. Sec. 5.5



   Mayors in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.3



   Powers and duties re civil defense - see ADM. 246.03



CHAPTER 214
Ordinances and Resolutions



214.01   Numbering and indexing of resolutions.



214.02   Resolutions establishing fees, charges, fines or rates.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   General Municipal powers - see CHTR. Ch. 3



   City legislation - see CHTR. Ch. 6



   Ordinances in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.3, 117.5b



   Enforcement - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.4i



   Enactment - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.4j



   Actions to recover fines and penalties - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.29



   Codified Ordinances - see ADM. Ch. 202



214.01  NUMBERING AND INDEXING OF RESOLUTIONS.



   (a)   All resolutions henceforth enacted by Council shall be
numbered, starting with this one, such that the first two digits of the
number shall be the last two digits of the calendar year in which the
resolution is enacted, followed by a hyphen, followed by consecutive numbers
starting each year again with the number one.



   (b)   The City Clerk shall maintain an index in numerical order of
all such resolutions from and after November 1, 1982, consisting of the
resolution number, the date on which it was enacted, and a brief description
of the contents of such resolution.



(Res. 82-1. Passed 11-1-82.)



214.02  RESOLUTIONS ESTABLISHING FEES, CHARGES, FINES OR RATES.



   All resolutions henceforth enacted by Council whereby fees, charges,
fines or rates are established for services rendered or for material or goods
sold by the City, shall be introduced in written or printed form. Except in
the case of resolutions establishing fees, charges, fines or rates, which are
declared to be emergency resolutions, no such resolution shall be finally
passed by Council at the same meeting during which it is introduced.



(Ord. 450. Passed 10-1-84.)



TITLE SIX - Administration



CHAPTER 220 
City Manager



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 220. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Manager - see CHTR. Sec. 7.1



   Changing salary or emoluments during term of office see M.C.L. Sec.
117.5



   Powers and duties re civil defense - see ADM. 246.04



CHAPTER 222
City Clerk



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 222. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Clerk - see CHTR. Sec. 7.2



   Deputy Clerk - see CHTR. Sec. 7.5



   Filing charters or amendments thereto - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.24



   Filing of initiative petitions - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.25



   Apportionment of wards, copy of apportionment plan - see M.C.L. Sec.
117. 27a



CHAPTER 224
City Attorney



224.01   Conflicts of interest.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Attorney - see CHTR. Sec. 7.3



   Legal advisor - see M.C.L. Sec. 87.20



   Membership in Board of Election Commissioners - see M.C.L. Sec. 168.25



   Duties re animals at large - see M.C.L. Secs. 433.53, 433.62



   Service of process - see M.C.L. Sec. 600.1925



224.01  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   (a)   Council desires to arrange for the administrative handling of
minor conflicts of interest between the City Attorney's office and private
clients when such conflicts of interest arise from time to time out of the
issuance of citations alleging traffic and other ordinance violations to be
tried in the District Court.



   (b)   The Police Department shall, whenever possible under State
law, reissue the citation alleging the same violation under State statute so
that the matter which would otherwise be a conflict of interest for the City
Attorney's office can be prosecuted by the County Prosecuting Attorney.



   (c)   When there is no comparable State statute for the violation of
these Codified Ordinances alleged in the citation, the City Manager is hereby
authorized to assign the prosecution of that case to outside counsel, being a
lawyer or law firm located within the County, giving preference to a lawyer
or law firm having experience in the prosecution of municipal ordinance
violations, provided that this delegation of authority to the City Manager
shall apply only to traffic and other ordinance violations triable in the
Fifty-Third District Court.



(Res. 87-31. Passed 12-21-87.)



CHAPTER 226
City Treasurer



226.01   Public Employee Health Care Fund.



226.02   ACH and electronic transactions policy.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Treasurer - see CHTR. Sec. 7.4



   Deputy Treasurer - see CHTR. Sec. 7.5



   Justices of the Peace to turn moneys collected over to City Treasurer -
see M.C.L. Sec. 117.31



   Deposit of public funds - see M.C.L. Secs. 129.11 et seq.



   Collection of municipal income taxes - see M.C.L. Sec. 141.671



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



226.01  PUBLIC EMPLOYEE HEALTH CARE FUND.



   (a)   There is hereby established in and for the City a Public
Employee Health Care Fund.



   (b)   The City Clerk/Treasurer, the City Manager and the Deputy
Clerk shall be the Fund’s investment fiduciary.



   (c)   Withdrawals from the Fund shall be restricted solely to the
payment of health care benefits on behalf of qualified persons and the
payment of the expenses of administration of the Fund.



   (d)   Retirees of the City who are eligible for health care benefits
paid for by the City under the terms of the Personnel Policies Manual or
collective bargaining agreements are hereby designated as qualified persons
for purposes of payment of health care benefits from the Fund.



   (e)   The Fund will be established on a non-actuarial basis.



   (f)   The investment fiduciary shall invest the assets of the Fund
in accordance with the City’s investment policy and/or Section 13 of the
Public Employee Retirement System Investment Act, 1965 PA 314, M.C.L.A.
38.1133. 



(Res. 00-44.  Passed 11-20-00.)



226.02  ACH AND ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS POLICY.



   The following policy shall govern the use of electronic transactions
and ACH arrangements for the City of Howell:



      (a)   Authority to Enter into ACH Agreements and Electronic
Transfer of Public Funds.



         (1)   The Treasurer or ETO may enter into an ACH
agreement as provided by Act 738 of the Public Acts of 2002, effective
December 30, 2002. The City of Howell has adopted Resolution 03-26
authorizing electronic transactions and approving this policy. Applicable
definitions in the Act shall apply.



         (2)   An ACH arrangement under Act 738 of the Public
Acts of 2002 is not subject to the Revised Municipal Finance Act, Act 334 of
the Public Acts of 2001, M.C.L.A. Sections 141.2101 to 141.2821, or to
provisions of law or charter concerning the issuance of debt by the City.



      (b)   Responsibility for ACH Agreements. The Treasurer or ETO
shall be responsible for all ACH agreements, including payment approval,
accounting, reporting and generally overseeing compliance with the ACH
policy. The Treasurer or ETO shall submit to the City of Howell documentation
detailing the goods or services purchased, the cost of goods or services, the
date of the payment and the department levels serviced by payment. This
report can be contained in the electronic general ledger software system or
in a separate report to the governing body.



      (c)   Internal Accounting Controls to Monitor Use of ACH
Transactions.



         (1)   The Treasurer or ETO shall be responsible for the
establishment of ACH agreements. The Treasurer or ETO shall notify the person
responsible for approval and payment of those accounts to be paid by ACH or
electronic transfers.



         (2)   Upon receipt of an invoice for payment for
accounts paid by ACH, the person responsible for approval and payments all
approve payment and notify the Treasurer or ETO of the date of debt to the
City accounts. Accounts payable by this method may include utility and
recurring lease payments. These payments shall be included on the report of
payments to the City of Howell. All other invoices approved by the person
responsible for approval and payment and payable by ACH may be paid in that
matter if deemed in the best interest of the City of Howell to avoid a late
fee.



         (3)   For payment of State and Federal payroll taxes,
the Treasurer or ETO shall initiate payment to the proper authority upon
receipt of the information from the payroll department and established EFTPS
and state program.



         (4)   For deposits from state, county and/or federal
authorities, and from third-party payment processors, e.g. banks/vendors, the
Treasurer or ETO shall obtain the amount of the deposit and send an advice to
the person responsible for accounting records.



         (5)   All invoices shall be held by the person charged
with keeping the records along with copies of payment advices.



(Res. 03-26.  Passed 12-1-03.)



CHAPTER 228
City Assessor



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 228.  This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City assessor - see CHTR. Sec. 7.6



   Tax Assessors in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.3



   Crimes and offenses - see M.C.L. Secs. 211.116, 211.150



   Perjury - see M.C.L. Sec. 211.118



   Special assessments - see B.R. & T. Ch. 892



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



CHAPTER 230
Purchasing Agent



230.01   Establishment of office; appointment.



230.02   General duties.



230.03   Purchases not made through Agent prohibited.



230.04   Specific duties.



230.05   Requisitions.



230.06   Completion of purchase contingent on sufficient balance.



230.07   Competitive bidding.



230.08   Records of purchases.



230.09   Cooperative purchase plans.



230.10   Policy re recycled products.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   General finance; budget procedure - see CHTR. Ch. 11



   Borrowing power - see CHTR. Ch. 13



   Contracts - see CHTR. Sec. 15.3



   Franchises - see CHTR. Sec. 15.5



230.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby established the office of Purchasing Agent, under the
direction and control of the City Manager. The Manager shall designate
himself or herself or another officer of the City not affiliated with the
City Treasurer's office to act as the Purchasing Agent. The duties of the
Purchasing Agent are as set forth in this chapter.



230.02  GENERAL DUTIES.



   The Purchasing Agent shall purchase or contract for all supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services needed by all departments,
boards, commissions and other agencies which derive their funds wholly or in
part from City funds and which are referred to as using agencies in this
chapter.



(Ord. 166. Passed 1-28-57.)



230.03  PURCHASES NOT MADE THROUGH AGENT PROHIBITED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no City officer or using
agency shall order the purchase of supplies or make a contract within the
purview of this chapter other than through the Purchasing Agent. No purchase
order or contract made contrary to this section shall be approved by City
officials, and the City shall not be bound thereby.



(Ord. 166. Passed 1-28-57.)



230.04  SPECIFIC DUTIES.



   In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in Section 230.02 and
in addition to any other powers conferred by this chapter, the Purchasing
Agent shall:



   (a)   Act to procure for the City the highest quality in supplies
and contractual services at the least expense to the City;



   (b)   Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on
all purchases and sales;



   (c)   Be responsible for the sale of City-owned personal property;



   (d)   Establish and amend, when necessary, all rules and regulations
authorized by this chapter and any other rules and regulations necessary to
its administration and enforcement;



   (e)   Prescribe and maintain such forms as he or she finds
reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this chapter;



   (f)   Exploit the possibilities of buying in sufficient substantial
quantities to take full advantage of available discounts;



   (g)   Act to procure for the City all tax exemptions to which it is
entitled;



   (h)   Have the authority to declare vendors, who default on their
quotations, irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any
business from the City for a stated period of time; and



   (i)   Prepare standard and written specifications for supplies used
by the various branches of the City government.



(Ord. 166. Passed 1-28-57.)



230.05  REQUISITIONS.



   Every using agency, either by or with the authorization of the head of
the department under which it operates, shall file with the Purchasing Agent
detailed requisitions of its requirements in supplies and contractual
services in such manner, at such times and for such future periods as the
Agent prescribes. The Agent shall examine each requisition and may revise it
as to quantity, quality or estimated cost.



(Ord. 166. Passed 1-28-57.)



230.06  COMPLETION OF PURCHASE CONTINGENT ON SUFFICIENT BALANCE.



   Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Agent shall not issue any
order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the City Clerk
has certified, after pre-audit, that there is to the credit of the using
agency concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess
of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order.



(Ord. 166. Passed 1-28-57.)



230.07  COMPETITIVE BIDDING.



   (a)   All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual
services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and
unusable, shall, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter,
be based, wherever possible, on competitive bids. If the amount of any
proposed expenditure or sale is estimated to exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000), the Purchasing Agent shall, unless otherwise approved by Council,
solicit sealed bids, and, when deemed necessary by the Agent, such bids shall
be accompanied by surety in the form of a check, cash or bond in such amount
as prescribed in the notice inviting bids.  All bids shall be submitted
sealed and shall be opened at the time and place stated in the notice. A
tabulation of the bids shall be submitted to Council, and no purchase order
shall be written until the tabulation has been approved by Council.  The
Agent may reject any or all bids when the public interest will be served
thereby.



   (b)   The requirement for sealed bids as provided in subsection (a)
hereof shall not apply for professional services, emergency repairs or
services, a continuation of services and transactions between governmental
units, unless Council deems the same to be necessary. 



(Ord. 655.  Passed 9-15-97; Ord. 725.  Passed 4-22-02.)



230.08  RECORDS OF PURCHASES.



   The Purchasing Agent shall keep adequate records of all purchase
transactions, and such records shall be open to public inspection.



(Ord. 166. Passed 1-28-57.)



230.09  COOPERATIVE PURCHASE PLANS.



   The Purchasing Agent may join with other units of government in
cooperative purchase plans when the best interests of the City will be served
thereby.



(Ord. 166.  Passed 1-28-57.)



230.10  COOPERATIVE PURCHASE PLANS.



   (a)   It shall be the policy of the City to purchase and use
recycled products whenever possible to the extent that such use does not
negatively impact health, safety or operational efficiency.



   (b)   All procurement procedures and specifications shall clearly
indicate a preference for recycled products.



   (c)   Recycled products will be purchased when quality and
performance are not compromised and the cost differential between such
products and products made with raw materials does not exceed ten percent,
with a maximum difference of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per contract.



   (d)   All purchases in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) will
require City Council approval.  In all cases requiring Council approval,
Council shall reserve the right to make the purchase that Council judges to
be in the best interests of the City.



   (e)   In evaluating recycled products for purchase, preference shall
be given to products meeting recommended minimum content amounts as specified
from time to time by the State of Michigan and/or the Federal Government.  A
copy of the current EPA minimum content standards for paper products is
attached to original Resolution 92-2, passed February 24, 1992, as Exhibit
A.  Preference shall also be given to those products having the highest
percentage of post-consumer recovered material.  Post-consumer recovered
material is defined as a finished material which would normally be disposed
of as a solid waste, having completed its life goal as a consumer item.
Examples of post-consumer recovered materials include, but are not limited
to, used newspaper, office paper, yard waste, plastic bottles, oil, asphalt,
concrete and tires.



   (f)   The City will cooperate with Livingston County and other
governmental agencies and non-profit groups in the development of programs
and procedures which will further this policy.



(Res. 92-2.  Passed 2-24-92; Ord. 725.  Passed 4-22-02.)



CHAPTER 232
Department of Public Safety



232.01   Establishment, supervision and responsibilities.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Building Department - see ADM. Ch. 234



   Police Department - see ADM. Ch. 236



   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 238



   Department of Civil Defense - see ADM. 246.02



232.01  ESTABLISHMENT, SUPERVISION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   Pursuant to Section 4.2 of the City Charter, there is hereby
established in and for the City a Department of Public Safety. The Department
shall be in the immediate charge of a Director of Public Safety who shall be
responsible directly to the City Manager. The Director shall be responsible
for the coordination and general supervision of the work of the Police
Department, the Fire Department, the Building Department and the Department
of Civil Defense. (Res. Unno. Passed 11-19-56.)



CHAPTER 234 Building Department



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 234. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Building code in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.3



   Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds - see M.C.L.
Sec. 117.4j



   Enforcement of Zoning Code - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Building permits and certificates of occupancy - see P. & Z. Chapter
1240 (Zoning Code)



   Enforcement of State Construction Code - see B. & H. 1410.05



   Authority of Building Inspector re flood hazards - see B. & H. 1440.02
et seq.



   Building Authority - see ADM. Ch. 283



CHAPTER 236
Police Department



236.01   Reserve Police Force.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Police Department - see CHTR. Sec. 7.7



   Enforcement of laws - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.4i



   Arrests - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.34



   Jurisdiction outside City limits - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.34



   Assistance of Fire Department - see ADM. 238.05



   False police reports - see GEN. OFF. 662.01(b)(13)



   Cost recovery for responses to emergencies - see TRAF Ch. 450



236.01  RESERVE POLICE FORCE.



   (a)   There is hereby established a Reserve Police Force for the
City for the purposes of assisting the regular Police Department, training
for civil defense and being available to serve during any emergency period
which may arise in the City.



   (b)   The members of the Reserve Police Force shall be designated by
the City Manager, and persons applying for such membership shall be
recommended by the Chief of Police to the Manager. All members shall be at
least twenty-one years of age, shall be residents of the County and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Manager.



   (c)   Members shall serve without compensation, except for special
functions as designated by the Chief. Their functioning shall be under the
management, supervision and control of the City Manager, but they shall be
under the immediate direction of the Chief.



   (d)   While on duty, members of the Reserve Police Force shall have
the same duties and authority as members of the Police Department under the
ordinances of the City and the statutes of the State, except for any contrary
ruling which may be made by the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training
Council.



(Ord. 384. Passed 8-27-79.)



CHAPTER 238
Fire Department



238.01   Composition; qualifications of Chief.



238.02   Duties of Chief.



238.03   Appointment, qualifications and discharge of members;
compensation.



238.04   Apparatus and equipment.



238.05   Enforcement; police and other peace officers to assist Department.



238.06   Social officers.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fire Department - see CHTR. Sec. 7.8



   Firemen's Retirement System - see M.C.L. Secs. 38.551 et seq.



   Borrowing money for fire protection - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.4a



   Fire stations - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.4e



   Right of way of Fire Department vehicles - see TRAF. 440. 04



   False fire alarms - see GEN. OFF. 662.01(b)(12)



   Cost recovery for responses to emergencies - see TRAF. Ch. 450



238.01  COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS OF CHIEF.



   (a)   The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, an
Assistant Fire Chief, a Fire Warden and such other officers and men as the
Chief and Council may deem necessary for the effective operation of the
Department. The Chief may also be the Fire Warden.



   (b)   The Chief shall be technically qualified by training and
experience and shall have the ability to command men and women and hold their
respect and confidence. (Ord. 134. Passed 2-7-50.)



238.02  DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   (a)   The Fire Chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations
to govern the Fire Department and shall be responsible to the City Manager
for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the Department. (Adopting
Ordinance)



   (b)   The Chief shall determine the number and kind of companies of
which the Department is to be composed and shall determine the response of
such companies to alarms.



   (c)   The Chief shall, at least once a month, conduct suitable
drills or instruction in the operation or handling of equipment, first aid
and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the City, fire prevention,
water supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to good
firemanship and safety of life and property from fire.



   (d)   The Chief shall assist the proper authorities in suppressing
the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause,
origin and circumstances of all fires.



   (e)   The Chief or his or her authorized assistant is hereby
authorized to enter any and all buildings and premises at any reasonable hour
for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written notice upon the
owner or occupant thereof to abate, within a specified time, all fire hazards
that may be found.



   (f)   Any person served with such a notice shall comply therewith
and promptly notify the Chief.



   (g)   The Chief shall see that complete records are kept of all
fires, inspections, apparatus, minor equipment, personnel and other
information about the work of the Department.



   (h)   The Chief shall report monthly to Council the condition of the
apparatus and equipment of the Department; the number of fires during the
preceding month, their location, cause and date and the loss occasioned
thereby; the number and purpose of all other runs made; the number of members
responding to each fire or other run; and any changes in membership.



   (i)   The Chief shall make a complete annual report to Council
within one month after the close of the fiscal year, such report to include
the information specified in subsection (g) hereof, together with comparative
data for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness
of the Department.



(Ord. 134. Passed 2-7-50.)



238.03  APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS AND DISCHARGE OF MEMBERS; COMPENSATION.



   (a)   The Fire Department shall consist of such persons as may be
appointed by the Fire Chief. They shall be able-bodied persons, preferably
residing within the City and preferably property owners whose business
activities are normally within the confines of the City, who have telephones
in their homes.



   (b)   Any member of the Department may be suspended or discharged
from the Department by the Chief at any time he or she may deem such action
necessary for the good of the Department.



(Ord. 134. Passed 2-7-50.)



   (c)   The compensation of the Chief shall be set by the City
Manager. The compensation of all other members of the Department shall be
fixed by resolution of Council.



238.04  APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT.



   (a)   The Fire Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and
equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and
properly protect life and property from fire.



   (b)   All apparatus and equipment of the Department shall be safely
and conveniently housed in such places as may be designated by Council. Such
places shall be heated during the winter.



(Ord. 134. Passed 2-7-50.)



238.05  ENFORCEMENT; POLICE AND OTHER PEACE OFFICERS TO ASSIST DEPARTMENT.



   (a)   All regularly appointed members of the Fire Department are
hereby given the necessary special police powers for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter and the Fire Prevention Code.



   (b)   The Chief of Police and/or other peace officers who may be on
duty and available for fire duty shall respond to all fire alarms and assist
the Fire Department in protecting life and property, regulating traffic,
maintaining order and in enforcing observance of this chapter and the Fire
Prevention Code. (Ord. 134. Passed 2-7-50.)



238.06  SOCIAL OFFICERS.



   (a)   The Fire Department may elect a President, Vice President,
Secretary and Treasurer to be known as social officers. Such officers may be
elected in any manner and for any term the membership of the Fire Department
may decide upon, and their duties shall be to arrange for and manage all
social functions sponsored by the Department.



   (b)   The functions and duties of such officers shall not interfere
with those of the regular Department officers who are charged with
responsibility for all fire service activities of the Department.



(Ord. 134. Passed 2-7-50.)



CHAPTER 239 Department of Parks and Cemetery



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 239. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Parks and recreational facilities - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1062



   Cemeteries - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1064



CHAPTER 240
Department of Public Works



240.01   Director.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 14



   Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4d et seq.



   Approval of public works projects by Planning Commission - see M.C.L. 
Secs. 125.39, 125.40



240.01  DIRECTOR.



   The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by and responsible to
the City Manager.  (Ord. 392.  Passed 1-28-80.)



CHAPTER 242
Water Department



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 242. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Contracts; franchises; permits - see CHTR. Ch. 15



   Municipal utilities - see CHTR. Ch. 16



   Water - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040



   Water and sewerage rates and management - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044



CHAPTER 243
Wastewater Treatment Department



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 243. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Sewers - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042



   Water and sewerage rates and management - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044



CHAPTER 244
Economic Development Corporation



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 244. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Department of Economic Expansion - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.1201 et seq.



   Economic Expansion Council - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.1207



   Regional economic development commission - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.1231 et
seq.



   Economic development corporations - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.1601 et seq.



   Tax Increment Finance Authority Act - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.1801 et seq.



   Economic and Social Opportunity Act - see M.C.L. Secs. 400.1101 et seq.



CHAPTER 246
Civil Defense



EDITOR'S NOTE: A Manual for Handling Emergency or Disaster Situations has
been prepared by the Chief of Police, in conjunction with the County Civil
Defense Director. Copies of the First Edition (May 1, 1981) are available, at
cost, from the City Clerk.



246.01   Definitions.



246.02   Department of Civil Defense.



246.03   Powers and duties of the Mayor.



246.04   Powers and duties of the City Manager.



246.05   Powers and duties of the Director of Civil Defense.



246.06   Civil defense and disaster control plan.



246.07   Conflicts.



246.08   Violations.



246.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Civil Defense Department as part of the Department of Public Safety -
see ADM. 232.01



   Flood hazards - see B. & H. Ch. 1440



246.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Civil defense" means the preparation for and the carrying out
of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military
forces are primarily responsible, for protection against, and to minimize and
repair injury and damage resulting from, enemy attack, sabotage or other
hostile action or natural disaster.



   (b)   "Natural disaster" means any condition seriously affecting or
threatening public health, welfare or security as a result of a severe fire,
explosion, flood, tornado, hurricane or similar natural or accidental cause
and which is beyond the control of public or private agencies ordinarily
responsible for the control of relief of such conditions. Riots, strikes,
insurrections and other civil disturbances are not included within the
meaning of "natural disaster."



   (c)   "Emergency" means a condition resulting from enemy attack or
natural disaster which cannot be handled by normal operating personnel and
facilities.



   (d)   "Civil defense volunteer" means any person who serves without
compensation in the civil defense organization.



(Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.02  DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL DEFENSE.



   A Department of Civil Defense is hereby established utilizing to the
fullest extent personnel and facilities of existing City departments and
agencies. The City Manager shall be responsible for its organization,
administration and operation. The organization shall consist of the following:



   (a)   A Department of Civil Defense within the administrative
organization of the City government. There shall be an executive head of the
Department, appointed by the City Manager subject to confirmation by Council,
who shall be known as the Director of Civil Defense, and such assistants,
clerical help, other employees and civil defense volunteers as are deemed
necessary to the proper functioning of the organization. The position of
Director of Civil Defense may be combined with any other position in the
administrative service of the City.



   (b)   Such deputy directors and coordinators as may be deemed
necessary to furnish adequate supervision to the several civil defense
functions. These shall, so far as possible, be additional duty assignments to
existing personnel, and it is the intent of this chapter that civil defense
and disaster assignments shall be as nearly consistent with normal duty
assignments as possible.



   (c)   The employees, equipment and facilities of all City
departments and agencies for, or adaptable to, civil defense and designated
by the City Manager to participate in the civil defense activity; and



   (d)   Civil defense volunteers, including persons and private
agencies or governmental units offering services to the organization.



(Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   (a)   In the event of actual or threatened enemy attack or natural
disaster, the Mayor or, in his or her absence or inability to serve, the
Mayor Pro-tem as conservator of the peace, shall:



      (1)   Declare a state of emergency within the City thereby
placing in effect the civil defense and disaster control plan required by
this chapter;



      (2)   As soon as possible thereafter, convene Council to
perform its legislative and administrative functions as the situation may
demand. Council shall have the power to terminate the state of emergency.



      (3)   Request the State, its agencies or political
subdivisions to send aid if the situation is beyond the control of the
regular and emergency City forces;



      (4)   Have the power to command services and the use of
equipment and facilities for such work and duties as the City may require to
aid the regular and volunteer City forces in time of emergency; and (



      (5)   Promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed
necessary to protect life and property and conserve critical resources. Such
regulations may be invoked when necessary for tests of the civil defense and
disaster plan. All such regulations shall be subject to the approval of
Council as soon as practical subsequent to their promulgation.



   (b)   The Mayor or, in his or her absence or inability to serve, the
Mayor Pro-tem, is hereby authorized to order civil defense forces to the aid
of the State or political subdivisions thereof, subject to Council's review
as soon as practical thereafter.



(Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager:



   (a)   Shall, through the Director of Civil Defense, maintain general
supervision over planning and administration for the civil defense
organization and the execution of the civil defense and disaster plan. He or
she shall coordinate the civil defense activities and make emergency
assignments of civil defense duties and civil defense forces in order to meet
situations not covered in the normal duties of such forces.



   (b)   May take all necessary action to conduct tests of the civil
defense and natural disaster plan;



   (c)   Shall, through the Director of Civil Defense, when a state of
emergency has been declared, assemble and utilize civil defense forces and
prescribe the manner and conditions of their use; and



   (d)   Shall designate a line of succession among his or her
department heads to carry out the powers and duties of this section in the
event of his or her absence or inability to serve.



(Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE.



   The Director of Civil Defense:



   (a)   Shall be the executive head of the Department of Civil Defense
and have responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of
the civil defense and disaster control organization under the direction and
control of the City Manager;



   (b)   Shall be responsible for public relations, information and
education regarding all phases of civil defense;



   (c)   Shall be responsible for the development of a civil defense
and disaster control plan and, upon adoption, be responsible for such
implementation and revision of the plan as to maintain it in a current state
of readiness at all times;



   (d)   Shall coordinate all activities for civil defense and disaster
control and maintain liaison and cooperate with all other interested and
affected agencies, public and private;



   (e)   Shall coordinate the recruitment and training of volunteer
personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the City
for civil defense purposes; and



   (f)   May issue proper insignia and papers to civil defense workers
and other people directly concerned with civil defense.



(Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.06  CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER CONTROL PLAN.



   As soon as practical after the enactment of this chapter (Ordinance
168, passed March 25, 1957), a comprehensive civil defense and disaster
control plan shall be adopted by resolution of Council upon the
recommendation of the City Manager. In the preparation of this plan, as it
pertains to City organization, the services, equipment, facilities and
personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the
fullest extent possible. When approved, it shall be the duty of all Municipal
departments and agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the
plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of
readiness at all times.



(Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.07  CONFLICTS.



   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter are in effect, they shall supersede all
existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may
be inconsistent therewith.



(Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.08  VIOLATIONS.



   No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay the civil defense
organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to
this chapter, or do any act prohibited by any rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or
other means of identification as a member of the civil defense organization
of the City unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the
proper officials. (Ord. 168. Passed 3-25-57.)



246.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 248
Employees Generally



EDITOR'S NOTE: Personnel Rules have been promulgated for officers and
employees of the City, providing for, inter alia, fringe benefits, grievance
procedures, disciplinary action and other incidents of employment. Copies of
the same, dated June 26, 1961, with amendments, are available, at cost, from
the City Clerk.



   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to compensation
are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained,
at cost, from the City Clerk.



248.01   Social security.



248.02   Eligibility for benefits; temporary employees excluded.



248.03   Equal employment- affirmative action policy.



248.04   Handicapped grievance procedure.



248.05   Retirement pensions.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   General provisions affecting officers of the City - see CHTR. Ch. 4



   Nepotism - see CHTR. Sec. 7.9



   Civil service - see CHTR. Sec. 7.10



   Pension plan - see CHTR. Sec. 7.11



   Employee welfare benefits - see CHTR. Sec. 7.12



   Municipal Employees Retirement System - see M.C.L.A Secs. 38.601 et seq.



   Compensation and salaries in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.3,
117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33



   Civil service in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.4i



   Shortening or extending term of office - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.5



   Public Employees Health Care Fund - see ADM. 226.01



248.01  SOCIAL SECURITY.



   (a)   Council hereby elects coverage under the Old Age and
Survivors' Insurance, as provided by Act 205 of the Public Acts of 1951, as
amended.



   (b)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed, on behalf of
the City, to enter into agreement with the department for the extension of
the benefits under Title II of the Social Security Act, subject to the
provisions of Sec. 8 of Act 205 of the Public Acts of 1951, as amended.



   (c)   The proper fiscal officers are hereby authorized to make all
required payments into the Contribution Fund established by the Enabling Act
and to establish such system of payroll deductions from the salaries of
employees and officers as may be necessary to their coverage under the Old
Age and Survivors' Insurance system.



   (d)   The proper officials of the City shall do all things necessary
to the continued implementation of such system.



   (e)   Any funds payable to the City from any department of the State
may be withheld by such department and transferred to the State Employees'
Retirement Board to be used in the payment of any default on the part of the
City in accordance with paragraph Vc of the contract between the State and
the City.



   (f)   The following positions are hereby designated as those which
are to be excluded: Part-time employees, employees paid on a contract or fee
basis and students.



   (g)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of Title II,
Sec. 218, of the Federal Social Security Act, as amended, the agreement
entered into between the State Agency, with the approval of the Attorney
General, and the Social Security Administrator, is hereby made a part of this
resolution and shall be termed as an agreement between the City and the State
Agency and shall become a part of the agreement or modification of the
agreement between the State and the Social Security Administrator.



(Res. Unno. Passed 12-22-51.)



248.02  ELIGIBILITY FOR BENEFITS; TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES EXCLUDED.



   (a)   Employees of the City must work at least ten days at eight or
more hours per day per month to qualify for retirement benefits.



   (b)   Temporary and seasonal part-time employees are excluded from
enrollment in the Municipal Employees' Retirement System, regardless of the
number of hours worked.



(Res. 84-18. Passed 6-25-84.)



248.03  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT-AFFIRMATIVE ACTION POLICY.



   The City hereby adopts an affirmative action plan. In adopting such
plan, the City commits itself to the principles of equal employment
opportunity in all phases of its employment practices and procedures. It is
the intent of the City, in adopting this plan, to ensure that the equal
employment opportunity policies and concepts are adopted as official City
policy and are translated into operational realities.



   Equal employment opportunity is the right of all people to work and
advance on the basis of true merit, ability and potential without reference
to race, color, age, religion, sex, national origin, handicap, height, weight
or marital status. In addition to being a moral commitment, equal opportunity
recognizes the full utilization of human resources as a necessary principle.
The City has an obligation which extends to all segments of the community to
ensure that these principles of equal opportunity and greater utilization of
human resources and potential are fairly and equitably applied.



(Res. Unno. Passed 1-12-81.)



248.04  HANDICAPPED GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.



   (a)   Coordinator. If a handicapped person has a grievance arising
out of the course of his or her community participation or employment, the
matter shall first be taken up with the coordinator by the aggrieved person.
Such grievance must be presented in written form (provided by the
coordinator) to the coordinator within three business days of the aggrieved
person's knowledge of the cause for the grievance.



   An oral decision by the coordinator must be given within one day or, at
the request of the aggrieved person, a written decision must be given within
three business days.



   (b)   Appeal to City Manager. If no satisfactory settlement is
obtained from the coordinator, the aggrieved person may submit the matter to
the City Manager. In this step the grievance shall be presented in writing
and a written decision shall be given the aggrieved person within three
business days.



   (c)   Appeal to Mayor and Council. If the grievance is not adjusted
pursuant to subsection (b) hereof, the aggrieved person may appeal the
grievance to the Mayor and Council.



   (d)   Records. The City Clerk shall keep records of all proceedings
for a period of ten years as suggested by the Michigan Municipal Records
Management Bulletin No. 104 of 1984. 



(Res. 84-32.  Passed 10-29-84.)



248.05  RETIREMENT PENSIONS.



   (a)   The City hereby elects to pick up Michigan Municipal
Employees' Retirement System (MERS) members' contributions as provided by the
Internal Revenue Code.  Such picked up contributions shall be remitted
directly by the City to the MERS.  Further contributions remitted are
designated as employer contributions for purposes of the Retirement System
which are being paid by the City in lieu of the employee contribution
requirements, and the employees will not be given the option to receive the
contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid to the pension plan.



   A copy of this subsection shall be filed with the MERS and the City
Payroll Officer for purposes of implementing this action. 



(Res. 94-14.  Passed 9-19-94.)



   (b)   The City hereby elects to provide the MERS Plan B-3 for all
its non-union employees, for the employees in the AFSCME Bargaining Unit and
for its Chiefs, Lieutenants and Sergeants Group.  As part of this change,
employees will also contribute to the retirement plan on a phased-in basis. 
Employees will make a one percent contribution in fiscal year 1994, a 1.5
percent contribution in fiscal year 1995 and a two percent contribution in
fiscal year 1996 and all years thereafter.  This change will take effect
beginning October 1, 1994.  Effective May 10, 1999, all general non-union
employees of the City shall make a 4.27 percent contribution to the
retirement plan.



   A copy of this subsection shall be filed with the MERS and the City
Payroll Officer for purposes of implementing this action. 



(Res. 94-15.  Passed 9-19-94; Res. 99-15.  Passed 5-10-99.)



   (c)   The City hereby elects to provide the MERS Plan B-3 for all
its police union (POAM) employees.  As part of this change, employees will
also contribute to the retirement plan on a phased in basis.  Employees will
make a 0.5 percent contribution in fiscal year 1997/98, a 1.0 percent
contribution in fiscal year 1998/99, a 1.5 percent contribution in fiscal
year 1999/00, and a 2.0 percent contribution in all years thereafter.  This
change will take effect beginning July 1, 1997.



   A copy of this subsection shall be filed with the Michigan Municipal
Employees’ Retirement System and the City Payroll Officer for purposes of
implementing this action.  (Res. 97-27.  Passed 11-24-97.)



TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Authorities



CHAPTER 260
Planning Commission



EDITOR'S NOTE:  Provisions relating to the Planning Commission are codified
in Chapter 1210 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.



CHAPTER 262
Board of Zoning Appeals



EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Board of Zoning Appeals are
codified in Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.



CHAPTER 264
Board of Review



264.01   Alternate members; appointment.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 12



   Board of Review - see CHTR. Secs. 12.10 et seq.



   Tax day - see B.R. & T. 890.01



264.01  ALTERNATE MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT.



   The City Council may appoint not more than two alternate members for a
four year term as regular members of the Board of Review.  Each alternate
member shall be a property tax payer of the City.  Alternate members shall
qualify by taking the constitutional oath of office within ten days after
appointment.  The City Council may fill any vacancies that occurs in the
alternate membership of the Board of Review.  A member of the City Council
is not eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any vacancy.  A
spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, son, or daughter, including an
adopted child of the City Assessor is not eligible to serve as an alternate
member or to fill any vacancy.  An alternate member may be called to perform
the duties of a regular member of the Board of Review in the absence of a
regular member. An alternate member may also be called to perform the duties
of a regular member of the Board of Review for the purpose of reaching a
decision in issues protested in which a regular member has abstained for
reasons of conflict of interest.



(Ord. 806.  Passed 2-11-08.)



CHAPTER 266
Cemetery Commission



EDITOR'S NOTE:  Chapter 266 was repealed by Ordinance 602, passed July 11,
1994.  Ordinance 602 provided that a Cemetery Advisory Panel may be
established by resolution of Council relating to the establishment of new
cemeteries.



CHAPTER 268
Local Officers Compensation Commission



268.01   Establishment; membership; terms of office.



268.02   Determination of City officials' salaries.



268.03   Meetings; quorum; Chairman; compensation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Remuneration of administrative officers - see CHTR. Sec. 4.4



   Increase or decrease of compensation - see CHTR. Sec. 4.10



   Salaries of members of Council - see CHTR. Sec. 5.3



268.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (a)   There is hereby established a Local Officers Compensation
Commission. The Commission shall consist of five members, all of whom shall
be residents of the City, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority
of Council.



   (b)   Each member of the Commission shall serve for a period of five
years, except that of the members appointed to the first Commission, one each
shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. All
members of the first Commission shall be appointed within thirty days after
the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 379, passed April 9, 1979).
Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of
appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired
term. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch
of any level of government, or members of the immediate family of such a
member or employee, shall be eligible to be a member of the Commission.



(Ord. 379. Passed 4-9-79.)



268.02  DETERMINATION OF CITY OFFICIALS' SALARIES.



   The Local Officers Compensation Commission is hereby authorized to
determine the salaries of local elected officials, which determination shall
set the salaries unless Council, by a resolution of two-thirds of its
members, rejects such determination. The determination of the Commission
shall be effective thirty days following its filing with the City Clerk,
unless the determination is rejected by Council. In case of such a rejection,
the existing salary of each elected official shall continue.



(Ord. 379. Passed 4-9-79.)



268.03  MEETINGS; QUORUM; CHAIRMAN; COMPENSATION.



   (a)   The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall meet for not
more than fifteen sessions in 1979 and every odd-numbered year thereafter and
shall make its determination within forty-five days of its first meeting. A
majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
conducting the business of the Commission. The Commission shall take no
action or make determinations without the concurrence of a majority of the
members thereof. The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among its members.



   (b)   The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation,
but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.



(Ord. 379. Passed 4-9-79.)



CHAPTER 272
Parks and Recreation Commission



272.01   Establishment.



272.02   Membership; terms.



272.03   Township participation.



272.04   Vacancies.



272.05   Officers; rules and regulations; meetings; records.



272.06   Director of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery.



272.07   Powers.



272.08   Employment and compensation of Commission members. (Repealed)



272.09   Employment of personnel; expenditures.



272.10   Fiscal year; budget.



272.11   Accounts; audit.



272.12   Reports.



272.13   Receipt of funds.



272.14   Disposal of recreational property.



272.15   Recreational  program.



272.16   Purchases.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Parks generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 23



   Recreation facilities in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.4e



   Sale of park property - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.5



   Misapplication of park funds - see M.C.L. Sec. 123.67



   Alcoholic beverages prohibited in public parks - see GEN. OFF. 604.01



   Commercial recreational establishments - see B.R. & T. Ch. 806



   Parks and recreational facilities - see S. U. & P. S. Ch. 1062



272.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Under the authority of Act 156 of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended,
a Public Park and Recreation Commission, to be known as the Howell Park and
Recreation Commission, is hereby established.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57. )



272.02  MEMBERSHIP; TERMS.



   (a)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall consist of four
members plus a representative from each participating township as approved by
Council. Voting members of the Commission shall consist of one member of
Council; one elector of the City, who shall hold no other public office in
the City; one member appointed by the Board of Education of the Howell Public
School District; one member of the Livingston County United Way; and a
representative of each participating township. The City Manager and the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Cemetery shall serve as ex-officio members.



   (b)   The terms of the member of Council, the member of the Board of
Education and the member of the Livingston County United Way shall be for one
year and until their successors are appointed. The other members of the
Commission shall be appointed for four-year terms and until their successors
are appointed.



   (c)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by Council for
the respective terms as hereinbefore directed.



(Ord. 212. Passed 8-5-63; Ord. 459. Passed 5-28-85.)



272.03  TOWNSHIP PARTICIPATION.



   Upon the recommendation of a majority of the members of the Park and
Recreation Commission, as provided for in Section 272.02, Council may appoint
one additional member from any township desiring to participate in the parks
and recreation program pursuant to the township participation formula adopted
by the Commission. Each member appointed under this section shall be entitled
to one vote on the Commission. Nomination for these appointments shall be
made by the respective township boards. The terms of office for these
appointments shall begin on May 1 of the year in which they become effective
and shall continue as provided in Section 272.02(b). (Ord. 459. Passed
5-28-85.)



272.04  VACANCIES.



   Whenever a vacancy occurs on the Park and Recreation Commission,
Council shall fill the same within thirty days thereafter. The appointee to
fill a vacancy shall complete the balance of the term of the member whom he
or she was appointed to replace. The appointee to fill such vacancy shall be
recommended to Council within ten days after the vacancy occurs by the same
group or organization that made such recommendation for appointment in the
original instance, and shall possess the same qualifications as the member
whom he or she is appointed to replace.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57.)



272.05  OFFICERS; RULES AND REGULATIONS; MEETINGS; RECORDS.



   The Park and Recreation Commission shall, within twenty days after its
appointment and annually thereafter within the first twenty days of May,
organize and elect from its membership a Chairman, and such other officers as
is deemed expedient by the Commission. The Director of Parks, Recreation and
Cemetery shall perform the functions of the Secretary. The Commission shall
adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the transaction of
its business. It shall hold regular meetings, at least once in each month,
which meetings shall be open to the public. The Commission shall keep a
record of its proceedings, which record shall be open to the public. A
majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, though a smaller number may adjourn meetings of the Commission from
time to time. Action of the Commission may be taken upon a favorable vote of
a majority of the members present at any regular meeting or at any special
meeting. Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Secretary on
the written request of the Chairman or of any two members of the Commission
on at least eighteen hours written notice to each member of the Commission
designating the time, place and purpose of any such meeting and served
personally or left at his or her place of residence by the Secretary or
someone designated by him or her. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements
for the calling of special meetings, any special meeting at which all members
of the Commission are present or have in writing waived the requirement that
notice be given at least eighteen hours prior to the time specified for the
holding of such meeting and at which a quorum of the Commission is present,
shall be a legal meeting.



(Ord. 459. Passed 5-28-85.)



272.06  DIRECTOR OF PARKS, RECREATION AND CEMETERY.



   The City Manager shall appoint a Director of Parks, Recreation and
Cemetery subject to the confirmation of this appointment by the Park and
Recreation Commission. The Director shall report directly to the City Manager
and the compensation of the Director shall be paid from the budget of the
Recreation Department in an amount suggested by the Commission and confirmed
by the City Manager.



(Ord. 459. Passed 5-28-85.)



272.07  POWERS.



   (a)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall have the right to
provide, conduct and supervise recreational areas, facilities, services and
programs for the public recreation in its broadest sense, including the right
to operate parks, playgrounds, playfields, swimming pools, beaches, indoor
community centers and any and all other recreational facilities and
activities. Further, the Commission shall specifically have the right,
subject to approval by Council, to establish rules and regulations governing
admittance to any and all recreational areas and facilities and to restrict
or regulate the use of these areas in any manner which, in the opinion of a
majority of the Commission members, best serves the interest of the people of
the City. Such rules and regulations shall be in writing and a copy thereof
shall be posted at the main entrance of all City parks and/or at other
appropriate places in the recreational areas of the City and shall also be
available at the office of the City Clerk. Such rules and regulations may be
amended and changed from time to time, provided that at least ten days notice
is given in advance of any change or amendment by posting the notice of
change or amendment in the same places the rules and regulations are posted
or available. However, the Commission is not required to provide for the
upkeep and care of the School District's athletic fields and playgrounds. The
Commission shall have the power to conduct and pay for necessary supervision
of public recreation in connection with Municipal parks, School District
athletic fields and playgrounds and other recreational areas. However, this
shall not be construed to delegate to the Commission by the City or by the
School District any of the powers, jurisdiction or control of either over
their respective properties and facilities. In other words, it is anticipated
that the Commission shall work with the School Districts, its Board of
Education and the City in connection with public recreation.



(Ord. 205. Passed 12-11-61.)



   (b)   The Park and Recreation Commission is hereby directed to
promulgate rules for the use of lands owned by the City and under supervision
of the Commission regulating the use thereon of such pavilions, playing
fields, shelters or other facilities as may from time to time exist. Included
in these rules shall be a system of reservations for such facilities by such
persons entitled to use the same on such terms as the Commission from time to
time decides.



   The Commission shall recommend to Council reasonable user fees for the
facilities under its supervision, whereupon Council may, by resolution, adopt
such fees as proposed by the Commission or as modified by Council.



   The Commission shall review the reasonableness of such fees from time
to time, but not less frequently than annually.



(Ord. 420. Passed 4-5-82.)



272.08  EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION OF COMMISSION MEMBERS. (REPEALED)



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 272.08 was repealed by Ordinance 459, passed
May 28, 1985.)



272.09  EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL; EXPENDITURES.



   Employment practices and expenditures by the Recreation Department
shall conform to and shall be made in accordance with the regular procedures
of the City which are promulgated in appropriate administrative memoranda.
The Commission shall not obligate the City and other agencies participating
in the financing of recreation activity for any amount for salaries or
recreational expenditures of any kind greater than the amount set aside for
recreational purposes by the City, the School District, the Livingston County
United Way and the participating townships in their respective annual
budgets. The Recreation Department shall not exceed the authorized budget
appropriation. Any excess revenues remaining at the end of any fiscal year
shall be returned to the Commission for the next annual budget. However, the
excess may be reduced by a proportional amount for administrative expenses
incurred by the City in its administration of the regular business of the
Department.



(Ord. 459. Passed 5-28-85.)



272.10  FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET.



   The fiscal year under which the Park and Recreation Commission shall
operate shall be from July 1 through June 30. The Commission shall prepare an
annual budget. Such budget shall be submitted to Council and to any other
agency participating in the financing of the recreational activities of the
Commission. Such annual budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be so
submitted not later than March 1 preceding the beginning of the fiscal year
in question. Such annual budget shall be reviewed by Council and by any other
agency participating in the financing of recreational activities of the
Commission. It is intended that the preparation of the annual proposed budget
by the Commission shall be an administerial act only.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57.)



272.11  ACCOUNTS; AUDIT.



   The City Clerk shall maintain the financial accounts of the recreation
system which shall be subject to the regular independent audit of City funds.
Moneys received by the Park and Recreation Commission shall be paid into the
City Treasury and shall be made available for the use of the Commission and
disbursed only on order of the Commission.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57.)



272.12  REPORTS.



   The City Clerk shall prepare a monthly report for the Park and
Recreation Commission and deliver the same to the Commission showing all
receipts and disbursements during the preceding month. The Commission shall
make an annual report to Council and to any other participating agency and
shall make such other and further reports as may be requested by Council and
any other participating agency.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57.)



272.13  RECEIPT OF FUNDS.



   The Park and Recreation Commission is hereby authorized to receive and
receipt for funds provided for a Civic Center, for Civic Center purposes, for
recreational purposes, for Youth Center purposes or for similar public or
civic purposes, from any and all public or private sources desiring to
contribute funds thereto.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57.)



272.14  DISPOSAL OF RECREATIONAL PROPERTY.



   No real property owned by the City and used for recreational purposes
shall be sold without the approval of three-fifths of the electors voting
thereon at any general or special election.



(Ord. 459. Passed 5-28-85.)



272.15  RECREATIONAL PROGRAM.



   The Park and Recreation Commission shall have authority over and shall
supervise the holding of games, exhibitions, contests and other recreational
events and shall have authority to charge admission for such games,
exhibitions and events, as it deems advisable and necessary in order to
defray the expenses of the recreational program.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57.)



272.16  PURCHASES.



   All purchases of the Park and Recreation Commission shall be made
through the City Purchasing Agent wherever practical.



(Ord. 170. Passed 5-20-57.)



CHAPTER 274
Board of Health



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 274. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Municipal health departments - see M.C.L. Sec. 327.205



   Health, safety and sanitation - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 622



   Nuisances - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 652



   Private sewage disposal systems - see S.U. & P.S. 1042.04



   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1060



CHAPTER 276
Library Board



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 276. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   Resolution 88-24, passed September 26, 1988, established a Board of
Trustees for the Howell District Library. Copies of this resolution may be
obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk. On October 4, 1988, the voters of the
City approved the establishment of the Howell District Library.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Library - see CHTR. Ch. 17



   Library Board - see CHTR. Secs. 17.1 et seq.



CHAPTER 278
Thompson Lake Board



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 278. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Park and Recreation Commission - see ADM. Ch. 272



   Parks and recreational facilities - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1062



   Traffic control at Thompson Lake - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.01



CHAPTER 280
Howell Historical Preservation Commission



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 280. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Comprehensive Land Use Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1212



   HL Historic Limited Use Districts - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



CHAPTER 282 Election Commission



EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Chapter 282. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Election precincts - see CHTR. Sec. 1.4



   Elections - see CHTR. Ch. 10



   Election Commission - see CHTR. Sec. 10.6



   Use of property as a voting place - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



CHAPTER 283
Building Authority



283.01   Purpose; approval and adoption of Articles of Incorporation.



283.02   Articles of Incorporation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds - see M.C.L.
Sec. 117.4j



   Building Department - see ADM. Ch. 234



   Board of Building Code Appeals - see ADM. Ch. 284



   State Construction Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1440



   Authority of Building Inspector re flood hazards - see B. & H. 1440.02
et seq.



283.01  PURPOSE; APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION.



   For the purpose of acquiring, furnishing, equipping, owning, improving,
enlarging, operating and maintaining a building or buildings, automobile
parking lots or structures, recreational facilities, stadiums and the
necessary site or sites for the property, together with appurtenant
properties and facilities necessary or convenient for the effective use of
the property, for use for any legitimate public purpose of the City, Council
hereby approves and adopts Articles of Incorporation to incorporate the City
Building Authority, which shall be in the form provided in Section 283.02.



(Res. 93-25.  Passed 9-7-93.)



283.02  ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION.



   These Articles of Incorporation are adopted and executed by the
incorporating unit, being the City of Howell, Livingston County, Michigan,
for the purpose of creating a Building Authority, pursuant to the provisions
of Act No. 31 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1948 (First Extra Session), as
amended (the "Act").



   ARTICLE I



   The name of this Authority is the "CITY OF HOWELL BUILDING AUTHORITY"
(referred to herein as the "Authority").



   ARTICLE II



   The name of the incorporating unit creating this Authority is the City
of Howell, in the County of Livingston, State of Michigan.



   ARTICLE III



   The purpose of this Authority is to acquire, furnish, equip, own,
improve, enlarge, operate and maintain buildings, automobile parking lots or
structures, recreational facilities, stadiums, and the necessary site or
sites therefor, together with appurtenant properties and facilities necessary
or convenient for the effective use thereof, for the use or benefit of the
City of Howell, Michigan (the "City").



   ARTICLE IV



   The Authority shall be a body corporate with power to sue and be sued
in any court of this State.  It shall have a corporate seal.  The corporate
limits of the Authority shall be the same as those of the City.  The
Authority shall possess all the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of
its incorporation and those incident thereto.  The enumeration of any powers
herein shall not be construed as a limitation upon its general powers unless
the context shall clearly indicate otherwise.



   ARTICLE V



   The Authority shall continue in existence until dissolved pursuant to
law: Provided, that it shall not be dissolved if such dissolution would
operate as an impairment of any bond or other contract.  In the event of
such dissolution, the title to any property then owned by the Authority shall
pass to the City.



   ARTICLE VI



   The fiscal year of the Authority shall be the same as the fiscal year
of the City.



   ARTICLE VII



   For the purpose of accomplishing the objects of its incorporation, the
Authority may acquire property by purchase, construction lease, gift, devise
or condemnation, and for the purpose of condemnation, it may proceed under
the provisions of Act No. 149 of the Public Acts of 1911, as now or hereafter
amended, or any other appropriate statute.



   ARTICLE VIII



   The Authority shall have power to enter into a contract or contracts
with the City, whereby the Authority will acquire property to be used by the
City and will lease the same to the City for a period not to exceed fifty
(50) years.  The consideration specified in such contract or contracts for
such use shall be subject to increase by the Authority, if necessary, in
order to provide funds to meet its obligations: Provided, that such increase
shall not require the City to pay more than a reasonable rental for the
leased premises.



   ARTICLE IX



   For the purpose of defraying all or part of the cost of acquiring,
improving, and enlarging any building or buildings, automobile parking lots
or structures, recreational facilities, stadiums, and the necessary site or
sites for the property, together with appurtenant properties and facilities
necessary or convenient for the effective use of the property, furnishing and
equipping the same; or refunding outstanding bonds as provided in Section 11K
of the Act, the Authority, after execution and delivery of a full faith and
credit general obligation contract of lease, as provided in the Act, and
pursuant to resolution duly adopted by a majority vote of the elected members
of the Commission (as hereinafter defined), may issue its negotiable bonds in
anticipation of the contract obligations of the City to make cash rental
payments to the Authority and may pledge the receipts from the payments for
payment of bonds and the interest on the bonds.  Bonds shall not be issued
unless the property has been leased by the Authority to the City for a period
extending beyond the last maturity of the bonds and no maturity shall in any
event be more than forty (40) years from the date of the bonds and until the
contract of lease is fully effective.  The bonds shall be called building
authority bonds, or, in the case of bonds issued to refund outstanding bonds,
the bonds shall be called building authority refunding bonds.



   ARTICLE X



   The powers of the Authority shall be exercised by its governing body
which shall be known as the "Commission" and shall consist of three (3)
members to be appointed by the City Council of the City, each of whom shall
hold office for a term of three (3) years, except that the term of one (1) of
the Commissioners first appointed shall expire on December 31, 1994; the term
of one (1) of the Commissioners first appointed shall expire on December 31,
1995; and the term of one (1) of the Commissioners first appointed shall
expire on December 31, 1996, respectively.  Thereafter, each Commissioner
shall be appointed for a full three (3) year term beginning on January 1 of
the first year of the term and expiring on December 31 of the last year
thereof. Each Commissioner shall serve during the term for which he or she
was appointed and thereafter until his or her successor is appointed.  No
member of the City Council of the City shall be eligible to appointment or
membership on the Commission.  The members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation but the Commission in its discretion may authorize the
payment of the actual expenditures of any member incurred in connection with
the business of the Authority as may be authorized by the Act and as are
approved by the City Council of the City.  The first members of the
Commission shall meet for the purpose of organization within twenty (20) days
after their appointment and thereafter the Commission shall meet for such
purpose on the first business day in January in each year at 10:00 a.m., at
the Howell City Hall, 611 E. Grand River, Howell, Michigan, or such other
usual place of holding the meetings of the Commission as shall be provided in
the By-Laws of the Authority and as may be permitted by law.  At each of
such organization meetings, the Commission shall select a Chairperson, a Vice
Chairperson, a Secretary, and a Treasurer who shall be members of the
Commission and as permitted by the Act.  The office of the Treasurer may be
held by any member of the Commission notwithstanding that he or she holds
some other office on the Commission.  Such officers shall serve until the
organization meeting in the following year and until their respective
successors shall be selected.  The time and place of such original
organization meeting shall be fixed by a majority of the members of the
Commission and notice thereof served personally upon all members, at least
twenty-four (23) hours prior to the time of holding of the meeting and in
accordance with the Act.  No appointment to the Commission and no election
of an officer of the Commission shall be deemed to be invalid because it was
not made within or at the time specified in these Articles.  Any member of
the Commission may be removed for cause at any time by action of the City
Council of the City.  Any officer of the Commission may be removed at any
time by action of the Commission.



   ARTICLE XI



   In event of a vacancy on the Commission, the City Council of the City
shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term.  In event of a vacancy in any
office of the Commission, such vacancy shall be filled by the Commission for
the unexpired term. In the case of the temporary absence or disability of any
officer, the Commission may appoint some person to temporarily act in his or
her stead except that in case of the temporary absence or disability of the
Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall so act.



   ARTICLE XII



   All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted at public meetings
held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976,
as amended ("Act 267").  Public notice of the time, date and place of the
meetings shall be given in the manner required by Act 267.  Meetings of the
Commission shall be held at such times and places as shall be prescribed by
resolution of the Commission.  Special Meetings of the Commission may be
called by the Chairperson or any two (2) members thereof, by serving written
notice of the time, place and purpose thereof, upon each member of the
Commission personally, or by leaving it at his or her place of residence at
least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of such meeting, or by
depositing the same in a United States Post Office or mailbox within the
City, at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time of such meeting,
enclosed in a sealed envelope properly addressed to him or her at his or her
home or office address, with postage fully prepaid thereon. Special meetings
of the Commission at which all members are present shall be deemed to be
valid even though no written notice thereof may have been given as above
provided.  Any member of the Commission may waive notice of any meeting
either before or after the holding thereof.  A majority of all members of
the Commission shall be required for a quorum.  The Commission shall act by
motion or resolution. For the passage of any motion or resolution there shall
be required the affirmative vote of two (2) members thereof.  The Commission
shall have the right to adopt rules governing its procedure, provided the
same are not in conflict with the terms of any State statute or of these
Articles.  The Commission shall keep a journal of its proceedings which
shall be signed by the Chairperson and Secretary.  All votes shall be by
yeas and nays.  The journal shall show how each member voted. Each member
shall be required to vote upon all motions and resolutions unless he or she
shall be disqualified from voting thereon.  No member of the Commission
shall vote upon any motion or resolution in which he or she has any personal
interest and in accordance with law.  No member of the Commission shall be
financially interested in any contract with the Authority.



   ARTICLE XIII



   The Chairperson of the Commission shall be the presiding officer
thereof.  In the absence or disability of the Chairperson the Vice
Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson.  The Secretary
shall be the recording officer of the Commission.  The Treasurer shall be
custodian of the funds of the Authority and shall give to it a bond in such
amount as shall be fixed by the Commission, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his or her office.  The cost of said bond shall
be paid by the Authority.  The Secretary shall be the chief accounting
officer of the Authority and subject to the approval of the Commission and
the City Council of the City may employ such assistants as may be necessary.
All moneys shall be deposited in a bank or banks to be designated by the
Commission, and all checks or other forms of withdrawal therefrom shall be
signed by the Treasurer and countersigned by the Secretary of the
Commission.  The officers of the Commission shall have such other powers and
duties as may be conferred upon them by the Commission.



   ARTICLE XIV



   The Commission shall have power to secure all necessary services to
carry out the functions of the Authority and to fix the compensation
therefor, except that the Commission shall only have power to hire such
employees of the Authority as are approved by the City Council of the City. 
The Commission shall submit to the City Council of the City an annual report
of its financial transactions, which report shall be open to public
inspection at all reasonable times.



   ARTICLE XV



   These Articles of Incorporation may be amended as provided by the Act,
under which statute this Authority is incorporated, or any other applicable
State statute: Provided, that no such amendment shall impair the obligation
of any bond or other contract of the Authority.



   ARTICLE XVI



   These Articles of Incorporation, upon their adoption by the City
Council of the City, shall be executed in duplicate for and on behalf of the
City, by the Mayor and the City Clerk of the City.  Said duplicate executed
copies shall be delivered to the County Clerk of the County of Livingston,
who shall file one (1) of said executed copies in his or her office and the
other with the Secretary of the Authority, when selected. The City Clerk of
the City shall cause a copy of these Articles of Incorporation to be
published once in the Livingston County Press, a newspaper circulating within
the City.  The County Clerk shall file one (1) printed copy of these
Articles of Incorporation with the Secretary of State of the State of
Michigan and one (1) printed copy thereof in his or her office, attached to
each of which printed copies shall be his or her certificate setting forth
that the same is a true and complete copy of the original Articles of
Incorporation on file in his or her office, and also the date and place of
the publication thereof.  This Authority shall become effective upon filing
of one printed copy of the Articles of Incorporation with the Secretary of
State.



(Res. 93-25.  Passed 9-7-93.)



CHAPTER 284
Board of Building Code Appeals



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 284.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Building Department - see ADM. Ch. 234



   Building Authority - see ADM. Ch. 283



   State Construction Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1410



   Board of Zoning Appeals is Board of Building Code Appeals - see B. & H.
1410.05(b)



CHAPTER 285
Downtown Development Authority



285.01   Title.



285.02   Determination of necessity; purpose.



285.03   Definitions.



285.04   Creation of Authority.



285.05   Termination.



285.06   Description of Downtown District.



285.07   Board of Directors.



285.08   Powers of Authority.



285.09   Fiscal year; adoption of budget.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4g,
117.5, 117.14a, 117.35a



   Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4d et seq.



   Downtown Development Authority - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.1651 et seq.



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Commercial and industrial developments - see P. & Z. 1226.12



   Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1219



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



285.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Downtown Development Authority
Ordinance" of the City of Howell.



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91.)



285.02  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY; PURPOSE.



   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best
interests of the public to create a public body corporate which shall operate
to halt property value deterioration, eliminate the causes of that
deterioration, increase property tax valuation where possible in the business
district of the City, and promote economic growth, pursuant to Act 197 of the
Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended.



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91.)



285.03  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as given to
them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context
clearly indicates to the contrary.  As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Act 197" means Act 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1975, as amended.



   (b)   "Authority" means the Downtown Development Authority of the
City of Howell created by this chapter.



   (c)   "Board" or "Board of Directors" means the Board of Directors
of the Authority, the governing body of the Authority.



   (d)   "Chief Executive Officer" means the Mayor or the duly
appointed designee of the Mayor.



   (e)   "City" means the City of Howell, Michigan.



   (f)   "Council" or "City Council" means the City Council of the City.



   (g)   "Downtown District" means the downtown district designated by
this chapter, as now existing or hereafter amended, and within which the
Authority shall exercise its powers.



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91.)



285.04  CREATION OF AUTHORITY.



   There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197 a Downtown Development
Authority for the City.  The Authority shall be a public body corporate and
shall be known and exercise its powers under title of the "Downtown
Development Authority of the City of Howell."  The Authority may adopt a
seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this State and shall possess all of
the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as
provided by this chapter and Act 197.  The enumeration of a power in this
chapter or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general
powers of the Authority.



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91.)



285.05  TERMINATION.



   Upon completion of its purposes, the Authority may be dissolved by the
Council.  The property and assets of the Authority, after dissolution and
satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the City.



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91.)



285.06  DESCRIPTION OF DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.



   The Downtown District shall consist of the territory in the City
described as follows, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made
pursuant to this chapter and Act 197:



Beginning at the southeast corner of Section 36, T3N, R4E, City of Howell,
Livingston County, Michigan; thence north along the west line of said
section, also being the centerline of Lucy Road to the intersection of Grand
River Avenue; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Grand River Avenue
to the southwest right-of-way of the Ann Arbor Railroad; thence northwesterly
along said right-of-way to the west right-of-way of Catrell Drive; thence
south to a point that is 410 feet north of the intersection of the north
right-of-way of Grand River Avenue and the west right-of-way of Catrell
Drive; thence west 488 feet; thence south to a point 100 feet north of the
north right-of-way of Grand River Avenue; thence northwesterly parallel with
Grand River Avenue 150 feet; thence north 353 feet; thence west 33 feet;
thence north 49.5 feet; thence west 264 feet to the east right-of-way of
National Avenue; thence north to the extended north right-of-way of Clinton
Street; thence west along said right-of-way to the southwest corner of Lot 16
of T.W. Mizners Washington Heights Addition; thence north along the west line
of said Lot 16 to the north line of Lot 11; thence west to the east line of
Lot 20 of Victory Gardens; thence south to the north line of Lot 20; thence
west to the east right-of-way of E.  Park Street; thence south to the north
right-of-way of Clinton Street; thence northwesterly along said right-of-way
to the extended west line of Lot 6 of A.  Whipples Addition; thence
southwesterly along said west line of Lot 6 to the southwest corner of said
lot; thence northwesterly parallel to and 8 rods north of the north
right-of-way of Grand River Avenue, to the east right-of-way of Bannard
Street; thence northeasterly along said right-of-way to the north
right-of-way of Clinton Street; thence northwesterly along said right-of-way
to the east right-of-way of Court Street; thence northerly to the extended
north right-of-way of Church Street; thence northwesterly along said
right-of-way to the east right-of-way of State Street; thence northeasterly
to the south right-of-way of Ann Arbor Railroad and the extended north
right-of-way of Wetmore Street; thence northwesterly along said right-of-way
to the extended west right-of-way of Center Street; thence southwesterly to
the north right-of-way of Clinton Street; thence northwesterly to the west
right-of-way of Chestnut Street; thence southwesterly to the southeast corner
of Lot 94 of Crane and Brook's Addition; thence northwesterly along the north
line of Lots 101 through 94 to the west right-of-way of West Street; thence
southwesterly along said right-of-way to the south right-of-way of Grand
River Avenue; thence southeasterly along the said right-of-way to the west
line of Section 36 and the northeasterly corner of Lot 50 of the Assessor's
Plat #1; thence south 14.4 feet; thence southwesterly 127 feet; thence
westerly 28.5 feet; thence southerly 32.5 feet; thence southeasterly 59.5
feet to the west line of Section 36; thence south to the southerly
right-of-way of Sibley Street; thence southeasterly along said right-of-way
to the west right-of-way of Walnut Street; thence southwesterly to the south
right-of-way of Washington Street; thence southeasterly to a point 26 feet
west of the northwest corner of Lot 181 of Crane and Brook's Subdivision;
thence southwesterly to a point 26 feet west of the northwest corner of Lot
182 of Crane and Brook's Subdivision; thence southeasterly 26 feet to the
northwest corner of Lot 182 of Crane and Brook's Subdivision; thence
southwesterly 528 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 265 of Crane and
Brook's Subdivision; thence northwesterly 66 feet to the northwest corner of
Lot 268 of Crane and Brook's Subdivision; thence southwesterly 132 feet to
the northwest corner of Lot 267 of Crane and Brook's Subdivision; thence
northwesterly 132 feet to the northwest corner of Lot 271 of Crane and
Brook's Subdivision, said corner being a point on the easterly right-of-way
line of Walnut Street; thence southwesterly along the easterly right-of-way
line of Walnut Street to the southwest corner of Lot 8 of the Assessor's Plat
#10, said point also being the northeast intersection of Walnut Street and
Mason Road right-of-ways; thence along the northerly right-of-way line of
Mason Road to a point on the extended west line of Lot 1 of First Marion
Addition; thence southerly 1,023 feet to the southwest corner of the north
1/2 of Lot 16 of First Marion Addition; thence easterly 132 feet to the
northeast corner of Lot 16 of First Marion Addition, also being a point on
the westerly right-of-way line of Pinckney Road; thence southerly along the
westerly right-of-way line of Pinckney Road to the northeast corner of Lot 20
of First Marion Addition; thence westerly 132 feet to the northwest corner of
Lot 20 of First Marion Addition; thence southerly 264 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot 23 of First Marion Addition; thence easterly 132 feet to the
southeast corner of Lot 23 of First Marion Addition, also being a point on
the westerly right-of-way line of Pinckney Road; thence southerly along the
westerly right-of-way line of Pinckney Road to the northeast corner of Lot 28
of First Marion Addition; thence south 89 degrees, 33 minutes, 28 seconds,
west 1,245.28 feet to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of I-96;
thence southwesterly along the northerly right-of-way line of I-96 south 89
degrees, 33 minutes, 28 seconds, west 644.73 feet; thence south 44 degrees, 1
minute, 12 seconds, east 721.24 feet; thence continuing along the northerly
right-of-way line of I-96 south 45 degrees, 41 minutes, 20 seconds, east
123.34 feet; thence southeasterly 569.35 feet along a radius to the left,
with a central angle of 45 degrees, 15 minutes, radius 720.90 feet, long
chord bearing south 68 degrees, 18 minutes, 50 seconds east, 554.66 feet
along the northerly right-of-way line of I-96; thence north 89 degrees, 3
minutes, 40 seconds east, 360.36 feet; thence north 43 degrees, 55 minutes,
40 seconds east, 134.40 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way line of
Pinckney Road; thence southeasterly across Pinckney Road right-of-way to a
point 1,220.21 feet north of the west 1/4 corner of Section 01, also being a
point on the easterly right-of-way line of Pinckney Road; thence north 89
degrees, east 300 feet; thence north 144 feet; thence south 89 degrees, west
97.89 feet; thence north 60 feet; thence northwesterly to a point north 0
degrees, 56 minutes, 20 seconds, west 1,457.87 feet and north 88 degrees, 5
minutes, 10 seconds, east 204 feet from the west 1/2 corner of Section 01;
thence north 237.5 feet; thence east 711.5 feet; thence south 310 feet;
thence east 1,020 feet; thence north 1,460 feet; thence west 317.5 feet;
thence south 192 feet; thence west 361 feet; thence north 132 feet; thence
west 995 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 78 of J.B. Skilbeck's Addition;
thence northerly 132 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 78 of J.B.
Skilbeck's Addition, also being a point on the southerly right-of-way line of
Pulford Street; thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of
Pulford Street to the northwest corner of Lot 78 of J.B. Skilbeck's Addition;
thence northerly across Pulford Street right-of-way to a point being 10 rods
east of the southwest corner of Lot 74 of J.B. Skilbeck's Addition, also
being a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Pulford Street; thence
north 6 rods to a point 10 rods east of the southwest corner of Lot 73 of
J.B. Skilbeck's Addition; thence east to the southeast corner of Lot 73 of
J.B. Skilbeck's Addition; thence north to the northwest corner of Lot 4 of
J.B. Skilbeck's Addition; thence west to a point 10 rods east of the
southwest corner of Lot 71 of J.B. Skilbeck's Addition; thence north 8 rods
to a point 10 rods east of the northwest corner of Lot 71 of J.B. Skilbeck's
Addition, also being a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Argyle
Street; thence northwesterly across the Argyle Street right-of-way to the
southwest corner of Lot 17 of J.B. Skilbeck's Addition, also being a point on
the northerly right-of-way line of Argyle Street; thence northerly to the
northeast corner of Lot 3 of J.B. Skilbeck's Addition, also being a point on
the southerly right-of-way line of Marion Street; thence northeasterly to the
southeast corner of Lot 22, Assessor's Plat #10, also being a point on the
northerly right-of-way line of Marion Street; thence easterly along the
northerly right-of-way line of Marion Street to the southwest corner of Lot
25, Assessor's Plat #10, also being the northwest corner of the Marion Street
and Dearborn Street right-of-way intersection; thence northerly along the
westerly right-of-way line of Dearborn Street to the southwest corner of the
Dearborn Street and C & O Railroad right-of-way lines; thence northeasterly
along the westerly right-of-way line of Dearborn Street to the southeast
corner of Lot 26 of Wilcox's Addition; thence northwesterly to the southwest
corner of Lot 16 of Wilcox's Addition; thence northeasterly to the northwest
corner of Lot 16 of Wilcox's Addition; thence northwesterly to the southeast
corner of Lot 3 of Wilcox's Addition, also being a point on the westerly
right-of-way line of McCarthy Street; thence northerly along the westerly
right-of-way line of McCarthy Street to a point 1 rod south of the southeast
corner of Lot 2 of Wilcox's Addition; thence westerly to a point 5 rods west
and 1 rod south of the southeast corner of Lot 2 of Wilcox's Addition; thence
northerly to a point 5 rods west of Lot 2 of Wilcox's Addition, also being a
point on the southerly right-of-way line of Livingston Street; thence
northwesterly to the southeast corner of Lot 262 of Crane and Brook's
Addition, also being a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Livingston
Street; thence northeasterly to a point 1 rod northeast of the northeast
corner of Lot 262 of Crane and Brook's Addition; thence northwesterly to a
point 7 rods south and 9 feet west of the northeast corner of Lot 264 of
Crane and Brook's Addition; thence northeasterly to a point of intersection 9
feet west of the northeasterly corner of Lot 264 of Crane and Brook's
Addition and the southerly right-of-way line of Brooks Street; thence
northeasterly to the southeast corner of Lot 222 of Crane and Brook's
Addition, also being a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Brooks
Street; thence southeasterly along the northerly right-of-way line of Brooks
Street to the southeast corner of Lot 225 of Crane and Brook's Addition;
thence northeasterly to the northeast corner of Lot 225 of Crane and Brook's
Addition; thence northwesterly along the northerly line of Lot 225 of Crane
and Brook's Addition, to a point 40 feet northwest of the northeast corner of
Lot 225 of Crane and Brook's Addition; thence north 28 degrees east, 43 feet;
thence north 62 degrees west, 60 feet; thence north 28 degrees east, 89 feet,
to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Crane Street; thence
northeasterly across Crane Street right-of-way to the southeast corner of Lot
179 Crane and Brook's Addition; thence southeasterly along the northerly
right-of-way line of Crane Street to the southeast corner of Lot 170 of Crane
and Brook's Addition; thence northeasterly to the northeast corner of Lot 170
of Crane and Brook's Addition; thence northwesterly to the northwest corner
of Lot 170 of Crane and Brook's Addition; thence northeasterly to a point
82.5 feet southeasterly of the southwest corner of Lot 1 of Crane and Brook's
Addition, also being a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Washington
Street; thence northeasterly along the northerly right-of-way line of
Washington Street to the southeast corner of Lot 1 of Crane and Brook's
Addition, also being a point on the easterly right-of-way line of State
Street; thence northeasterly to a point 22 feet south of the southwest corner
of Lot 2 of Crane and Brook's Addition; thence southeasterly parallel to the
southerly line of Lot 2 to the easterly line of Lot 27 of Cowdry's Addition;
thence northeasterly to the southeast corner of Lot 16; thence southeasterly
along the southerly line of Lot 17 through 21 and 29 to the east right-of-way
of Barnard Street; thence northeasterly to the south right-of-way of Sibley
Street; thence southeasterly along said right-of-way to the west right-of-way
of National Street; thence south to the south line of Section 36; thence east
to the place of beginning. All distances have been taken from tax
descriptions and recorded plats and are approximate.



(Ord. 630.  Passed 5-13-96.)



285.07  BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of the
Board.  The Board shall consist of the Chief Executive Officer and eight
members.  Members shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer, subject
to approval by the Council.  Not less than a majority of the members shall
be persons having an interest in property located in the Downtown District. 
Not less than one of the members shall be a resident of the Downtown District
if the Downtown District has 100 or more persons residing within it. 
Members shall be appointed to serve for a term of four years, except that of
the members first appointed, an equal number, as near as is practicable,
shall be appointed for terms of one year, two years, three years, and four
years.  A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed
and qualified.  Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify
by taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.  An
appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the Chief Executive Officer
for the unexpired term only.  Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. 
The Chairperson of the Board shall be elected by the Board. The Board shall
adopt bylaws governing its procedures subject to the approval of the
Council.  In the event that the Board determines to employ a Director of the
Authority, such Director shall furnish a bond in the penal sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) payable to the Authority for use and benefit of
the Authority and shall file the same with the City Clerk of the City.



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91; Ord. 740. Passed 4-7-03.)



285.08  POWERS OF AUTHORITY.



   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter, the Downtown
Development Authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the
limitations imposed by law and herein.  The Downtown Development Authority
shall not have the power to levy a tax.



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91.)



285.09  FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (a)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on July 1 of each
year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as
may hereafter be adopted by the Council.



   (b)   The Board shall prepare annually a budget and shall submit it
to the Council for approval in the manner and at the time, and which budget
shall contain the information, required of Municipal departments.  The Board
shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has
been approved by the Council.  The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a
budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been
financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance
authorizing the revenue bonds.



   (c)   The Authority shall submit financial reports to the Council at
the same time and on the same basis as departments of the City are required
to submit reports.  The Authority shall be audited annually by the same
independent auditors auditing the City, and copies of the audit report shall
be filed with the Council. 



(Ord. 533.  Passed 1-2-91.)



CHAPTER 286
Tax Increment Finance Authority



EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Tax Increment Finance Authority are
codified in Chapter 896 of Part Eight - the Business Regulation and Taxation
Code.



CHAPTER 287
Local Development Finance Authority



EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Local Development Finance Authority
are codified in Chapter 898 of Part Eight - the Business Regulation and
Taxation Code.



CHAPTER 288
Cable Television Commission



EDITOR'S NOTE:  This chapter, previously titled Cable T.V. Commission, was
repealed by implication by Ordinance 615, passed September 5, 1995, codified
as new Chapter 803 of these Codified Ordinances.



   There are no sections in Chapter 288.  This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Notice of public meetings - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 15.264



   Encroachments on highways and roads - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 247.1 et seq.



   Construction and maintenance of facilities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 247.183
et seq.



   Television and radio generally - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 484.301 et seq.,
750.507 et seq.



   Cables improperly located; insurance - see M.C.L.A. Sec. 500.3123



   Cable television franchises - see B.R. & T. Ch. 803



   Cable television rates - see B.R. & T. Ch. 804



CHAPTER 289
Brownfield Redevelopment Authority



EDITOR’S NOTE:  Provisions relating to the Brownfield Redevelopment
Authority are codified in Chapter 899 of Part Eight - the Business Regulation
and Taxation Code.



TITLE TEN - Judiciary



CHAPTER 290
Municipal Court



EDITOR'S NOTE: The Howell Municipal Court was abolished by the State
legislature in 1968. Violations of Municipal law are prosecuted in the
Fifty-Third District Court of the State. Equitable remedies are pursued in
the Forty-Fourth Judicial Circuit Court of the State.



   There are no sections in Chapter 290. This chapter has been established
to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Circuit Courts generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 6, Sec. 1; M.C.L.
Secs. 600.501 et seq.



   Courts generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 6, Secs. 1 et seq.; M.C.L.
Secs. 600.101 et seq.



   Municipal Court - see CHTR. Ch. 8



   District Courts generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 600.8101 et seq.



   General Code penalty; complicity - see ADM. 202.99



PART FOUR - TRAFFIC CODE



   Chap. 400.   Michigan Vehicle Code.



   Chap. 410   Uniform Traffic Code.



   Chap. 420   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.



   Chap. 430   Parking Violations Bureau.



   Chap. 440   Miscellaneous Regulations.



   Chap. 450   Cost Recovery and Reimbursement for Emergency Responses.



CHAPTER 400
Michigan Vehicle Code



400.01   Adoption by reference.



400.02   Reference in code.



400.03   Citation.



400.04   Notices to be published.



400.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Adoption of codes by reference - see CHTR. Sec. 6.5



400.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923 as amended
through February 29, 2012, is incorporated and adopted by reference.



(Ord. 745.  Passed 9-22-03; Ord. 786.  Passed 9-11-06; Ord. 805.  Passed
9-10-07; Ord. 814.  Passed 9- 8-08; Ord. 825.  Passed 9-14-09; Ord. 837. 
Passed 6-28-10; Ord. 853.  Passed 4-9-12.)



400.02  REFERENCE IN CODE.



   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall
mean the City of Howell.



(Ord. 745.  Passed 9-22-03; Ord. 786.  Passed 9-11-06; Ord. 805.  Passed
9-10-07; Ord. 814.  Passed 9-8-08; Ord. 825.  Passed 9-14-09; Ord. 837. 
Passed 6-28-10.)



400.03  CITATION.



   Section citations to this Code shall be preceded by the prefix "H."



(Ord. 745.  Passed 9-22-03; Ord. 786.  Passed 9-11-06; Ord. 805.  Passed
9-10-07; Ord. 814.  Passed 9-8-08; Ord. 825.  Passed 9-14-09; Ord. 837. 
Passed 6-28-10.)



400.04  NOTICES TO BE PUBLISHED.



   The Howell City Clerk shall publish this Ordinance in the manner
required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the
purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the
Code is available to the public at the office of the Clerk for inspection.



(Ord. 745.  Passed 9-22-03; Ord. 786.  Passed 9-11-06; Ord. 805.  Passed
9-10-07; Ord. 814.  Passed 9-8-08; Ord. 825.  Passed 9-14-09; Ord. 837. 
Passed 6-28-10.)



400.99  PENALTY.



   The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by
reference, and that the City may not enforce any provision of the Michigan
Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93
days. The exception to this provision is adoption by reference of MCL
257.625(l)(c) in which the violation for this specific Section of the
Michigan Vehicle Code is punishable by one or more of the following:



   (a)   Community service for not more than 360 hours;



   (b)   Imprisonment for not more than 180 days;



   (c)   A fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more
than seven hundred dollars ($700.00).



(Ord. 745.  Passed 9-22-03; Ord. 786.  Passed 9-11-06; Ord. 805.  Passed
9-10-07; Ord. 814.  Passed 9-8-08; Ord. 825.  Passed 9-14-09; Ord. 837. 
Passed 6-28-10; Ord. 853.  Passed 4-9-12.)



CHAPTER 410 Uniform Traffic Code



410.01   Adoption by reference.



410.02   References in Code.



410.03   Citation.



410.04   Notices to be published.



410.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Adoption of codes by reference - see CHTR. Sec. 6.5



   Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec.
117.4h



   Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 257.601 et
seq., 257.634 et seq.



   Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L. Secs. 257.951 et seq.



   Traffic control at Thompson Lake - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.01



   Traffic control in Lake View Cemetery - see S.U. & P.S. 1064.02



410.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as
promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police
pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969,being Act 306 of the
Public Acts of 1969, being M.C.L.A. Sections 24.201 to 24.328 and made
effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the
Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this state
are incorporated and adopted by reference.



(Ord. 414. Passed 8-10-81; Ord. 746.  Passed 9-22-03.)



410.02  REFERENCES IN CODE.



   References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Howell.



(Ord. 414. Passed 8-10-81; Ord. 746.  Passed 9-22-03.)



   Section citations to this Code shall be preceded by the prefix "HUTC."



(Ord. 746.  Passed 9-22-03.)



410.04  NOTICES TO BE PUBLISHED.



   The Howell City Clerk shall publish this Ordinance in the manner
required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the
purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages and
the fact that a complete copy of the Code is available to the public at the
office of the Clerk for inspection.



(Ord. 746.  Passed 9-22-03.)



410.99  PENALTY.



   The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships and Villages are adopted by reference.
(Ord. 746.  Passed 9-22-03.)



CHAPTER 420
Commercial and Heavy Vehicles



420.01   Weight limits; truck routes.



420.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Turn signals - see U.T.C. Secs. 5.35, 5.78



   Use on certain highways prohibited - see U.T.C. Sec. 5.61



   Windshield defrosters required - see U.T.C. Sec. 5.81



   Mud flaps required - see U.T.C. Sec. 5.88



   Flag or lamp required; projecting load - see U.T.C. Sec. 5.89



   Commercial vehicle defined - see TRAF. 410.03(U.T.C. Sec 1.007)



   D.U.I - see TRAF. 410.03(U.T.C. Secs. 5.01, 5.15 et seq.)



   Truck loads causing litter - see GEN. OFF. 652.05(f)



420.01  WEIGHT LIMITS; TRUCK ROUTES.



   (a)   Intent. The intent and purpose of this section is to protect
the surfacing and pavements of the public streets and alleys of the City and
to such end the same shall be liberally construed.



   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      (1)   "Truck" means a motor vehicle designed, used or
maintained primarily for the transportation of property.



      (2)   "Commercial vehicle" means a motor vehicle used for the
transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for the
transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or a motor vehicle
designed and used for drawing another vehicle and not so constructed as to
carry any load thereon, either independently or as any part of the weight of
a vehicle or load so drawn.



   (c)   Designated Truck Routes. No person shall operate or cause to
be operated a commercial vehicle or truck on any of the public streets or
alleys of the City, except as herein otherwise provided, except upon the
following public streets which are hereby designated as commercial vehicle or
truck routes:



   Barnard St., between Sibley St. and the A.A. Railroad.



   Catrell Dr., between Grand River Ave. and Sutton Ave.



   Clinton St. between Center St. and State St.



   Chestnut St., between Sibley St. and Grand River Ave.



   Centel St. between Sibley St. and Wetmore St.



   Court St. between Sibley St. and Grand River Ave.



   Dearborn St., from Marion St. to Livingston St.



   Elm St. from North St. to Grand River Ave.



   Fowler St. from the C. & O. Railroad to Grand River Ave.



   Grand River Ave., from the east City limits to the west City limits.



   Lucy Rd., from Grand River Ave. to the south City limits.



   Livingston St., from Dearborn St. to Fowler St.



   Livingston St., from S. Michigan Ave. to W. Walnut St.



   Michigan Ave., from Pinckney Rd. to Grand River Ave. From Grand River
to M-59, weight limits shall be as provided in subsection (e)hereof.



   Marion St., from Pinckney Rd. to Dearborn St.



   Mason Rd., from the west City limits to Pinckney Rd.



   Morgan Dr., from Pinckney Rd. to the end of the street.



   M-59, Highland Rd., all those sections within the City limits.



   National Ave., from the south City limits to Sutton Ave.



   North St., from National St. to Roosevelt St.



   Pinckney Rd., from the south City limits to Michigan Ave.



   Pulford St., between Pinckney Rd. and Jones St.



   Roosevelt St., between North St. and Mt. Olive Cemetery.



   Sibley St., from Fair St. to National Ave.



   S. Highlander Way, from the C. & O. Railroad to W. Grand River Ave.



   State St., between Grand River Ave. and Clinton St.



   Sutton Ave., between National Ave. and the east end.



   Sibley St., between Chestnut St. and Fowler St.



   Wetmore St., between Center St. and Walnut St.



   Walnut St., between Sibley St. and Wetmore St.



   (d)   Exceptions. The restrictions imposed in subsection (c) hereof
shall not apply to any vehicle the weight of which, loaded or unloaded, is
5,000 pounds or less, and shall not prevent the delivery of any person or
property to any place in the City or prevent a vehicle from receiving any
person or property at any place in the City. In addition, the Chief of
Police, at his or her discretion, may issue a permit for the operation of a
truck or commercial vehicle on any public street or alley in the City.



   (e)   North Michigan Avenue. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated a commercial vehicle weighing more than 10,000 pounds on North
Michigan Avenue between Grand River and M-59, unless the vehicle is owned or
operated by a governmental body or unless the vehicle is making deliveries to
residences or businesses located on or accessible only from North Michigan
Avenue.



(Ord. 301. Passed 5-16-72; Ord. 484. Passed 2-2-87; Ord. 493. Passed 11-9-87;
Ord. 697.  Passed 11-8-99.)



   (f)   Signs. Notice of the prohibitions and limitations set forth in
this section shall be given by posting appropriate and legible signs, such as
may be seen by an ordinarily observant person, upon or at the entrance to the
streets or parts thereof affected by the provisions hereof.



   (g)   Enforcement. The Chief of Police and other police officers of
the City shall enforce all weight, size and other vehicle and load
limitations imposed by the Uniform Traffic Code, as adopted in Section
410.01, in addition to the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 195. Passed 10-17-60.)



420.99     PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 430
Parking Violations Bureau



430.01   Establishment; responsibility of City Clerk.



430.02   Authority of City Clerk.



430.03   Procedure for processing violations.



430.04   Issuance of violations; contents of notice of violation.



430.05   Parking offenses and fine schedule.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Parking generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 257.672 et seq.; U.T.C. Secs.
1.019 et seq., 8.10 et seq.



   Municipal violations bureaus in counties of 100,000 or more - see
M.C.L. Sec. 725.301



   Parking for handicapped persons - see TRAF. 440.02



   Storage of junk vehicles - see GEN. OFF. 622.05



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1276



   Fire lanes - see F. P. Ch. 1620



   Parking in HL Historic Limited Use Districts - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240
(Zoning Code)



430.01  ESTABLISHMENT; RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY CLERK.



   Pursuant to M.C.L. 600.8395, a Parking Violations Bureau is hereby
established for the purpose of accepting civil infraction admissions in
parking violation cases and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as
prescribed by this chapter. The Bureau shall be under the supervision and
control of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 522. Passed 3-26-90.)



430.02  AUTHORITY OF CITY CLERK.



   The City Clerk shall establish a location for the Parking Violations
Bureau and adopt rules and regulations for its operation. The City Clerk
shall appoint the Chief of Police, or, subject to the approval of Council,
any other qualified City employee to administer the day-to-day affairs of the
Bureau.



(Ord. 522. Passed 3-26-90.)



430.03  PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING VIOLATIONS.



   All parking violations as enumerated in this chapter and issued under
this chapter shall be disposed of by the Parking Violations Bureau.
Violations may be settled by the City Clerk, the Chief of Police or a
designated administrator upon request by an alleged violator of this chapter.
If a violation has not been settled within the time periods set forth in
Section 430.05, then the Bureau shall cause to be issued a civil infraction
citation against the alleged violator. All civil infraction citations issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be processed in the same manner as a civil
infraction under Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended.



(Ord. 522. Passed 3-26-90.)



430.04  ISSUANCE OF VIOLATIONS; CONTENTS OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The issuance of a notice of violation by a duly appointed City employee
or a police officer of the City shall be deemed an allegation of a parking
violation. Such notice of violation shall indicate the address of the Bureau,
the hours during which the Bureau is open, the length of time to respond
before the Bureau, the amount of the scheduled penalty for the violation, and
notice that failure to respond shall be cause for the Bureau to issue a civil
infraction citation pursuant to Section 430.03.



(Ord. 522. Passed 3-26-90.)



430.05  PARKING OFFENSES AND FINE SCHEDULE.



   (a)   Parking Offenses.  Following is the schedule of parking
offenses in the City:



      (1)   On or encroaching upon a sidewalk.



      (2)   In front of or encroaching upon a public or private
driveway.



      (3)   Within an intersection.



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.



      (5)   On a crosswalk.



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if there is not a
crosswalk, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an
intersection of highways.



      (7)   Within 30 feet of the approach to a flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a highway.



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by an official sign or marking.



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.



      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to a fire station
within 75 feet of the entrance if properly marked by an official sign.



      (11)   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or
obstruction, if the stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



      (12)   On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.



      (13)   Upon a bridge or other elevated highway structure or
within a highway tunnel.



      (14)   Within 500 feet of an accident at which a police
officer is in attendance, if the scene of the accident is outside of a city
or village.



      (15)   In front of a theater.



      (16)   In a place or in a manner that blocks immediate egress
from an emergency exit conspicuously marked as an emergency exit of a
building.



      (17)   In a place or in a manner that blocks or hampers the
immediate use of an immediate egress from a fire escape conspicuously marked
as a fire escape providing an emergency means of egress from a building.



      (18)   In a parking space clearly identified by an official
sign as being reserved for use by disabled persons that is on public property
or private property available for public use, unless the individual is a
disabled person as described in section 19a of Chapter 400 or unless the
individual is parking the vehicle for the benefit of a disabled person. In
order for the vehicle to be parked in the parking space the vehicle shall
display one of the following:



         A.   A certificate of identification or windshield
placard issued under section 675 of Chapter 400 to a disabled person.



         B.   A special registration plate issued under section
803d of Chapter 400 to a disabled person.



         C.   A similar certificate of identification or
windshield placard issued by another state to a disabled person.



         D.   A similar special registration plate issued by
another state to a disabled person.



         E.   A special registration plate to which the tab for
persons with disabilities is attached issued under this act.



      (19)   In a clearly identified access aisle or access lane
immediately adjacent to a space designated for parking by persons with
disabilities.



      (20)   On a street or other area open to the parking of
vehicles that results in the vehicle interfering with the use of a curb-cut
or ramp by persons with disabilities.



      (21)   Within 500 feet of a fire at which the fire apparatus
is in attendance, if the scene of the fire is outside a city or village.
However, volunteer fire fighters responding to the fire may park within 500
feet of the fire in a manner not to interfere with fire apparatus at the
scene. A vehicle parked legally previous to the fire is exempt from this
paragraph.



      (22)   In violation of an official sign restricting the period
of time for or manner of parking.



      (23)   In a space controlled or regulated by a meter on a
public highway or in a publically owned parking area or structure, if the
allowable time for parking indicated on the meter has expired, unless the
vehicle properly displays one or more of the items listed in section 675(8)
of Chapter 400.



      (24)   On a street or highway in such a way as to obstruct the
delivery of mail in a rural mailbox by a carrier of the United States postal
service.



      (25)   In a place or in a manner that blocks access to a space
clearly designated as a fire lane.



      (26)   In a place or in a manner that blocks the use of an
alley.



      (27)   In any Howell School District lot without a valid
parking permit (student).



      (28)   A person shall not park or stand a vehicle in a roadway
which is to the right of the finished hard surface. A person shall park or
stand a vehicle parallel with the edge of the hard surface, headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the hard surface.  A hard
surface is otherwise defined as the finished road or designated parking area
comprised of asphalt, concrete or an area containing crushed gravel or stone
sufficient to accommodate a motor vehicle.



      (29)   Displaying vehicle for sale within the public
right-of-way or upon City owned real property.



      (30)   Working on or repairing vehicle within public
right-of-way, except for emergency repairs made to move an otherwise disabled
vehicle.



      (31)   A vehicle shall not be parked in an area purchased,
acquired, or used as a clear vision area adjacent to or on a highway
right-of-way. A person shall not conduct vending or other commercial
enterprises in a clear vision area.



      (32)   A person shall not display advertising and sell
merchandise from a vehicle within the public right-of-way or upon City owned
real property.



      (33)   Prohibited zones as posted.



      (34)   Prohibited parking in areas where a permit issued by
the City is required (boat launch and City park as examples).



      (35)   Failure to move from the public right-of-way a disabled
or abandoned vehicle. Failure to move said vehicle under such conditions
shall cause the City to remove the vehicle at the owner's expense.



      (36)   Prohibited parking in areas contrary to Chapter 1240 of
the City of Howell Zoning Ordinance as it exists upon the date of enactment
of this section and as amended, from time to time, in the future.



   (b)   Fine Schedule.  Following is the schedule of fines for
parking violations in the City:

               Penalty         Penalty        �
�Penalty

               (If Paid      (Not Paid      (Not
Paid

      Offense      Within 48 Hrs.)   Within 48
Hrs.)   Within 10 Days)

   1.   Parking in parking

      lot over posted      $ 5.00         $
10.00         $ 30.00

      time limits.

   2.   Parking on designated

      streets over time limit.   $
5.00         $10.00         $ 30.00

   3.   Bicycle parking

      violations.      $
5.00         $10.00         $ 30.00

   4.   Handicap
Zone.   $60.00         $80.00         $100.00

   35.   Prohibited
Zone   $30.00         $60.00         $80.00

      (City boat launch &

      City Park with no

      seasonal permit)



   The following offenses shall carry a civil fine of ten dollars ($10.00)
per violation and, if not paid within ten days, the amount of the fine shall
be increased to twenty dollars ($20.00).



   5.   Parking too far from curb.



   6.   Angle parking violations.



   7.   Obstructing traffic.



   8.   On or encroaching upon a sidewalk.



   9.   Within an intersection.



   10.   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.



   11.   On a crosswalk.



   12.   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if there is not a crosswalk,
then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection
of highways.



   13.   Within 30 feet of the approach to a flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a highway.



   14.   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.



   15.   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station.



   16.   On the side of a street opposite the entrance to a fire
station within 75 feet of the entrance if properly marked by an official sign.



   17.   On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street, i.e. double parking.



   18.   Upon a bridge or other elevated highway structure or within a
highway tunnel.



   19.   In front of a theater.



   20.   In a place or in a manner that blocks immediate egress from an
emergency exit conspicuously marked as an emergency exit of a building.



   21.   In a place or in a manner that blocks or hampers the immediate
use of an immediate egress from a fire escape conspicuously marked as a fire
escape providing an emergency means of egress from a building.



   22.   In a place or in a manner that blocks the use of an alley.



   23.   Displaying vehicle for sale within the public right-of-way or
upon City owned real property.



   24.   Working on or repairing vehicle within public right-of-way,
except for emergency repairs made to move an otherwise disabled vehicle.



   25.   Displaying advertising within the public right-of-way or upon
City owned real property.



   26.   Selling merchandise from a vehicle within the public
right-of-way or upon City owned real property.



   27.   Loading zone violations.



   28.   Failure to set brakes.



   29.   Parked on grade and wheels not turned to curb.



   30.   Parked left to curb.



   31.   Abandoned vehicle within public right-of-way.



   32.   Disabled vehicle, failure to move from public right-of-way.



   33.   Unattended vehicle with keys in ignition or motor running.



   34.   All night parking as posted.



   35.   Parking in areas requiring a permit (including boat launch and
City park with no seasonal permit), except as otherwise set forth above, with
respect to the boat launch and City Park seasonal permits.



   36.   Tow away zones.



   37.   In a place or in a manner that blocks access to a space
clearly designated as a fire lane.



   38.   On a street or highway in such a way as to obstruct the
delivery of mail in a rural mailbox by a carrier of the United States postal
service.



   39.   In any Howell School District lot without a valid parking
permit (student).



   40.   Parking right of a hard surface.



   41.   A vehicle shall not be parked in an area purchased, acquired,
or used as a clear vision area adjacent to or on a highway right-of-way. A
person shall not conduct vending or other commercial enterprises in a clear
vision area.



   42.   In front of or encroaching upon a public or private driveway.



   43.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet
of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless
a different length is indicated by an official sign or marking.



   44.   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction, if
the stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



   45.   Reserved for future use.



   46.   Snow emergency.



   47.   Special event.



   48.   Prohibited parking in areas contrary to Chapter 1240 of the
City of Howell Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 522.  Passed 3-26-90; Ord. 692.  Passed 7-6-99; Ord. 841.  Passed
12-20-10; Ord. 844.  Passed 5-9-11; Ord. 917.  Passed 8-13-18.)



CHAPTER 440
Miscellaneous Regulations



440.01   School Board property.



440.02   Parking for handicapped persons.



440.03   Prohibited vehicles in public parks and cemeteries.



440.04   Fire Department vehicles.



440.05   Motor vehicle liability insurance.



440.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   School buildings and grounds - see M.C.L. Secs. 322. 281 et seq.,
388.851 et seq.



   Right of way of authorized emergency vehicles - see U.T.C. Sec. 5.1



   Application of U.T.C. to motorcycles and mopeds - see U.T.C. Secs. 6.1,
6.2



   Riding on motorcycles and mopeds - see U.T.C. Sec. 6.8



   Mandatory child restraints - see TRAF. 410.03 (U.T.C. Sec. 5.82)



   Safety belts - see TRAF. 410.03 (U.T.C. Sec. 5.83)



   Parking Violations Bureau - see TRAF. Ch. 430



440.01  SCHOOL BOARD PROPERTY.



   (a)   The provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code, as adopted in
Section 1410. 01, are hereby expressly made applicable to property of the
Howell Public School System. (Adopting Ordinance)



   (b)   Council may from time to time, by ordinance, establish
reasonable rates of speed, the direction of vehicular traffic, stop signs and
parking restrictions for property of the Howell Public School System, such
regulations to be first approved by the Board of Education of the School
District, provided the same are not in conflict with any of the provisions of
the Uniform Traffic Code, as adopted in Section 410. 01.



   (c)   At any time from and after the effective date of this
subsection (Ordinance 279, passed November 30, 1970), the City may remove any
and all traffic control orders established on property owned by the School
District without the consent or prior approval of the School Board.



(Ord. 279. Passed 11-30-70.)



   (d)   No person shall violate any regulation or traffic control
order established by Council pursuant to this section.



440.02  PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.



   (a)   As used in this section, "handicapper" means a person who has
a physical characteristic categorized as a handicap, which handicap limits
ambulation or necessitates the use of a wheelchair for mobility, or a person
who is blind.



   (b)   Every vehicle parking in parking spaces designated for
handicappers shall be equipped with special license plates or serially
numbered registration displayed on the vehicle.



   (c)   Any person parking a vehicle in a parking space designated for
handicappers, which vehicle is not equipped with special plates or serially
numbered registration indicating that it is a handicapper's vehicle, shall be
guilty of a civil infraction and such violation shall be processed in the
same manner as a civil infraction under Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949,
as amended, being MCL 257.1 to 257.923.



(Ord. 410. Passed 6-29-81.)



440.03  PROHIBITED VEHICLES IN PUBLIC PARKS AND CEMETERIES.



   (a)   No person shall operate any of the following vehicles within
the public parks of the City or within the cemetery owned and operated by the
City as follows:



      (1)   Mopeds as defined by MCL 257.32b of the Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code;



      (2)   Snowmobiles as defined by MCL 324.82101;



      (3)   Off-road vehicles or “ORV” as defined in MCL
324.81101.



   (b)   No person shall operate any other vehicle allowed within the
public parks of the City or within the cemetery owned and operated by the
City in any place other than designated roadways and parking areas.



(Ord. 684.  Passed 9-28-98.)



440.04  FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES.



   (a)   All motor equipment of the Fire Department and all personal
motor vehicles of Department members shall have the right of way over all
other traffic when responding to an alarm. No person shall fail to yield such
right of way to any such equipment or vehicle at such times.



   (b)   Each member of the Fire Department driving a motor vehicle
shall be issued a suitable insignia to be attached to the motor vehicle.



(Ord. 134. Passed 2-7-50.)



440.05  MOTOR VEHICLE LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   (a)   No owner or registrant of a motor vehicle, with respect to
which security is required by MCLA 500.3101 et seq., shall operate the motor
vehicle, or permit it to be operated, upon a highway or other place open to
the general public, including an area designated for the parking of motor
vehicles within the City, without having in full force and effect security
complying with such statutes. Whoever violates this subsection is guilty of a
misdemeanor.



   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
other place open to the general public, including an area designated for the
parking of motor vehicles within the City, with the knowledge that the owner
or registrant of the motor vehicle does not have security in full force and
effect as required by MCLA 500.3101 et seq.; MSA 24.13101 et seq. Whoever
violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (c)   The owner of a motor vehicle who operates or permits the
operation of the motor vehicle upon the highways of the City, or the operator
of the motor vehicle, shall produce, pursuant to subsection (b), upon the
request of a police officer, evidence that the motor vehicle is insured under
Chapter 31 of the Insurance Code of 1956, Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of
1956, being sections 500.3101 to 500.3179 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. An
owner or operator of a motor vehicle who fails to produce evidence of
insurance under this subsection when requested to produce that evidence or
who fails to have motor vehicle insurance for the vehicle as required under
Chapter 31 of Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1956, is responsible for a
civil infraction.



   (d)   A certificate of insurance, if issued by an insurance company,
which certificate states that security which meets the requirements of
sections 3101 and 3102 of the Michigan Compiled Laws is in force, shall be
accepted as prima-facie evidence that insurance is in force for the motor
vehicle described in the certificate of insurance until the expiration date
shown on the certificate. The certificate, in addition to describing the
motor vehicles for which insurance is in effect, shall state the name of each
person named on the policy, policy declaration or a declaration certificate
whose operation of the vehicle would cause the liability coverage of that
insurance to become void.



   (e)   If an owner or operator of a motor vehicle is determined to be
responsible for a violation of subsection (c) hereof, the court in which the
civil infraction determination is entered may require the person to surrender
his or her operator's or chauffeur's license unless proof that the vehicle
has insurance meeting the requirements of sections 3101 and 3102 of Act No.
218 of the Public Acts of 1956, is submitted to the court. If the person
submits proof to the court that the vehicle has insurance meeting the
requirements of sections 3101 and 3102 of Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of
1956, in addition to the civil fine and costs provided by Section 907 of the
Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, being MCLA 257.907; MSA 9.2607, the court shall
assess a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If the court requires the
license to be surrendered, the court shall order the secretary of state to
suspend the person's license. The court shall immediately destroy the license
and shall forward to the secretary of state an abstract of the court record
as required by Section 732 of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, being MCLA
257.732; MSA 9.2432. Upon receipt of the abstract, the secretary of state
shall suspend the person's license beginning with the date on which such
person is determined to be responsible for the civil infraction, for a period
of 30 days or until proof of insurance which meets the requirements of
section 3101 and 3102 of Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1956, is submitted
to the secretary of state, whichever occurs later. A person who submits proof
of insurance to the secretary of state under this subsection shall pay a
service fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the secretary of state. The
person shall not be required to be examined as set forth in Section 320c of
the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, being MCLA 257.320c; MSA 9.2020(3), and
shall not be required to pay a replacement license fee.



   (f)   If an owner or operator of a motor vehicle is determined to be
responsible for a violation of subsection (c), the court in which the civil
infraction determination is entered shall notify the secretary of state of
the vehicle registration number and the year and make of the motor vehicle
being operated at the time of the violation. This notification shall be made
on the abstract or on a form approved by the supreme administrator. Upon
receipt, the secretary of state shall immediately enter this information in
the records of the department. The secretary of state shall not renew,
transfer, or replace the registration plate of the vehicle involved in the
violation or allow the purchase of a new registration plate for the vehicle
involved in the violation until the owner meets the requirements of Section
227a of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, being MCLA 257.227a; MSA 9.1927a, or
unless the vehicle involved in the violation is transferred or sold to a
person other than the owner's spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, or
child.



   (g)   An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who knowingly produces
false evidence under this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.



   (h)   Points shall not be entered on a driver's record pursuant to
Section 320a of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, being MCLA 257.320a; MSA
9.2020(1), for a violation of this section.



   (i)   This section does not apply to the owner or operator of a
motor vehicle that is registered in a state other than this state or a
foreign country of province.



(Ord. 639.  Passed 2-17-97.)



440.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 450
Cost Recovery and Reimbursement for Emergency Responses



EDITOR’S NOTE:  This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 578,
passed April 5, 1993, was repealed in its entirety and re-enacted by
Ordinance 695, passed September 13, 1999.



450.01   Definitions.



450.02   Incidents requiring reimbursement.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Police Department - see ADM. Ch. 236



   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 238



   D.U.I. - see TRAF. 410.03 (U.T.C. Secs. 5.01, 5.15 et seq.)



   Fire Department vehicles - see TRAF. 440.04



   Motor vehicle liability insurance - see TRAF. 440.05



   Recovery of costs for responses to hazardous spills, releases or
discharges - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 620



450.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Aircraft" means that term as defined in Section 4 of the
Aeronautics Code of the State of Michigan, 1945 PA 327, MCL 259.4.



   (b)   "Local unit of government" means the City of Howell.



   (c)   "Motor vehicle" means that term as defined in Section 33 of
the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.33.



   (d)   "ORV" means that term as defined in Section 81101 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
324.81101.



   (e)   "Snowmobile" means that term as defined in Section 8210 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
324.82101.



   (f)   "Vessel" means that term as defined in Section 82108 of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
324.82108.



(Ord. 695.  Passed 9-13-99.)



450.02  INCIDENTS REQUIRING REIMBURSEMENT.



   (a)   As part of the sentence for a conviction of any of the
following offenses, in addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the
court may order the person convicted to reimburse the City for expenses
incurred in relation to that incident, including, but not limited to,
expenses for an emergency response and expenses for prosecuting the person,
as provided in this section:



      (1)   A violation of Section 410.03(UTC Section 5.15(1), (3),
(4), (5), (6) or (7) or section 5.15m) of the Howell City Code.



      (2)   Felonious driving, negligent homicide, manslaughter, or
murder resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle, snowmobile, ORV,
aircraft, vessel or locomotive engine while the person was impaired by or
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, as
defined in section 7104 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7104,
or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or had an
unlawful blood alcohol content.



      (3)   A violation of Section 82127 of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.82127.



      (4)   A violation of Section 81134 or 81135 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.81134 and
324.8115.



      (5)   A violation of Section 185 of the Aeronautics Code of
the State of Michigan, 1945 PA 327, MCL 259.185.



      (6)   A violation of Section 80176(1), (3), (4) or (5) of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
324.80176.



      (7)   A violation of Section 353 or 355 of the Railroad Code
of 1993, 1993 PA 354, MCL 462.353 and 462.355.



   (b)   The expenses for which reimbursement may be ordered under this
chapter include all of the following:



      (1)   The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of City
law enforcement personnel for time spent responding to the incident from
which the conviction arose, arresting the person convicted, processing the
person after the arrest, preparing response on the incident, investigating
the incident and collecting and analyzing evidence, including determining the
blood alcohol content and the presence and identity of controlled substances
in the blood, breath or urine.



      (2)   The salaries, wages or other compensation, including
overtime pay, of City fire department and emergency medical service
personnel, including City volunteer fire-fighters or City volunteer emergency
medical service personnel, for time spent responding to, and providing
fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services in relation to, the
incident from which the conviction arose.



      (3)   The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by the
City fire department and emergency medical service personnel, including City
volunteer fire-fighters or City volunteer emergency medical service
personnel, in providing services in relation to the incident from which the
conviction arose.



   (c)   If police department, fire department, or emergency medical
service personnel from more than one unit of government incurred expenses as
described in subsection (b)hereof, the court may order the person convicted
to reimburse each unit of government for the expenses it incurred.



   (d)   The amount ordered to be paid under this chapter shall be paid
to the clerk of the court, who shall transmit the appropriate amounts to the
City to receive reimbursement. If not otherwise provided by the court under
this subsection, the reimbursement ordered under this chapter shall be made
immediately.  However, the court may require that the person make the
reimbursement ordered under this chapter within a specified period or in
specified installments. 



   (e)   If the person convicted is placed on probation or parole, any
reimbursement ordered under this chapter shall be a condition of that
probation or parole. The court may revoke probation and the parole board may
revoke parole if the person fails to comply with the order and if the person
has not made a good faith effort to comply with the order. In determining
whether to revoke probation or parole, the court or parole board shall
consider the person's employment status, earning ability, number of
dependents, financial resources, the willfulness of the person's failure to
pay, and any other special circumstances that may have a bearing on the
person's ability to pay.



   (f)   An order for reimbursement under this chapter may be enforced
by the prosecuting attorney of the State or the City attorney to received the
reimbursement in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action.



   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the chapter, a person
shall not be imprisoned, jailed or incarcerated for a violation of parole or
probation, or otherwise, for failure to make reimbursement as ordered under
this chapter unless the court determines that the person has the resources to
pay the ordered reimbursement and has not made a good faith effort to do so.



   (h)   The City may elect to be reimbursed for expenses under this
chapter or 1998 PA 345. This subsection does not allow the City to be fully
reimbursed more than once for any expenses incurred herein by the City.



(Ord. 695.  Passed 9-13-99.)



PART SIX - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE



      Chap. 604   Alcoholic Beverages.



      Chap. 606   Animals.



      Chap. 612   Drugs.



      Chap. 618   Gambling.



      Chap. 620   Howell Area Fire Authority Charges.



      Chap. 622   Health, Safety and Sanitation.



      Chap. 652   Nuisances.



      Chap. 656   Offenses Relating to Persons.



      Chap. 658   Offenses Relating to Property.



      Chap. 662   Peace Disturbances.



      Chap. 668   Railroads.



      Chap. 688   Weapons and Explosives.



CHAPTER 604
Alcoholic Beverages



604.01   Prohibited in public parks.




604.02   Prohibited in Howell Shopping Center parking lot.





604.03   Permitted in Armory.





604.04   Sale to and possession by minors.





604.05   Selling  or  furnishing alcoholic liquor to minor; failure to
make diligent inquiry; violation as misdemeanor; penalty; signs; consumption
of alcoholic liquor as cause of death or injury; felony; enforcement against
licensee; consent of parent or guardian in undercover operation; defense in
action for violation; report; definitions.





604.05A   Selling, serving, or furnishing alcohol; prohibitions.





604.06   Purchase, consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor by
minor; attempt; chemical breath analysis; notice to parent, custodian, or
guardian; construction of section; exceptions; "any bodily alcohol content"
defined.





604.07   Power of peace officer or law enforcement officer witnessing
violation to stop and detain person; issuance of appearance ticket.





604.08   Presumptions; notice requirements.





604.09   Stop and detain; appearance tickets.





604.99   Violation, fines, sanctions; furnishing fraudulent identification
to minor; screening and assessment.




   CROSS REFERENCES



   Intoxicating liquors generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 436.1 et seq.



   Sales on Sundays and municipal election days - see M.C.L. Sec. 436.19e



   Driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor - see TRAF. 410.03
(U.T.C. Secs. 5.01, 5.15 et seq.)



   Possession of alcoholic liquor in a passenger compartment - see TRAF.
410.03(U.T.C. Secs. 5.16a, 5.16b)



   Drugs - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 612



   Public intoxication - see GEN. OFF. 662.01(b)(5)



604.01  PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   No person shall consume or have in his or her possession any
intoxicating liquor



or alcoholic beverage in a public park in the City.



(Ord. 121. Passed 7-15-47.)



604.02  PROHIBITED IN HOWELL SHOPPING CENTER PARKING LOT.



   No person shall consume intoxicants or have intoxicants open and
available for consumption upon the premises designated as the Howell Shopping
Center parking lot or upon or within any motor vehicle parked upon such
premises.



(Ord. 374. Passed 9-25-78.)



604.03  PERMITTED IN ARMORY.



   The serving and use of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the
Howell National Guard Armory, located at 725 South Isbell Street, by outside
parties of a nonmilitary or State governmental nature, is hereby authorized,
provided, however, that any such use of alcoholic beverages on such premises
shall be in conformity with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission, local ordinances, State and Federal rules and regulations
and rules in general orders of the Department of Military Affairs.



(Res. Unno. Passed 6-5-67.)



604.04  SALE TO AND POSSESSION BY MINORS.



   (a)   As used in this section "alcoholic liquor" means any
spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquid or compound, whether or
not medicated, proprietary or patented and by whatever name called,
containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, which is fit
for use for beverage purposes.



   (b)   A minor, defined as a person less than twenty-one years of
age, shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or
attempt to consume alcoholic liquor or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor,
except as provided in this chapter and by Section 703 of the Michigan Liquor
Control Code (hereinafter referred to as "the Code"), that being M.C.L.A.
436.1101 et seq.



   (c)   This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing
alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed by the Code, by the Commission or
by an agent of the Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for
his or her personal consumption.



   (d)   This section shall not be construed to limit the civil or
criminal liability of a vendor or a vendor's clerk, servant, agent or
employee for a violation of the Code.



(Ord. 696.  Passed 10-11-99.)



604.05  SELLING OR FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR TO MINOR; FAILURE TO MAKE
DILIGENT INQUIRY; VIOLATION AS MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY; SIGNS; CONSUMPTION OF
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AS CAUSE OF DEATH OR INJURY; FELONY; ENFORCEMENT AGAINST
LICENSEE; CONSENT OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN IN UNDERCOVER OPERATION; DEFENSE IN
ACTION FOR VIOLATION; REPORT; DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a minor.
Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) hereof and subject to
subsections (d), (e), and (f) hereof, a person who knowingly sells or
furnishes alcoholic liquor to a minor, or who fails to make diligent inquiry
as to whether the person is a minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A retail
licensee or a retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who violates this
subsection shall be punished in the manner provided for licensees in section
909 of the code except that if the violation is the result of an undercover
operation in which the minor received alcoholic liquor under the direction of
the State police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an
enforcement action, the retail licensee's clerk, agent or employee is
responsible for a State civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Except as otherwise
provided in subsection (b) hereof, a person who is not a retail licensee or a
retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee and who violates this subsection
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more that one thousand
dollars ($1,000) and imprisonment for not more than sixty days for a first
offense, a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500)
and imprisonment for not more than ninety days for a second or subsequent
offense, and may be ordered to perform community service.  For a second or
subsequent offense, the Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or
chauffeur's license of an individual who is not a retail licensee or retail
licensee's clerk, agent, or employee and who is convicted of violating this
subsection as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA
300, MCL 257.319. A suitable sign describing the content of this section and
the penalties for its violation shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
each room where alcoholic liquor is sold. The signs shall be approved and
furnished by the commission.



   (b)   A person who is not a retail licensee or the retail licensee's
clerk, agent, or employee and who violates subsection (a) hereof is guilty of
a felony, punishable by imprisonment for not more than ten years or a fine of
not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000), or both, if the subsequent
consumption of the alcoholic liquor by the minor is a direct and substantial
cause of the person's death or an accidental injury that causes that person's
death.



   (c)   If a violation occurs in an establishment that is licensed by
the commission for the consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed
premises, a person who is a licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of a
licensee shall not be charged with a violation of subsection (a) hereof or
section 801(2) unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the
licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due
diligence that person less than twenty-one years of age possessed or consumed
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent,
or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action.



   (d)   If the enforcing agency involved in the violation is the State
police or a local police agency, a licensee shall not be charged with a
violation of subsection (a) hereof or section 801 (2) of the code unless all
of the following occur, if applicable:



      (1)   Enforcement action is taken against the minor who
purchased or attempted to purchase, consume or attempted to consume, or
possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor.



      (2)   Enforcement action is taken under the section against
the person twenty-one years of age or older who is not the retail licensee or
the retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who sold or furnished the
alcoholic liquor to the minor.



      (3)   Enforcement action under this section is taken against
the clerk, agent, or employee who directly sold or furnished alcoholic liquor
to the minor.



   (e)   If the enforcing agency is the commission and an appearance
ticket or civil infraction citation has not been issued, then the commission
shall recommend to a local law enforcement agency that enforcement action be
taken against a violator of this section or section 703 who is not a
licensee. However, subsection (d) hereof does not apply if the minor against
whom enforcement action is taken under section 703, the clerk, agent, or
employee of the licensee who directly sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to
the minor, or the person twenty-one years of age or older who sold or
furnished alcoholic liquor to the minor is not alive or is not present in
this State at the time the licensee is charged. Subsection (d)(1) hereof does
not apply under either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The violation of subsection (a) hereof is the result of
an undercover operation in which the minor purchased or received alcoholic
liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior
approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employee-sponsored
internal enforcement action.



      (2)   The violation of subsection (a) hereof is the result of
an undercover operation in which the minor purchased or received alcoholic
liquor under the direction of the State police, the commission, or a local
police agency as part of an enforcement action.



   (f)   Any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of
alcoholic liquor by the minor under subsection (e)(1) or (2) hereof must have
been under the direction of the State police, the commission, or the local
police agency and must have been part of the undercover operation.



   (g)   If a minor participates in an undercover operation in which
the minor is to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor under the supervision of
a law enforcement agency, his or her parents or legal guardian shall consent
to the participation if that person is less than eighteen years of age.



   (h)   In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the
defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before
furnishing alcoholic liquor to a minor, a motor vehicle operator's or
chauffeur's license, a military identification card, or other bona fide
documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a
defense to an action brought under this section.



   (i)   The commission shall provide, on an annual basis, a written
report to the Department of State Police as to the number of actions heard by
the commission involving violations of this section and section 801(2). The
report shall include the disposition of each action and contain figures
representing the following categories:



      (1)   Decoy operations.



      (2)   Off-premises violations.



      (3)   On-premises violations.



      (4)   Repeat offenses within the three years preceding the
date of that report.



   (j)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Corrective action" means action taken by a licensee or
a clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee designed to prevent a minor from
further possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises.
Corrective action includes, but is not limited to, contacting a law
enforcement agency and ejecting the minor and any other person suspected of
aiding and abetting the minor.



      (2)   "Diligent inquiry" means a diligent good faith effort to
determine the age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an
official Michigan operator's or chauffeur's license, an official Michigan
personal identification card, a military identification card, or any other
bona fide picture identification which establishes the identity and age of
the person.



(Ord. 854.  Passed 4-9-12.)



604.05A   SELLING, SERVING, OR FURNISHING ALCOHOL; PROHIBITIONS.



   (a)   A vendor shall not sell, serve, or furnish any alcoholic
liquor to any person in an intoxicated condition.



   (b)   A licensee shall not allow a person who is in an intoxicated
condition to consume alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises.



   (c)   A licensee, or the clerk, servant, agent, or employee of a
licensee, shall not be in an intoxicated condition on the licensed premises.



   (d)   A licensee shall not allow an intoxicated person to frequent
or loiter on the licensed premises except where the intoxicated person has
been refused service of further alcoholic liquor and continues to remain on
the premises for the purpose of eating food, seeking medical attention,
arranging for transportation that does not involve driving himself or
herself, or any other circumstances where requiring the person to vacate the
premises immediately would be considered dangerous to that person or to the
public.



   (e)   A licensee shall not allow a minor to consume alcoholic liquor
or to possess alcoholic liquor for personal consumption on the licensed
premises.



   (f)   A licensee shall not allow any person less than eighteen years
of age to sell or serve alcoholic liquor.



   (g)   A licensee shall not allow any person less than eighteen years
of age to work or entertain on a paid or voluntary basis on the licensed
premises unless the person is employed in compliance with the youth
employment standard act, 1978 PA 90, MCL 409.101 to 409.124.



   This subsection does not apply to an entertainer under the direct
supervision and control of his or her parent or legal guardian.



(Ord. 854.  Passed 4-9-12.)



604.06  PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION, OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINOR;
ATTEMPT; CHEMICAL BREATH ANALYSIS; NOTICE TO PARENT, CUSTODIAN, OR GUARDIAN;
CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION; EXCEPTIONS; "ANY BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT" DEFINED.



   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess
alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in
this chapter. A minor who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by the following fines and sanction and is not subject to the
penalties prescribed in section 909 of the code.



(Ord. 854.  Passed 4-9-12.)



604.07  POWER OF PEACE OFFICER OR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER WITNESSING
VIOLATION TO STOP AND DETAIN PERSON; ISSUANCE OF APPEARANCE TICKET.



   A peace officer or law enforcement officer described under section 201
or an inspector of the commission who witnesses a violation of section 701(1)
or 703, or a local ordinance corresponding to section 701(1) or 703, may stop
and detain a person and obtain satisfactory identification, seize illegally
possessed alcoholic liquor, and issue an appearance ticket as prescribed in
section 9c of chapter IV of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL
764.9c.



(Ord. 854.  Passed 4-9-12.)



604.08   PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor
has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit to a
preliminary chemical breath analysis. A peace officer may arrest a person
based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other
acceptable blood-alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to
determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor.



   (b)   The Howell City Police Department, upon determining that a
person less than eighteen years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Act
293 of the Public Acts of 1968, being M.C.L.A. 772.1 to 772.6, allegedly
consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consume, possess, or purchase
alcoholic liquor in violation of Section 604.04 shall notify the parent or
parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the
violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably
ascertainable by the City Police Department. The notice required by this
subsection shall be made not later than forty-eight hours after the City
Police Department determines that the person who allegedly violated Section
604.04 is less than eighteen years of age and not emancipated pursuant to Act
293 of the Public Acts of 1968. The notice may be made by any means
reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice, including, but not
limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If an
individual less than seventeen years of age is incarcerated for violating
Section 604.04, his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified
immediately as provided in this subsection.



(Ord. 696.  Passed 10-11-99.)



604.09   STOP AND DETAIN; APPEARANCE TICKETS.



   (a)   A peace officer who witnesses a violation of Section 604.04
may stop and detain the person for purposes of obtaining satisfactory
identification, seizing illegally possessed alcoholic liquor, and issuing an
appearance ticket.



   (b)   As used in this section, "appearance ticket" means a complaint
or written notice issued and subscribed by a peace officer directing a
designated person to appear in the Fifty-Third District Court or the
Livingston County Juvenile Court at a designated time in connection with the
alleged violation. The appearance ticket shall consist of the following parts:



      (1)   The original which shall be a complaint or notice to
appear by the officer and filed with the court.



      (2)   The first copy which shall be the abstract of court
record.



      (3)   The second copy which shall be delivered to the alleged
violator.



      (4)   The third copy which shall be retained by the Howell
City Police Department.



   (c)   The court may accept a plea of guilty by the defendant of the
allegations of an appearance ticket and the court shall then impose a fine,
license suspension, or other sanction as further authorized by this chapter.
If the defendant denies the allegations of the appearance ticket, the court
shall then set a date for trial or hearing.



(Ord. 634.  Passed 7-22-96.)



604.99  VIOLATION, FINES, SANCTIONS; FURNISHING FRAUDULENT IDENTIFICATION TO
MINOR; SCREENING AND ASSESSMENT.



   (a)   The following fines and sanctions are hereby assessed for a
violation of Section 604.06 as follows:



      (1)   For the first violation a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), and may be ordered to participate in substance
abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as
defined in Section 6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, M.C.L.A.
333.6107, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services,
and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance
abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in
subsection (d), below.



      (2)   For a violation of Section 604.06 following a prior
conviction or juvenile adjudication for a violation of this subsection,
section 33b(l) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, or a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to this subsection or section 33b(l) of former
1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, by imprisonment for not more than thirty days but only
if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of
probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening or
community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that
conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance
abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as
defined in Section 6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, M.C.L.A.
333.6107, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to
perform community service, and to undergo substance screening and assessment
at his or her own expense as described in subsection (d), below.



      (3)   For a violation of the subsection following two or more
prior convictions or juvenile adjudications for a violation of this
subsection, section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, or a local
ordinance substantially corresponding to this subsection or section 33b(1) of
former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, by imprisonment for not more than sixty days but
only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of
probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or
community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that
conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance
abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation
services as defined in Section 6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368,
M.C.L.A. 333.6107, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance screening
and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (d),
below.



   (b)   A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor,
or notwithstanding subsection (a) hereof, a minor who uses fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or both.



   (c)   When an individual who has not previously been convicted of or
received a juvenile adjudication for a violation of subsection (a) hereof
pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a) hereof or offers a plea of
admission in a juvenile delinquency proceeding for a violation of subsection
(a) hereof, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal
proceeding or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the
juvenile has committed the offense and with the consent of the accused, may
defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation upon terms
and conditions that include, but are not limited to, the sanctions set forth
in subsection (a)(1), above, payment of the costs including minimum State
cost as provided for in section 18m of chapter XIIA of the Probate Code of
1939, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.18m, and section 1j of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1927 PA 172, MCL 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed
in section 3 of chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175,
MCL 771.3. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation or upon a
finding that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court,
the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a
juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the
offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the
terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual
and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall
be without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is
not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of this section or for
purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction
of a crime, including this additional penalties imposed for second or
subsequent convictions or juvenile adjudications under subsection (a)(2) and
(3), above. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this
subsection as to an individual. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record
of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on
probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection.
The Secretary of State shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea and of the
discharge and dismissal under this subsection. These records shall be
furnished to any of the following:



      (1)   To a court, prosecutor, or police agency upon request
for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this
subsection.



      (2)   To the Department of Corrections, a prosecutor, or a law
enforcement agency, upon the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law
enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions:



         A.   At the time of the request, the individual is an
employee of the Department of Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law
enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the Department of
Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency.



         B.   The record is used by the Department of
Corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine
whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of employment or
whether an applicant meets criteria for employment.



   (d)   The court may order the person convicted of violating
subsection (a) hereof to undergo screening and assessment by a person or
agency as designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in
section 6103 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6103, in order
to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative
services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment
programs. The court may order a person subject to a conviction or juvenile
adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsection
(a) hereof to submit to random or regular preliminary chemical breath
analysis. In case of a minor under eighteen years of age not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, the parent, guardian, or custodian may
request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of
the probation.



   (e)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or
chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsection (a) or
(b) hereof as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA
300, MCL 257.319.



   (f)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor
has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may require
the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A peace
officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a
preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical
breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a
criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed
alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. A minor who refuses to
submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required in this
subsection is responsible for a State civil infraction and may be ordered to
pay a civil fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



   (g)   The Howell City Police Department, upon determining that a
person less than eighteen years of age who is not emancipated under 1968 PA
293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased alcoholic
liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had
any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (a) hereof shall notify
the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature
of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is
reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required
by this subsection shall be made not later than forty-eight hours after the
law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated
subsection (a) hereof is less than eighteen years of age and not emancipated
under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The notice may be made by any means
reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited
to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual
less that seventeen years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a)
hereof, his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as
provided in this subsection.



   (h)   This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing
alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed by this act, by commission, or by
an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his
or her personal consumption.



   (i)   This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of
the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation
of this act.



   (j)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled
in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in
an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty
member is not prohibited by this act if the purpose of the consumption is
solely educational and is a requirement of the course.



   (k)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection
with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited
by this act.



   (l)   Subsection (a), above, does not apply to a minor who
participates in either or both of the following:



      (1)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and
with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an
employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.



      (2)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the State police, the
commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless
the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the
minor was not under the direction of the State police, the commission, or the
local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation.



   (m)   The State police, the commission, or a local police agency
shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an
undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a), above,
section 801(2) of the code, or section 701(1) of the code.



   (n)   In a criminal prosecution for the violation of subsection (a),
above, concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an
affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue
or location where that consumption was legal.



   (o)   As used in this section, "any bodily alcohol content" means
either of the following:



      (1)   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of
urine.



      (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting
from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.



(Ord. 696.  Passed 10-11-99; Ord. 854.  Passed 4-9-12.)



CHAPTER 606
Animals



606.01   Dogs running at large.



606.02   Prohibited animals.



606.03   Barking and howling dogs.



606.04   Interference with impounding of animals.



606.05   Dangerous and vicious dogs.



606.06   Bites; report to Police Department.



606.07   Removal of animal excrement.



606.08   Keeping of chickens.



606.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Animal pounds - see M.C.L. Secs. 123.301 et seq., 750.70



   Animal diseases generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 287.2 et seq.



   Animals generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 287.2 et seq., 750.49 et seq.,
752.21 et seq.



606.01  DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (a)   No person shall permit a dog owned or harbored by, or under
the control of, such person, to run at large in the City.



   (b)   As used in this section, "running at large" means a dog which
is loose on the streets or other public ways of the City or a dog which is at
large upon any property not owned and occupied by the person who is the owner
or custodian of such dog.  However, a dog shall not be construed to be
running at large when it is upon the public ways or private places of the
City if it is accompanied by its owner or caretaker and such owner or
caretaker thereof holds such dog by a leash securely fastened to its collar
or otherwise maintains effective control and supervision of such animal.



   (c)   A dog found running at large, as set forth in this section,
may be caught and taken charge of by officers of the Police Department, the
Livingston County Animal Director or its designate, or any other person
designated by resolution of Council for such work.  Upon catching a dog
running at large, the same shall be confined in the Livingston County Animal
Shelter.  If the owner of the dog is known, or if the owner's name can be
learned by means of a license tag attached to the collar of such animal,
immediate notification of such impounding shall be given to the owner.  If a
dog is impounded and the owner or custodian thereof cannot be located, the
Chief, Animal Director, or other designated person, is authorized to destroy
such animal any time after five days from the date of impounding, provided
that the impounding fee has not been paid to the Livingston County Animal
Shelter within that time.  The redemption procedure provided for herein is
in addition to the penalty provided for in Section 606.99. 



(Ord. 527.  Passed 9-24-90.)



606.02  PROHIBITED ANIMALS.



   (a)   In General.  Except as otherwise provided for in this
section, and except for domesticated breeds of dogs and cats, no person shall
keep, maintain or confine anywhere in the City, bovines, equines, sheep,
goats, or swine, regardless of whether the same have been domesticated or
otherwise kept, maintained or confined by virtue of a State or Federal
license.  In addition, and by way of illustration, but not by way of
limitation, no person shall keep, as a pet, the following wild or exotic
animals:  alligator, badger, bat, bear, beaver, bobcat, cheetah, cougar,
coyote, crocodilian, eagle, elk, ermine, falcon, ferret, fox, hawk, jackal,
jaguar, nonhuman primates, lemur, leopard, lion, lynx, mink, muskrat, ocelot,
opossum, owl, panther, porcupine, puma, raccoon, skunk, tiger, venomous
reptiles, wolf, wolf-hybrid, wolverine, weasel or wildcat.



   (b)   Declaration of Certain Animals as Wildlife; Rabies Risk to
Humans; Testing.  Animals in the following group are hereby declared to be
wildlife, even if born in captivity.  Animals in this group cannot be
vaccinated against rabies and shall be destroyed and sent for testing by the
Police Department if they bite a human being.  By way of illustration, the
animals designated in this group are as follows: badger, bat, beaver, coyote,
ermine, fox, lemur, mink, muskrat, opossum, porcupine, raccoon, skunk,
weasel, wolf and wolf-hybrid.



   (c)   Other Risks to Humans.  Except as otherwise provided for in
this section, no person shall keep, maintain or confine anywhere in the City
any other animal not listed herein which may cause, by virtue of being a
carrier of a disease which can be serious or fatal to humans, or which
represents, by virtue of its size, disposition or physical attributes, a risk
to owners and the community as a whole. If found anywhere in the City, the
same shall be removed from the City forthwith.



   (d)   Certain Animals Declared to be Public Nuisances; Destruction
or Confinement.  Except as otherwise provided for in this section, if the
animals designated in this section are not removed from the City forthwith by
the owners thereof, after notice to said owners, the same shall be declared
to be a public nuisance per se, and the City hereby has the authority to
proceed to a court of competent jurisdiction to have said animals removed
from within the City limits and either destroyed or confined so as to remove
any risk to citizens of the City in the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the City.



   (e)   Resolution of Disputes re Animal Designations.  If there is a
dispute between the City and an owner of an animal as to whether or not said
animal is prohibited by virtue of this section, then, in such event, the
owner, at his or her cost, shall be afforded the opportunity to have said
animal certified by a competent veterinarian, or some other person who is an
expert as to the breed of said animal, to show that said animal is not
prohibited pursuant to this section.



   (f)   Permit to Keep Animals; Requirements.  Notwithstanding
anything in this section to the contrary, the City Council, in its sole
discretion, may allow a person to keep, maintain or confine in the City the
prohibited animals set forth in this section so long as the person requesting
permission files an application with the City Clerk containing the following
information:



      (1)   The location and zoning classification where the animal
will be kept, maintained and confined;



      (2)   A detailed plan of how the animal will be kept,
maintained and confined;



      (3)   United States Department of Agriculture or other Federal
or State approval that the applicant meets all of the criteria by either a
State or Federal department and that approval has otherwise been received by
the applicant;



      (4)   Liability insurance for injury which could be suffered
by any person related to the keeping, maintenance and confinement of the
animal.  City Council shall set the minimum limits of insurance as part of
permit approval.



      (5)   A plan of veterinary care shall be provided, signed by
both the owner of the animal, any person who will be maintaining the animal
not the owner, and the veterinarian; and



      (6)   Any other information requested by City Council during
the application process.



   City Council shall not grant the application if the animal is kept,
maintained or confined in any area of the City not zoned B-1 or B-2.  The
permit to be issued by the City Council may either be in the form of a
motion, duly made and approved by a majority of the City Council members, or
in writing, at the sole discretion of the City Council.  Further, the permit
shall be for one year, whereupon application for a new permit shall be made
by the person in the manner set forth in this subsection.  City Council may,
by resolution, fix a fee for the issuance of a permit.



   (g)   Ferrets Excluded.  Ferrets shall not be regulated by this
section, but shall be regulated pursuant to the terms and conditions of Act
358 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 287.891 et seq.



   (h)   Chickens Excluded.  The keeping of female chickens shall not
be regulated by this section, but regulated by Section 606.08.



(Ord. 677.  Passed 7-20-98; Ord. 883.  Passed 10-28-13.)



606.03  BARKING AND HOWLING DOGS.



   No person shall harbor or keep a dog which, by loud and frequent
yelping or habitual barking or howling, causes a serious annoyance to other
persons in the neighborhood.  If said dog is caught and confined, the owner
shall be notified and/or the dog destroyed pursuant to the procedures
described in Section 606.01.



(Ord. 527.  Passed 9-24-90.)



606.04  INTERFERENCE WITH IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS.



   No person shall prevent or hinder or attempt to prevent or hinder the
impounding of any animal or the delivery of the same to the Livingston County
Animal Shelter by any person authorized to do so or release or attempt to
release any animal from the shelter in a manner not otherwise authorized by
law.



(Ord. 527.  Passed 9-24-90.)



606.05  DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.



   (a)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Dangerous dog" is defined as follows:



         A.   "Dangerous dog" means a dog that, without
provocation, and subject to paragraph (a)(1)C. and D. hereof, has chased or
approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or
has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person, while that dog is off
the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer and not under the reasonable
control of its owner, keeper, harborer or some other responsible person, or
not physically restrained or confined in a locked pen which has a top, locked
fenced yard with a fence of appropriate height within the yard so as to not
allow said dog to escape by means of jumping the fence, or other locked
enclosure which has a top.



         B.   "Dangerous dog" means and includes:



            1.   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals;



            2.   Any dog which attacks a human being or
domestic animal without provocation; or



            3.   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in
part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting, or
any dog trained to attack people or other animals.



         C.   No dog shall be deemed dangerous if it bites,
attacks or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or
menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it.



         D.   "Dangerous dog" does not include a police dog that
has chased or approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude
of attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person while
the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers
in the performance of their official duties.



      (2)   "Menacing fashion" means that a dog would cause any
person being chased or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will
cause physical injury to that person.



      (3)   "Police dog" means a dog that has been trained and may
be used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of
their official duties.



      (4)   "Vicious dog" is defined as follows:



         A.   "Vicious dog" means a dog that, without provocation
and subject to paragraph (a)(4)B. hereof, meets any of the following
requirements:



            1.   Has killed or caused serious injury to any
person;



            2.   Has caused injury, other than killing or
serious injury to any person or has killed another dog.



         B.   "Vicious dog" does not include either of the
following:



            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused
serious injury to any person or that has caused injury, other than killing or
serious injury, to any person while the police dog is being used to assist
one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties; or



            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious
injury to any person while a person was committing or attempting to commit a
trespass or other criminal offense inside the residential building of the
owner, keeper or harborer of the dog.



      (5)   "Without provocation" means that a dog was not teased,
tormented or abused by a person, or that the dog was not coming to the aid or
the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity
and who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.



   (b)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog
shall fail to do either of the following, except when the dog is lawfully
engaged in hunting or training for the purpose of hunting, accompanied by the
owner, keeper, harborer or a handler:



      (1)   While that dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper
or harborer, securely confine it at all times in a locked pen which has a
top, locked fenced yard with a fence of appropriate height within the yard so
as to not allow said dog to escape by means of jumping the fence or other
locked enclosure which has a top, except that a dangerous dog may, in the
alternative, be tied with a leash or tether so that the dog is adequately
restrained;



      (2)   While that dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper
or harborer, keep it on a chain link leash or tether that is not more than
six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following:



         A.   Keep that dog in a locked pen which has a top,
locked fence yard or other locked enclosure which has a top;



         B.   Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who
is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash
or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station such a person in a close enough proximity
to that dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; and/or



         C.   Muzzle that dog.



   (c)   No person shall possess with intent to sell, or offer for
sale, breed, buy or attempt to buy, within the City, any dangerous or vicious
dog.



   (d)   Any dangerous or vicious dog which attacks a human being or
another domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when, in a court's judgment,
such dangerous or vicious dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm
to human beings or domestic animals.



   (e)   Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food and veterinary
expenses, necessitated by the seizure of any dog for the protection of the
public and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of such
dog.  Such payment shall be in addition to the penalty provided in Section
606.99.



(Ord. 731.  Passed 10-21-02.)



606.06  BITES; REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   If any person is bitten by any animal as set forth in this chapter, it
shall be the duty of that person, or the owner or custodian of the animal
having knowledge of the same, to report such fact to the Police Department
within twelve hours thereafter.  If the owner or custodian of any animal has
any reason to believe or suspect that such animal has become infected with
rabies, it shall be the duty of that person to report such fact to the Police
Department immediately.  No person shall refuse to show or exhibit, at any
reasonable time, any animal which he or she is harboring, sheltering or
keeping in his or her possession or custody to any City inspector, police
officer or health official to the City or Livingston County.



(Ord. 731.  Passed 10-21-02.)



606.07  REMOVAL OF ANIMAL EXCREMENT.



   (a)   Any person who, while walking or escorting a dog on a leash,
allows said dog to deposit excrement on public or private property, other
than the property of the dog's owner or the property of the person walking or
escorting the dog on a leash, shall immediately remove such excrement.



   (b)   Any person owning a dog, whether or not on a leash, which
deposits excrement on public or private property, other than the property of
the animal's owner, shall, upon being made aware of such fact, immediately
remove such excrement. 



   (c)   A person who violates the above sections is responsible for a
Municipal civil infraction, as follows:



      (1)   Upon being found responsible for a first violation of
this section, a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00);



      (2)   Upon being found responsible for a second violation of
this section, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00); and



      (3)   Upon being found responsible for a third and/or
subsequent violation of this section, a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).



(Ord. 711.  Passed 7-31-00; Ord. 731.  Passed 10-21-02.)



606.08  KEEPING OF CHICKENS.



   (a)   Permit Required.  Any person who keeps chicken within the
City shall obtain a permit from the City prior to acquiring the chickens and
pay a permit fee set by City Council. Applications shall be made to the City
of Howell Community Development Department. Permits are nontransferable.



   (b)   Neighbor Consent.  No permit shall be issued and no chickens
shall be allowed to be kept unless the owners of all adjacent properties (as
defined below) consent in writing to the permit and this consent is presented
along with an application for a permit.



   (c)   Term of Permit. Permits are issued on an annual basis and are
then renewable annually.



   (d)   Adjacent Property.  For the purposes of this chapter,
"adjacent property" is defined as any property sharing any part of a property
line or corner with the parcel proposed for the keeping of chickens.



   (e)   Requirements.  Each person holding a permit to keep chickens
within the City shall comply with the following:



      (1)   The principle use of the property where the chickens are
to be kept must be a single family dwelling as defined by the City of Howell
Zoning Ordinance;



      (2)   No more than six hens per parcel;



      (3)   No keeping of roosters;



      (4)   No slaughter of any chickens;



      (5)   Chickens shall not be kept in any location on the
property other than the backyard as defined by the City of Howell Zoning
Ordinance;



      (6)   Chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure and
must be kept in the covered enclosure or in a fenced enclosure at all times.
Fenced enclosures are subject to the requirements of Section 5.11 of the City
of Howell Zoning Ordinance;



      (7)   Chickens shall be provided with a secure,
well-ventilated, roofed and lockable enclosure. The floors and walls of the
structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition;



      (8)   No covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be
located closer than ten feet to any property line;



      (9)   No covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be
located closer than forty feet from any residential structure on an adjacent
property;



      (10)   All enclosures for the keeping of chickens shall be so
constructed as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored
underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure;



      (11)   Chicken feed must be stored within a tightly lidded
container in a shed, garage, or similar storage area; and



      (12)   Waste materials (feed, manure, litter) shall be
disposed of in a sanitary manner (which may include bagging or composting)
and not piled or otherwise stored on the property.



   (f)   Application for Permit.  An application for a permit for
keeping chickens shall be made on a form provided by the City, shall be
accompanied by a payment of a non-refundable annual permit fee in an amount
set by resolution of City Council and shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information:



      (1)   Number of chickens;



      (2)   Description of all pens, coops, cages and enclosures
constructed for housing and confining chickens;



      (3)   The distance and location of all pens, coops, cages and
enclosures from all adjacent property lines and residential structures; and



      (4)   Documentation of consent from all adjacent property
owners.



   (g)   Amendment.  No additional fee shall be required for an
amendment to a permit.



   (h)   Violation of Section and Revocation of Permits.  If any of
the above requirements are not complied with, the City may revoke any permit
granted under this section and/or initiate a civil infraction violation
pursuant to Section 606.99.  The City may also revoke a permit if a person's
chickens become a nuisance as defined in Section 652.01 or the permit holder
receives two verified violations pertaining to the keeping of chickens within
a six month period.



(Ord. 883.  Passed 10-28-13.)



606.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person violating or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   Upon a first conviction under this chapter, a fine of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and payment of any and all impound fees.



      (2)   Upon a second conviction under this chapter, a fine of
fifty dollars ($50.00) and payment of any and all impound fees.



      (3)   Upon a third or subsequent conviction, a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment of not more than
ninety days in the County Jail, or both, and payment of any and all impound
fees.  In addition, the animal may be impounded and destroyed by order of
the District Court.



(Ord. 527.  Passed 9-24-90.)



   (b)   Whoever violates Section 606.05 and 606.08 is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to the following fines:



      (1)   Upon being found responsible for a first violation,
twenty-five dollars ($25.00);



      (2)   Upon being found responsible for a second violation,
fifty dollars ($50.00); and



      (3)   Upon being found responsible for a third and/or
subsequent violation, seventy-five dollars ($75.00).



(Ord. 711.  Passed 7-31-00; Ord. 883.  Passed 10-28-13.)



CHAPTER 612
Drugs



612.01   Definitions.



612.02   Use or possession of drug paraphernalia.



612.03   Delivery or manufacture of drug paraphernalia.



612.04   Advertising of drug paraphernalia.



612.05   Medical marihuana.



612.06   Recreational marihuana.



612.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Drugs and medicine generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 335.1 et seq.



   Marihuana - see M.C.L. Secs. 335.4, 335.59, 335.151 et seq.



   Purchase by municipal officers and employees - see M.C.L. Sec. 335.55



   Driving under the influence of narcotic drugs - see TRAF. Ch. 410
(U.T.C. Secs. 5.15 et seq.)



   Alcoholic beverages - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 604



   Public intoxication - see GEN. OFF. 662.01(b)(5)



612.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   Controlled Substance. "Controlled substance" means a drug,
substance or immediate precursor, as defined in the State Public Health Code,
being Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978 (MCL 333.7201 through 333.7231), as
amended.



   (b)   Drug Paraphernalia. "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment,
products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or
designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
In further definition of "drug paraphernalia" the following shall be
considered:



      (1)   Types of paraphernalia. "Drug paraphernalia" includes,
but is not limited to, the following:



         A.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



         B.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



         C.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



         D.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness
or purity of controlled substances;



         E.   Scales and balances used, intended for use or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



         F.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, which are used,
intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



         G.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marihuana;



         H.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



         I.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers
used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



         J.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use
or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



         K.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects
used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body; and



         L.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish
or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic
or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads
or punctured metal bowls;



            2.   Water pipes;



            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            5.   Roach clips (objects used to hold burning
materials, such as a marihuana cigarette that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand);



            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



            7.   Chamber pipes;



            8.   Carburetor pipes;



            9.   Electric pipes;



            10.   Air-driven pipes;



            11.   Chillums;



            12.   Bongs; and



            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.



      (2)   Determination of paraphernalia. In determining whether
or not an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should
consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:



         A.   Statements by the owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use;



         B.   Prior convictions, if any, of the owner or of
anyone in control of the object, under any State or Federal law relating to a
controlled substance;



         C.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to
a direct violation of this chapter;



         D.   The proximity of the object to controlled
substances;



         E.   The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object;



         F.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
the owner, or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to a person
who he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intends to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this chapter. The innocence of the owner or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this chapter,
should not prevent a finding that the object is intended or designed for use
as drug paraphernalia.



         G.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use;



         H.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



         I.   National and local advertising concerning use of
the object;



         J.   The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale;



         K.   Whether or not the owner or anyone in control of
the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



         L.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of
sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise;



         M.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community; and



         N.   Expert testimony concerning use of the object.



(Ord. 406. Passed 4-6-81.)



612.02  USE OR POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   No person shall use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia,
to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, unless such person is licensed to do so by the State.



(Ord. 406. Passed 4-6-81.)



612.03  DELIVERY OR MANUFACTURE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   No person shall deliver, or possess with intent to deliver, or
manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that such drug paraphernalia
will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, unless such person is licensed to do so by the State.



(Ord. 406. Passed 4-6-81.)



612.04  ADVERTISING OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   No person shall place in a newspaper, magazine, handbill or other
publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in
part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.



(Ord. 406. Passed 4-6-81.)



612.05   MEDICAL MARIHUANA.



   Pursuant to Section 333.27205 of the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, Act 281 of 2016, no Marihuana Facilities, as defined by the
Act, shall be permitted in the City of Howell.



(Ord. 920.  Passed 12-3-18.)



612.06   RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA.



   Pursuant to Section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, no Marihuana Establishment, as defined by the Act, shall be
permitted in the City of Howell.



(Ord. 920.  Passed 12-3-18.)



612.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 618
Gambling



618.01   Gaming in public places.



618.02   Gambling devices in public places.



618.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Gambling - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.301 et seq.



618.01  GAMING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (a)   No person shall engage in any game of cards or game with dice
for money or merchandise or any other valuable thing in any store,
restaurant, billiard or pool room or cigar or tobacco stand in the City.



   (b)   No person shall permit any game of cards or game of dice for
money or merchandise or any other valuable thing to be carried on in any
store, restaurant, billiard or pool room or cigar or tobacco stand, occupied
or controlled by such person, in the City.



(Ord. 87. Passed 3-23-26.)



618.02  GAMBLING DEVICES IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (a)   No person shall operate or play any slot machine or other
mechanical device, incident to which prizes of money, merchandise or other
things of value are given, in any store, restaurant, billiard or pool room or
cigar or tobacco stand in the City.



   (b)   No person shall permit the operation or playing of any slot
machine or other mechanical device, incident to which prizes of money,
merchandise or other things of value are given, in any store, restaurant,
billiard or pool room or cigar or tobacco stand, occupied or controlled by
such person, in the City. (Ord. 87. Passed 3-23-26.)



618.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 620
Howell Area Fire Authority Charges



620.01   Purpose.



620.02   Definitions.



620.03   Charges imposed upon responsible party.



620.04   Billing procedures.



620.05   Other remedies.



620.06   Severability.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Police Department - see ADM. Ch. 236



   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 238



   Fire Department vehicles - see TRAF. 440.04



   Cost recovery and reimbursement for emergency responses to traffic
incidents - see TRAF. Ch. 450



   Discharges of hazardous materials to sewers - see S.U. & P.S. 1043.02(d)



620.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is created to insure that a responsible party, as defined
in this chapter, found culpable or otherwise liable for a fire, extraordinary
emergency incident or incendiary fire is responsible and financially liable
for the payment of the actual costs of clean-up, mitigation, and recoverable
expenses incurred by the Howell Area Fire Authority in its response and
mitigation of the fire, extraordinary incident, or incendiary fire within the
City of Howell. In the event the liable party does not or cannot perform such
clean-up or mitigation within a reasonable time, as determined by the Fire
Chief of the Howell Area Fire Authority, the Fire Chief of the Howell Area
Fire Authority shall perform or cause to be performed clean-up and mitigation
of the fire, extraordinary emergency incident or incendiary fire.



(Ord. 761.  Passed 8-23-04.)



620.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   "Extraordinary emergency incident" means an emergency incident
which requires a greater amount of firefighters, equipment, supplies, and/or
personnel hours than were required to respond to ninety percent of the Howell
Area Fire Authority's incidents in the prior fiscal year.



   (b)   "Incendiary tire" is any fire intentionally set or caused to
be set by any human being or entity, whether by their own act, or in concert
with another, or with mechanical assistance, regardless of whether said fire
was set with incendiary materials or fuels or ignited merely by applying
flame or heat to any substance.



   (c)   "Responsible party" is any individual, sole proprietorship,
partnership, joint venture, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation
including government corporation, association, local unit of government,
commission, the state, a political subdivision of the state, an interstate
body or any other legal entity that owns, controls, leases, or accepts for
transport, storage, treatment or disposal the property involved in the
extraordinary emergency incident, and/or was found responsible by a court of
competent jurisdiction for setting a incendiary fire.



(Ord. 761.  Passed 8-23-04.)



620.03  CHARGES IMPOSED UPON RESPONSIBLE PARTY.



   A responsible party or responsible parties are jointly and severally
liable for and shall be required to reimburse the City of Howell and/or the
Howell Area Fire Authority for all costs incurred in responding to a fire,
extraordinary emergency incident or incendiary fire, including but not
limited to:



   (a)   Costs or expenses incurred by the Howell Area Fire Authority,
its fire department, and the City of Howell, as well as any other fire
department, police agency, emergency medical service agency, public service
or public works department, technical or specialty rescue response team,
private contractor and any other entity whose assistance is requested by or
contracted for by the Howell Area Fire Authority, including all actual
expenses attributable to the response, mitigation of the incident and
clean-up, including all actions deemed necessary by the Howell Area Fire
Authority Fire Chief to preserve public safety, including the costs of
equipment, operations, personnel, materials utilized, meals and overtime
costs for personnel, medical expenses for any injuries resulting to response
personnel, costs of specialists, experts, contractors, and consultants, legal
fees, engineering fees, water costs, rental or purchase of machinery and/or
equipment, costs related to canine response, costs related to the repair or
replacement of any equipment or apparatus damaged in the course of the
response, costs incurred by any agency whose response is requested by the
Howell Area Fire Authority Fire Chief pursuant to any mutual aid agreement,
and any other incidental costs of the Howell Area Fire Authority and the City
of Howell, incurred because or related to the response to the fire,
extraordinary emergency incident or incendiary fire.



   (b)   Charges to the Howell Area Fire Authority and/or the City of
Howell or either's agencies imposed by any local, state or federal government
entities related to the fire, extraordinary emergency incident or incendiary
fire.



   (c)   Costs incurred by the Howell Area Fire Authority and/or the
City of Howell in accounting for the fire, extraordinary emergency incident
or incendiary fire expenditures, including billing and collection costs,
court costs, and actual attorney fees. If a responsible party or parties fail
to pay charges assessed under this ordinance, and a collection action is
subsequently filed, the responsible party or parties shall be responsible for
any and all actual costs incurred by the Howell Area Fire Authority and/or
the City of Howell in the course of such collection action.



(Ord. 761.  Passed 8-23-04.)



620.04  BILLING PROCEDURES.



   Upon the occurrence of an extraordinary emergency incident or a
determination of responsibility for incendiary fire, the Fire Chief of the
Howell Area Fire Authority shall prepare and deliver or cause to be delivered
an invoice of the charges imposed by Section 620.03 to the responsible party
or parties for payment. The responsible party or parties shall reimburse the
City of Howell and/or the Howell Area Fire Authority, as directed by the
invoice, for the charges set forth in the invoice within thirty (30) days.
For any amounts due that remain unpaid after thirty (30) days, the
responsible party or parties shall be responsible for any and all actual
costs incurred by the Howell Area Fire Authority and/or the City of Howell in
the course of such collection action, as further addressed in Section
620.03(c) of this chapter.



(Ord. 761.  Passed 8-23-04.)



620.05  OTHER REMEDIES.



   The City of Howell and/or the Howell Area Fire Authority may pursue any
other remedy or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court
of competent jurisdiction to collect charges imposed under this chapter. The
recovery of charges imposed under this chapter does not limit the liability
of responsible parties under any other local ordinance or state or federal
laws, rules, or regulations.



(Ord. 761.  Passed 8-23-04.)



620.06  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any provision or part of this chapter be declared by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, such finding shall
not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of this chapter.



(Ord. 761.  Passed 8-23-04.)



CHAPTER 622
Health, Safety and Sanitation



622.01   Air pollution.



622.02   Trees and vegetation.



622.03   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses.



622.04   Accumulations of junk.



622.05   Storage of certain motor vehicles.



622.06   Unenclosed wells, cisterns, excavations.



622.07   Slaughterhouses.



622.08   Playing games in streets; throwing missiles; coasting.



622.09   Barbed wire; obstruction of street rights of way.



622.10   (Reserved for future legislation)



622.11   Abandoned refrigerators.



622.99   Penalty. 



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Health and sanitation generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 4, Sec. 51;
M.C.L. Secs. 325.1 et seq., 327.1 et seq., 750.466 et seq.



   Health and sanitation in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.3,
117.4i



   Municipal health departments - see M.C.L. Sec. 327.205



   Public safety generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.493 et seq.



   Board of Health - see ADM. Ch. 274



   Mandatory child restraints - see TRAF. 410.03 (U.T.C. Sec 5.82)



   Safety belts - see TRAF. 410.03 (U.T.C. Sec. 5.83)



   Nuisances - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 652



   Private sewage disposal systems - see S.U. & P.S. 1042.04



   Performance standards in zoning - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



622.01  AIR POLLUTION.



   (a)   No person shall cause or permit the discharge into the open
air of any vapors, smoke, dirt or soot by the use of fuel and a fuel burning
device so as to cause physical discomfort or danger to the health or person
of any of the inhabitants of the City or so as to interfere with the ordinary
use and enjoyment of the property of any inhabitant in the City. A violation
of this subsection is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



   (b)   The continuance of a public nuisance, as referred to in
subsection (a)hereof, may be restrained by proceedings in the Forty-fourth
Judicial Circuit Court upon the complaint of the Mayor and Clerk of the City.
The institution of such proceedings shall not be a bar to the arrest,
prosecution and conviction of any person violating subsection (a)hereof or to
any suit to recover such penalty.



   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
discharge into the open air of vapors, smoke, dirt or soot by the use of any
fuel and fuel burning device located and used in single residences occupied
and used solely for residential purposes.



(Ord. 147. Passed 12-9-52.)



   (d)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
this section and a provision of any State or Federal statute or regulation,
the State or Federal statute or regulation shall prevail.



622.02  TREES AND VEGETATION.



   (a)   Cutting and Removal. No owner, lessee or occupant, or any
agent, servant, representative or employee of such owner, lessee or occupant,
having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or land or any part thereof
in the City, shall permit or maintain on any such lot or land, or on or along
the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same between the property line
and the curb, or between the property line and the middle of the alley up to
twenty feet outside the property line if there is no curb, any growth of
weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than eight inches,
or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. No person shall cause,
suffer or allow poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants, or plants
detrimental to health, to grow on any such lot or land in such a manner that
any part of such ivy, ragweed or other poisonous or harmful weed extends
upon, overhangs or borders any public place (including the public sidewalk),
or allow seed, pollen or other poisonous particles or emanations therefrom to
be carried through the air into any public place.  No person shall allow or
maintain upon any portion of such lot or land any growth of grass, brush,
weeds so as to create a nuisance due to unsightliness, an unhealthy or unsafe
condition, or traffic hazard, or fire hazard.



   No person shall neglect to cut, remove or destroy weeds, grass or other
vegetation as directed in this section, or fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with the provisions of any notice herein provided for or violate any of the
provisions in this section, or resist or obstruct the City Manager or his or
her authorized agent in the cutting and removal of weeds, grass and other
vegetation.



   (b)   Trees. No tree or other vegetation by virtue of disease,
damage or insect infestation which presents a hazard to persons or vegetation
on public property shall be maintained on private property.



   (c)   Obstructing Vision. Whenever any tree, shrub, bush or plant is
located on or adjacent to a street right of way such as to obstruct the view
of a driver of a vehicle entering or driving upon that street, the vegetation
in question shall be cut or trimmed so as to eliminate such obstruction,
provided that the written approval of the City Manager must be obtained
before any tree with a trunk diameter of greater than one inch is removed or
radically trimmed. No shrub, bush or plant shall be permitted to grow to a
height of greater than three feet if it is located so as to provide such
obstruction.



   (d)   Duty of Owner Lessee or Occupant. The owner, lessee or
occupant of any lot or land shall cut and remove or cause to be cut and
removed or destroyed by other lawful means, all such weeds, grass or other
rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply
with subsection (a) hereof, provided that cutting, removing or destroying
such weeds and vegetation at least once in every four weeks between May 15
and September 15 shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section.



(Ord. 187. Passed 9-21-59.)



   (e)   Noncompliance; Remedy of City. If the provisions of the
foregoing subsections are not complied with, the City Manager or his or her
duly authorized representative shall serve notice upon the owner, lessee or
occupant or any person having the care or control of any such lot or land to
comply with the provisions of this section. Such notice shall be given
verbally to any of such persons or in writing. If in writing, it shall be
sent first class mail to the owner of record of the lot or land in question
with a copy sent to the occupant of such lot or land if other than the owner
of record thereof. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails,
neglects or refuses to cut, remove or destroy, or to cause to be cut, removed
or destroyed, such weeds, grass, trees, or other vegetation within five
business days from the date of such notice, or if no person can be found in
the City who either is or claims to be the owner of such lot or land or who
either represents or claims to represent such owner, the City Manager shall
cause such weeds, grass, trees and other vegetation to be removed or
destroyed and the actual cost of such cutting, removal or destruction, plus
an administrative fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for inspection and
other additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified to by the
City Manager or his or her duly authorized representative and shall become
and be a lien upon the property on which such weeds, grass, trees and other
vegetation were located. A statement for such actual costs plus
administrative fee shall thereupon be sent by first class mail to the
property owner or his or her representative to whom the original notice was
given. Should the obligation as described by this statement remain unpaid
after forty-five days from the date of the statement, the City Manager or his
or her representative may then certify the delinquent amount, after first
adding a penalty of ten percent, to the Assessor. At the discretion of the
City Manager, this amount shall either be incorporated into a special
assessment roll, to be processed in the manner prescribed by the City Charter
and ordinances of the City, or shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a
charge against such premises and be collected and the lien thereof enforced
in the same manner as general City taxes against such premises are collected
and liens enforced. In general, the decision as to whether the obligation
shall be made a part of a special assessment roll or certified directly to
the assessing officer for collection as a City tax shall depend upon the
number and magnitude of such outstanding delinquent statements. (Ord. 676. 
Passed 6-22-98.)



   (f)   Hardship.  Under proof of financial hardship the City Manager
may authorize charges under subsection (d) herein to be paid in installments
or to be reduced subject to City Council approval.



   (g)   Exemptions. Exempted from the provisions of this section,
except subsection (b) hereof, are flower gardens, plots of shrubbery,
vegetable gardens and small grain plots. An exemption under this subsection
cannot be claimed unless the land has been subjected to adequate
cultivation.  (Ord. 187.  Passed 9-21-59.)



(Ord. 812.  Passed 7-14-08; Ord. 869.  Passed 5-20-13.)



622.03  NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.



   No person shall erect, continue, use or maintain a dwelling, building,
structure or place for a residence or for the exercise of a trade, employment
or business, or for the keeping or feeding of an animal which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations or noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the
health, comfort or property of individuals or of the public. No person shall
cause or allow offal, filth or noisome substances to be collected or remain
in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of the public. No person
shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a navigable river, harbor
or collection of water, or corrupt or render unwholesome or impure, a
watercourse, stream or water, or unlawfully divert such watercourse, from its
natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of others.



622.04  ACCUMULATIONS OF JUNK.



   (a)   No person shall allow, permit or maintain a public nuisance.



   (b)   No person owning, occupying or otherwise having charge or
control of any property shall place or permit to be placed on such property
any paper, dirt, ashes, cartons, boxes or any scrap or waste material unless
such person takes reasonable steps to secure such matter from being blown or
carried onto any street, sidewalk, alley, park, public ground or property of
another person.



   (c)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Public nuisance" means the accumulation, storage or
disposition of garbage or refuse in any manner other than as provided in
these Codified Ordinances or the accumulation or storage of junk at any place
except in a wholly enclosed building or structure, provided that this
paragraph shall not apply to a junk yard lawfully operated by one customarily
engaged in and having facilities for processing junk.



      (2)   "Junk" means old or scrap rope, rags, batteries, paper,
rubber, lumber, pipe and copper, brass, iron, steel or other ferrous or
nonferrous materials which are not held for sale for remelting purposes by a
person customarily engaged in such business and having facilities for
processing such materials, as well as used building and roofing materials.



      (3)   "Garbage" means all putrescible wastes, except wastes of
the human body, and other water-carried wastes, and includes all vegetable
and animal wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or
consumption of foods. Containers that contained food or liquids for
consumption by humans or other beings shall also be classified as garbage.



      (4)   "Refuse" means ashes, crockery, bottles, cans, paper and
other wood pulp products, boxes, rags, grass clippings and other cut
vegetation, old or discarded clothing, bedding, mattresses, furniture,
appliances, rubbish, stone, sand, dirt, nails, pieces of glass and oil and
all other similar nonputrescible wastes other than those included in the
definition of garbage.



      (5)   "Person" means the owner, occupant, user or other in
control of the premises.



   (d)   In addition to the penalties provided in Section 622. 99,
following conviction and while the nuisance continues, the City Manager shall
cause written notice to abate such public nuisance to be served upon the
person convicted and the owner of the premises, if other than the person
convicted. Such notice shall be served personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and shall state the nature of the public nuisance
and the time, not less than ten days following service of the notice, within
which the public nuisance shall be abated. If, by the time stated, the public
nuisance has not been abated, the City Manager shall cause it to be abated
and shall certify the cost thereof to the City Treasurer, who shall certify
the same to the County Auditor to be placed upon the tax duplicate of the
owner of the property involved to be collected as taxes.



622.05  STORAGE OF CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (a)   No person in charge or control of any property within the
City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall store on,
place on, permit to be stored or placed on or allow to remain on any private
property in the City a dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable motor
vehicle, any part of a motor vehicle, untitled motor vehicle or unregistered
motor vehicle except in a completely enclosed building or upon the premises
of an authorized junk yard or impound yard, as may be permitted under the
Howell City Zoning Code.  Placement of a tarpaulin or other covering over a
motor vehicle described in this chapter shall not be deemed to be in
compliance herewith.



   (b)   No person in charge or control of any property within the
City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall
dismantle, cut up, remove parts from otherwise disassemble a motor vehicle,
except in a completely enclosed building or upon the premises of an
authorized junk yard, as may be permitted under the Howell City Zoning Code.



   (c)   This section shall not be constructed to permit the parking or
placing of dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable motor vehicles, any
part of a motor vehicle, untitled motor vehicles or unregistered motor
vehicles on any street area in the City of Howell or in any front yard, as
defined in the Howell City Zoning Code.



   (d)   The Chief of Police, or the Code Enforcement Officer, as
designated in Section 208.03 of the Howell City Code, may remove or cause to
be removed any dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperative motor vehicle,
untitled motor vehicle or unregistered motor vehicle or part thereof, from
private property in the City after having notified, in writing, the owner or
occupant of such property of the intended removal at least ten days prior to
such removal.  Such notice shall be served personally upon a person in
charge or control, whether as owner, tenant, occupant or lessee, of the
property, if occupied, or may be posted in a conspicuous place upon vacant or
unoccupied property, and such vehicles or parts thereof, so removed, shall be
disposed of according to law.



   (e)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Dismantled and partially dismantled motor vehicles"
means motor vehicles from which a part which is ordinarily a component of
such a motor vehicle has been removed or is missing.  Exempt from this
definition are motor vehicles which are undergoing regularly scheduled
maintenance or mechanical repairs, and which otherwise do not meet any
criteria of this section.



      (2)   "Enclosed building" shall mean a garage or other
permanent structure which has four walls, a roof and a means of access for
ingress and egress, i.e., doors large enough to accommodate ingress and
egress.



      (3)   "Inoperable motor vehicles" means motor vehicles which,
by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other causes, are incapable of being
propelled under their own power.



      (4)   "Motor vehicles" means wheeled vehicles which are
self-propelled or intended to be self- propelled.



      (5)   "Unregistered motor vehicle" is a motor vehicle which
has not been registered pursuant to the Michigan State Motor Vehicle Code
which is Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being M.C.L. 257.1
et seq. and is not registered to the owner, tenant, occupant or lessee of the
property wherein the motor vehicle is stored or placed.



      (6)   "Untitled motor vehicle" is a motor vehicle which has
not been titled pursuant to the Michigan State Motor Vehicle Code which is
Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being M.C.L. 257.1 et seq.
and is not titled to the owner, tenant, occupant or lessee of the property
wherein the motor vehicle is stored or placed.



   (f)   The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable
motor vehicle, part of a motor vehicle, untitled motor vehicle or
unregistered motor vehicle on a platted or unplatted parcel of land in
violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.



(Ord. 724.  Passed 3-11-02.)



622.06  UNENCLOSED WELLS, CISTERNS, EXCAVATIONS.



   (a)   No person shall cause, allow, permit or suffer to exist an
open unenclosed well, cistern, cellar, hole or excavation, which may be
dangerous to small children roaming on lots not so enclosed as to prevent
their so doing, or a cellar or excavation containing water under an old
building or a pool of standing stagnant water, or a dangerous approach on a
street or unenclosed lot. A violation of this subsection is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.



   (b)   Upon complaint made in writing to the Chief of Police, the
Chief shall give written notice to the owner of the lot in question or, if
the owner is unknown or absent, then to the occupant of such lot, to abate
the nuisance complained of within one week after receipt of such notice. At
the end of such period, the Chief shall investigate such nuisance and if he
or she finds that it has not been abated by having been placed in a safe and
sanitary condition, then he or she shall make a complaint or cause the same
to be done for the purpose of prosecuting the owner or occupant for a
violation of this section.



(Ord. 31. Passed 5-17-1898.)



622.07  SLAUGHTERHOUSES.



   No person shall keep, use or maintain a slaughterhouse or other place
for the slaughtering of animals in the City. No person shall slaughter any
animal in the City.



(Ord. 9. Passed 1-6-1896.)



622.08  PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS; THROWING MISSILES; COASTING.



   (a)   No person shall play baseball, football or any other game
played with a ball or a ball and a club, or bat any ball, on any of the
public streets in the City. No person shall throw any baseball, football,
snowball or any other kind of ball, or any stone or other hard substance, in
any of the public streets and alleys of the City.



   (b)   No person shall coast on any of the sidewalks of the City with
a sled or any other article or thing.



(Ord. 10. Passed 1-13-1896.)



622.09  BARBED WIRE; OBSTRUCTION OF STREET RIGHTS OF WAY.



   (a)   No person shall place or maintain any barbed wire fencing or
any strand of barbed wire along the line of, or in, any public street, alley
or public place in the City. No person shall place or allow such barbed wire
to remain between any premises owned or occupied by him or her and the
adjoining premises, or place or allow to remain any barbed wire fencing or
barbed wire in the City in any place where it will expose a person to injury
on account thereof, provided that it shall not be unlawful to place such
barbed wire at the top of a legal fence when placed not less than six feet
from the ground.



   (b)   No person shall place or maintain a fence, tree, shrub or
other obstacle in any portion of a street right of way except by permission
of the Chief of Police.



622.10  (RESERVED FOR FUTURE LEGISLATION)



622.11  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.



   (a)   No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling, in
a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice
box, refrigerator or container having airtight doors which when closed cannot
be opened from the inside.



   (b)   No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling, in
a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice
box, refrigerator or other container of any kind which has an airtight
snap-lock or other device thereon without first removing such snap-lock or
the doors from such ice box, refrigerator or container.



622.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 652
Nuisances



652.01   Nuisance defined and prohibited.



652.02   Abatement.



652.03   Legal and equitable remedies.



652.04   Waterways.



652.05   Littering and distribution of handbills.



652.06   Noise control.



652.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Nuisances generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 600.3801 et seq.



   Barking and howling dogs - see GEN. OFF. 606.03



   Health, safety and sanitation - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 622



   Assessments for nuisances - see B.R. & T. 892.20



   Violations of industrial wastewater pretreatment regulations as
nuisances;  abatement - see S.U. & P.S. 1043.99



   Zoning Code nuisances - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



652.01  NUISANCE DEFINED AND PROHIBITED.



   As used in this chapter, "nuisance" means anything that annoys, injures
or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends
public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street,
highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure
in life or property. Public nuisances include, but are not limited to,
whatever is prohibited by any provision of this chapter. No person shall
commit, create or maintain any nuisance.  Nuisance shall include the
possession, shelter, keeping, harboring or maintaining any animal which,
under such conditions or in such a manner, creates a nuisance by way of
noise, odor, menace to health or otherwise.  The Police Department,
Livingston County Animal Director or its designee or any other person
designated by resolution of the Council may impound, or if unable to
apprehend the same, may destroy any sick, diseased or abandoned animal which
is either running at large and/or creating a nuisance by way of noise, odor,
menace to health or otherwise.



(Ord. 732.  Passed 10-21-02.)



652.02  ABATEMENT.



   Where no other procedure is made specifically applicable by another
provision of this chapter, any structure, condition or activity prohibited by
this chapter may be abated by the City Manager in accordance with the
following procedure. The City Manager shall first investigate the existence
of the alleged nuisance to determine whether or not a nuisance, as defined in
Section 652.01, exists and to further determine the person who has created or
is committing or maintaining such nuisance. He or she shall then give written
notice to the person responsible for the creation, commission or maintenance
of such nuisance, specifying in particular the nature thereof, the corrective
action to be taken to abate the same and the time limit for abatement of such
nuisance, which shall be a reasonable time, but not to exceed fifteen days
from the time the notice is served. Such notice shall be served verbally to
such person or in writing. If in writing, it shall be sent certified, return
receipt requested. If, at the expiration of the time limit in such notice,
the person responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of the
nuisance has not complied with the requirements thereof, the City Manager
shall carry out the requirements of such notice. The cost of such abatement
shall be a debt owed the City by the person responsible for the commission,
creation or maintenance of such nuisance.



652.03  LEGAL AND EQUITABLE REMEDIES.



   Any action taken by the City to abate a nuisance under Section 652.02
or any other provision of this chapter shall not affect the right of the City
to institute proceedings against the person committing, creating or
maintaining the nuisance in violation of this chapter nor affect the
imposition of the penalty prescribed for such violation. As an additional
remedy, upon application by the City to any court of competent jurisdiction,
the court may order the nuisance to be abated and/or the violation or
threatened violation to be restrained and enjoined.



652.04  WATERWAYS.



   (a)   Obstruction and Encroachment Prohibited. No person shall place
piers, pilings, abutments or structures of any kind in or upon any waterway
without first obtaining approval therefor by resolution of Council. No person
shall place, or permit or suffer to be placed, any structure, material,
earth, debris or property of any kind within any waterway so as to constitute
an obstruction or encumbrance in, or encroachment upon, such waterway.



   (b)   Removal of Encroachments, Obstructions and Encumbrances. The
Department of Public Works shall maintain a survey map of the waterways of
the City, showing all authorized structures, obstructions and encumbrances
thereon, and shall remove from any waterway any unauthorized encroachment,
encumbrance or obstruction. All costs pertaining to the removal or demolition
of such an encroachment, encumbrance or obstruction shall be billed to the
owner of the property adjacent thereto from which the encroachment,
obstruction or encumbrance has developed. If such costs are not paid within
thirty days, they shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection as
taxes.



   (c)   Violations a Nuisance. Any unauthorized encroachment,
obstruction or encumbrance which is placed, erected or maintained in any
waterway in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance per
se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may
order the nuisance to be abated and/or the violation or threatened violation
to be restrained or enjoined. The taking of any action for the abatement of
any such nuisance shall not prevent prosecution of the person who placed or
maintained the obstruction, encroachment or encumbrance in violation of this
section, and the converse shall also be true.



652.05  LITTERING AND DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.



   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:



      (1)   "Commercial handbill" means any printed or written
matter, sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet
or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter
or literature, which:



         A.   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product,
commodity or thing;



         B.   Directs attention to any business, mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;



         C.   Directs attention to or advertises any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or



         D.   While containing reading matter other than
advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit
and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



      (2)   "Garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      (3)   "Litter" means garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.



      (4)   "Newspaper" means any newspaper of general circulation,
as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States, in accordance with Federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer,
as provided by general law. In addition thereto, "newspaper" means and
includes any periodical or current magazine published in not less than four
issues per year and sold to the public.



      (5)   "Noncommercial handbill" means any printed or written
matter, sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid
definitions of commercial handbill or newspaper.



      (6)   "Park" means a park, reservation, playground, beach,
recreation center or any other public area in the City owned or used by the
City and devoted to active or passive recreation.



      (7)   "Private premises" means any dwelling, house, building
or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private
residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling,
house, building or other structure.



      (8)   "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid
wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles and solid market and industrial
wastes.



      (9)   "Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting
of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.



   (b)   Litter in Public Places. No person shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the City
except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for
collection or in official City dumps.



   (c)   Placement of Litter in Receptacles. Persons placing litter in
public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.



   (d)   Sweeping Litter Into Gutters; Duty to Keep Sidewalks Clean.



      (1)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter,
street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter from
any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of
their premises free of litter.



      (2)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall
sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the
City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business within the City shall keep the sidewalks in front of their business
premises free of litter.



   (e)   Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles. No person, while a
driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any
street or other public place within the City or upon private property.



   (f)   Truck Loads Causing Litter. No person shall drive or move any
truck or other vehicle within the City unless such vehicle is so constructed
or loaded as to prevent any part of the load, contents or litter from being
blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place, nor shall
any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the City the wheels or
tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public
place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.



   (g)   Litter in Parks. No person shall throw or deposit litter in
any park within the City except in public receptacles and in such a manner
that the litter will not be carried or deposited by the elements upon any
part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the
park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere as provided herein.



   (h)   Litter in Lakes, Streams and Fountains. No person shall throw
or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water
in a park or elsewhere within the City.



   (i)   Distributing Handbills. No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other
public place within the City, nor shall any person hand out, distribute or
sell any commercial handbill in any public place. However, it shall not be
unlawful on any sidewalk, street or public place within the City for any
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.



   (j)   Placing Handbills on Vehicles. No person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon a vehicle.
However, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand
out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial
handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.



   (k)   Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Premises. No person shall
throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.



   (l)   Distributing Handbills at Inhabited Private Premises. No
person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing
or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other
person then present in or upon such private premises.



   (m)   Exemption for Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of
subsections (a) through (l) hereof and subsections (n) through (s) hereof
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to
newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in
such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.



   (n)   Dropping Litter from Aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall
throw out, drop or deposit within the City any litter, handbill or any other
object.



   (o)   Posting Notices Prohibited. No person shall post or affix any
notice, poster or other paper device, calculated to attract the attention of
the public, to any lamppost, public utility post or shade tree, or upon any
public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.



   (p)   Litter on Occupied Private Property. No person shall throw or
deposit litter on any occupied private property within the City, whether
owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of
private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection
in such a manner that litter will not be carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.



   (q)   Responsibility of Owners and Occupants. The owner, as well as
the occupant, which includes the person in control of any private property,
shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this
subsection does not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, as
well as the occupant or person in control of such premises, to provide for
the emptying of such private receptacle at least once each week.



   (r)   Litter on Vacant Lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter
upon any open or vacant private property within the City, whether owned by
such person or not.



   (s)   Clearing of Litter from Private Property by City. The presence
of litter on any property or premises in the City that is not in compliance
with this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the City Manager
is authorized to abate the same in accordance with Section 652.02. The cost
thereof may be assessed against the property and collected according to law.
Where any premises or property is occupied and investigation reveals the
arrangements for the disposal of litter from such premises fail to comply
with the requirements of this section, the City Manager is hereby authorized,
after notice as provided in Section 652.02, to arrange for the regular
disposal of litter from such premises at least once each week during such
periods of time as such premises are occupied, and the cost of such removal
shall be assessed against the property and collected according to law.



(Ord. 828.  Passed 11-9-09.)



652.06  NOISE CONTROL.



   (a)   Purpose; General Prohibition. In order to preserve and protect
the public peace, health and safety, no person shall make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise
which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others within the City.



   (b)   Specific Noises Prohibited. Each of the following acts is
hereby declared to be unlawful and is prohibited, but this enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or
signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not
in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching
apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or
as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the
creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time;



      (2)   Radios and musical instruments. The playing of any
television set, radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner
or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of the following day, or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity;



      (3)   Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling or singing or the making of any loud noise on the public streets
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, or the
making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other
type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity;



      (4)   Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers
in a loud and boisterous manner;



      (5)   Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or
bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, disturbs the comfort
or repose of any person in the neighborhood;



      (6)   Whistles and sirens. The blowing of any whistle or
siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of fire or danger;



      (7)   Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motorcycle, watercraft, boats or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or
other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom;



      (8)   Construction noises. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the
excavation of streets and highways, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit is first obtained from the Department of
Public Works;



      (9)   Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers; and



      (10)   Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum,
loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention for any purpose.



   (c)   Exceptions. None of the provisions of subsections (a)and
(b)hereof shall apply to or be enforced against:



      (1)   Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle of the
City or ambulance while engaged in necessary public emergency business;



      (2)   Highway maintenance and construction. Necessary
excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the
City or the State during the night, when the public safety, welfare and
convenience render it impossible to perform such work during the day;



      (3)   Public addresses. The reasonable use of stationary
amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are
noncommercial in character;



      (4)   Christmas music and chimes by permit. The use of
stationary amplifiers or loudspeakers by any person for the transmission of
Christmas music and chimes when authorized by a permit issued upon the
authority of the City Council; all permits so issued shall specify the hours
and dates upon which the use of any amplifier or loudspeaker is authorized,
and the use thereof shall be limited to the times specified in the permit; and



      (5)   Amplifiers. The use of amplifiers primarily for the
transmission of music when a permit has been granted by authority of the City
Commission on a finding that such transmission contributes to the amenities
of the commercial area in which it originates and is not audible in any
residential area.



(Ord. 907.  Passed 8-8-16.)



652.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 656
Offenses Relating to Persons



656.01   Minor's curfew.



656.02   Definitions.




656.03   Selling, giving, or furnishing tobacco products, alternative
nicotine product or vapor product to minor prohibited; misdemeanor; penalty;
sign required, copies of sign; affirmative defense; notice; rebuttal
testimony; notice of rebuttal; exception.




656.04   Noninterference with right of parent or guardian.



656.99   Penalty.



656.99A   Prohibited conduct by minor; violation as misdemeanor; penalty;
participation in health promotion and risk reduction assessment program;
costs; community service; exceptions; other violations.



656.99B   Selling cigarette separately prohibited; exception; violation as
misdemeanor; penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Malicious destruction of property by minors - see M.C.L. Sec. 600.2913



   Playing games in streets - see GEN. OFF. 622.08



   False alarms - see GEN. OFF. 658.02



   Disorderly conduct - see GEN. OFF. 662.01



656.01  MINOR'S CURFEW.



   (a)   No minor under the age of sixteen years shall loiter, idle or
congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park located within
the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is
accompanied by a parent or guardian or an adult delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany the child.



   (b)   Every member of the Police Department is hereby authorized to
take any child under the age of sixteen years, who is found violating any of
the provisions of this section, to the home of such child and there inquire
from the parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody and
control of such child whether or not the child has been locked out or is
compelled to be upon the streets by reason of lack of home or home restraint,
and, if such child has a home where he or she can be properly cared for, to
leave such child at his or her home and report the fact of such parent's,
guardian's or other person's negligence, if such is found, to the Juvenile
Court Judge for the County. 



(Ord. 657.  Passed 9-29-97.)



656.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   "Alternative Nicotine Product" means a noncombustible product
containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
absorbed or ingested by any other means. FDA approved cessation products
containing nicotine, when properly procured either via a prescription or a
medical doctor's recommendation, to control an alternative nicotine problem
or addiction, shall be a defense to liability under this sub-section,
656.02(a).



   (b)   "Minor" means an individual under 18 years of age.



   (c)   "Person who sells tobacco products at retail" means a person
whose ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the
retail sale of tobacco products subject to state sales tax.



   (d)   "Public place" means a public street, sidewalk, or park or any
area open to the general public in a publicly owned or operated building or
public place of business.



   (e)   "Tobacco product" means a product that contains tobacco and is
intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, cigarettes,
noncigarette smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are
defined in section 2 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act, 1993 PA327; MCL
205,422, and cigars.



   (f)   "Use a tobacco product" means to smoke, chew, suck, inhale, or
otherwise consume a tobacco product.



   (g)   "Vapor Product" means a noncombustible product containing
nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or
other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size,
that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form.
Vapor Product includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe or similar product or device and a vapor cartridge
or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.



(Ord. 855.  Passed 4-9-12; Ord. 919.  Passed 10-8-18.)



656.03   SELLING, GIVING, OR FURNISHING TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCT OR VAPOR PRODUCT TO MINOR PROHIBITED; MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY;
SIGN REQUIRED, COPIES OF SIGN; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE; NOTICE; REBUTTAL
TESTIMONY; NOTICE OF REBUTTAL; EXCEPTION.



   (1)   A person shall not sell, give or furnish a tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product or vapor product to a minor. A person who
violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than $50.00 for each violation.



   (2)   A person who sells a tobacco product, alternative nicotine
product or vapor product at retail shall post, in a place close to the point
of sale and conspicuous to both employees and customers, a sign produced by
the department of community health that includes the following statement:



   "The purchase of a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or
vapor product by a minor under 18 years of age and the provision of tobacco
products to a minor are prohibited by law. A minor unlawfully purchasing or
using a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product is
subject to criminal penalties."



   (3)   If the sign required under subsection (2) is more than 6 feet
from the point of sale,  it shall be 5-1/2 inches by 8-1/2 inches and the
statement required under subsection (2) shall be printed in 36-point
boldfaced type. If the sign required under subsection (2) is 6 feet or less
from the point of sale, it shall be 2 inches by 4 inches and the statement
required under subsection (2) shall be printed in 20-point boldfaced type.



   (4)   The department of community health shall produce a sign
required under subsection (2) and have adequate copies of the sign ready for
distribution to licensed wholesalers, secondary wholesalers, and unclassified
acquirers of tobacco products free of charge. Licensed wholesalers, secondary
wholesalers, and unclassified acquirers of a tobacco product, alternative
nicotine product or vapor product shall obtain copies of the sign from the
department of community health and distribute them free of charge, upon
request, to persons who are subject to subsection (2) who do not purchase
their supply of a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor
product from wholesalers, secondary wholesalers, and unclassified acquirers
of tobacco products licensed under the Tobacco Products Tax Act, 1993 PA 327,
MCL 205.421 to 205.436.



   (5)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (1)
that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have
in force a written policy to prevent the sale of a tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product or vapor product to persons under 18 years of
age and that the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy. A
defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense described
in this subsection shall file and serve notice of the defense, in writing,
upon the court and the prosecuting attorney. The notice shall be served not
less than 14 days before the date set for trial.



   (6)   A prosecuting attorney who proposes to offer testimony to
rebut the affirmative defense described in subsection (5) above, shall file
and serve a notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon the court and the defendant.
The notice shall be served not less than 7 days before the date set for trial
and shall contain the name and address of each rebuttal witness.



   (7)   Subsection (1) does not apply to the handling or
transportation of a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor
product by a minor under the terms of that minor's employment.



(Ord. 855.  Passed 4-9-12; Ord. 919.  Passed 10-8-18.)



656.04   NONINTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.



   This act does not interfere with the right of a parent or legal
guardian in the rearing and management of his or her minor children or wards
within the bounds of his or her own private premises.



(Ord. 855.  Passed 4-9-12.)



656.99  PENALTY. (REPEALED)



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  Section 656.99 was repealed by Ordinance No. 855,
passed April 9, 2012. See Sections 656.99A and 656.99B for penalty
provisions.)



656.99A   PROHIBITED CONDUCT BY MINOR; VIOLATION AS MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY;
PARTICIPATION IN HEALTH PROMOTION AND RISK REDUCTION ASSESSMENT PROGRAM;
COSTS; COMMUNITY SERVICE; EXCEPTIONS; OTHER VIOLATIONS.



   (1)   Subject to subsection (3) below, a minor shall not do any of
the following:



      (a)   Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product or vapor product.



      (b)   Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product or vapor product.



      (c)   Use a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or
vapor product in a public place.



      (d)   Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of
age that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age
for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or
attempting to possess a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or
vapor product.



   (2)   An individual who violates subsection (1) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each violation.
Pursuant to a probation order, the court may also require an individual who
violates subsection (1) to participate in a health promotion and risk
reduction assessment program, if available. An individual who is ordered to
participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under
this subsection is responsible for the costs of participating in the program.
In addition, an individual who violates subsection (1) is subject to the
following:



      (a)   For the first violation, the court may order the
individual to do one of the following:



         (i)   Perform not more than 16 hours of community
service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.



         (ii)   Participate in a health promotion and risk
reduction program, as described in this subsection.



      (b)   For a second violation, in addition to participation in
a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the
individual to perform not more than 32 hours of community service in a
hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.



      (c)   For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to
participation in a health promotion, and risk reduction program, the court
may order the individual to perform not more than 48 hours of community
service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility.



   (3)   Subsection (1) does not apply to a minor participating in any
of the following:



      (a)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product
under the direction of the minor's employer and with the prior approval of
the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal
enforcement action.



      (b)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product
under the direction of a state police or a local police agency as part of an
enforcement action, unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt
of a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product by the
minor was not under the direction of the state police or the local police
agency and was not part of the undercover operation.



      (c)   Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to
purchase a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor product for
the purpose of satisfying federal substance abuse block grant youth tobacco
access requirements, if the compliance checks are conducted under the
direction of a substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in section 6103
of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6103, and with the prior
approval of the state police or a local police agency.



   (4)   Subsection (1) does not apply to the handling or
transportation of a tobacco product, alternative nicotine product or vapor
product by a minor under the terms of that minor's employment.



   (5)   This section does prohibit the individual from being charged
with, convicted of, or sentenced for any other violation of law arising out
of the violation of subsection (1).



(Ord. 855.  Passed 4-9-12; Ord. 919.  Passed 10-8-18.)



656.99B   SELLING CIGARETTE SEPARATELY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION; VIOLATION AS
MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY.



   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) below, a person
who sells tobacco products at retail shall not sell a cigarette separately
from its package.



   (2)   Subsection (1) hereof does not apply to a person who sells
tobacco products at retail in a tobacco specialty retail store or other
retail store that deals exclusively in the sale of tobacco products and
smoking paraphernalia.



   (3)   A person who violates subsection (1) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense.



(Ord. 855.  Passed 4-9-12; Ord. 919.  Passed 10-8-18.)



CHAPTER 658
Offenses Relating to Property



658.01   Injury or destruction of public property.



658.02   False alarms; tampering with alarm boxes.



658.03   Trespassing.



658.04   Skateboarding, in-line skates and rollerskates.



658.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Real estate generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 554.1 et seq.



   Malicious destruction of property by minors - see M.C.L. Sec. 600.2913



   Theft generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.356 et seq.



   Malicious destruction of property - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.377a, 750.377b



   Damage to City sewer system - see S.U. & P.S. 1042.07



   Tampering with meters - see S.U. & P.S. 1042.10



   Obstructions on government property - see GEN OFF. 662.01(b)(18)



   Tampering with cable television equipment - see B.R. & T. 803.28



658.01  INJURY OR DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall use, destroy, injure, tamper with, convert, deface or
remove any real or personal property of the City without first being
authorized to do so by a proper City official.



658.02  FALSE ALARMS; TAMPERING WITH ALARM BOXES.



   (a)   No person shall give any false alarm of fire or other
emergency or ring any bell of the City for the purpose of giving any false
alarm of fire or other emergency.



(Adopting Ordinance)



   (b)   No person shall tamper with, unlock or break the glass of the
boxes or appliances of the fire alarm system of the City for the purpose of
communicating any false fire alarm.



   (c)   No person shall in any way cut, mutilate, deface, cover or
obstruct any of the fire alarm boxes of the City with any sign, notice,
announcement or otherwise.



(Ord. 73. Passed 1-11-21.)



658.03  TRESPASSING.



   (a)   No person shall:



      (1)   Willfully enter or remain upon the lands or premises of
another, without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by
the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of the owner or occupant. No
person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to
depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or his or her agent or servant,
shall neglect or refuse, without lawful authority, to depart therefrom.



      (2)   Willfully enter or remain upon the lands or premises of
another, without lawful authority, after having been warned of the owner's
regulations governing access to and use of the property through the
conspicuous posting of informational signs which state "WARNING -- THESE
PREMISES ARE PROVIDED FOR THE BENEFIT OF PATRONS AND EMPLOYEES OF THIS
ESTABLISHMENT. USE OF PARKING AREA IS ONLY PERMITTED WHILE THE EMPLOYEE OR
PATRON IS INSIDE THE ESTABLISHMENT. VIOLATORS WILL BE SUBJECT TO TRESPASSING
CHARGES."



      (3)   Stand, idle or sit, either in person or within a
motorized vehicle, in or about any store, shop, business or commercial
establishment, and/or its premises and private parking lot, if such standing,
idling or sitting causes interference or disorder with the normal course of
business of the store, shop, business or commercial establishment, or in any
way tends to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians or vehicles enroute
to or from the establishment or premises.



   (b)   The judge of appropriate jurisdiction may impose community
service for a violation of this section, in addition to the penalty provided
in Section 658.99.



(Ord. 497. Passed 4-25-88.)



658.04  SKATEBOARDING, IN-LINE SKATES AND ROLLERSKATES.



   (a)   Definitions:



      (1)   “Rollerskates,” “in-line skates” and “street
skates” are defined as a recreational piece of equipment with small wheels
near the toe and near the heel of a shoe, boot or frame that would attach to
a shoe, which are used for gliding on a hard surface such as a floor,
sidewalk, concrete and the like.



      (2)   “Skateboards” are defined as a recreational piece of
equipment consisting of a short, oblong board with small wheels at each end,
that is to be ridden on a hard surface such as a floor, sidewalk, concrete
and the like. Rollerskating or skateboarding is the act of using
rollerskates, street skates, in-line skates and skateboards.



   (b)   No person shall rollerskate, in-line skate, skateboard or use
any other type of skating artifice or device within the City without
complying with the terms of this section.



   (c)   Whenever any person is rollerskating, in-line skating, street
skating or skateboarding upon a sidewalk or other paved surface intended for
use by pedestrians, such person shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian and shall not approach, overtake or pass such pedestrian in a
reckless or careless manner, and shall not pass such pedestrian except in
single file if such person is rollerskating, in-line skating, street skating
or skateboarding with other such skaters or riders.



   (d)   No person shall rollerskate, in-line skate, street skate or
skateboard on any bench, plant or wall, retaining wall, porch, steps or other
device or structure which is located on public property, or jump or step on
or off such device or structure in the process of using rollerskates, in-line
skates, street skates or skateboards.



   (e)   In-line skating and skateboarding shall be prohibited at all
times within the Central Business District. For purposes of this section, the
Central Business District is defined by the following street locations, which
when intersected is the area to be enforced: the west boundary of the area
shall be Center Street; the east boundary of the area shall be Court Street;
the south boundary of the area shall be Sibley Street; and the north boundary
of the area shall be Clinton Street.



   (f)   The City Council may, in its discretion, by resolution,
authorize the City Manager to erect signs on any other City owned property or
in any other place of the City prohibiting the use of rollerskates, in-line
skates, street skates and skateboards thereon. It shall be unlawful to
perform such acts on any such City owned property or within such City area
when the same is posted. No person shall rollerskate, in-line skate, street
skate or skateboard on any sidewalk or other paved surface intended for
pedestrians in a reckless or careless manner or in a manner which is likely
to result in injury or harm to any person or property.



   (g)   If an individual violates this section, the Police Department
may impound the skateboard, in-line skates or street skates for not more than
thirty days in lieu of instituting a civil infraction action. In the case of
temporarily impounding the skateboard, in-line skates or street skates of a
minor pursuant to this section, written notice within a reasonable time
period from the date of the impoundment shall be given to the minor's parent
or legal guardian by first class mail.



(Ord. 690.  Passed 5-10-99.)



658.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



   Whoever violates Section 658.04 is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00). The judge of appropriate jurisdiction may
impose community service in addition to the required fine.



(Ord. 497. Passed 4-25-88.)



CHAPTER 662
Peace Disturbances



662.01   Disorderly conduct.



662.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Disorderly conduct generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.167 et seq.



   Gambling - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.301 et seq.



   Prostitution - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.448 et seq.



   Barking and howling dogs - see GEN. OFF. 606.03



   Noise control - see GEN. OFF. 652.06



   Noise as a performance standard in zoning - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240
(Zoning Code)



662.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (a)   Definitions.  As used in this section:



      (1)   "Public place" means any street, alley, park, public
building, public lakes, public waterways, or place of business or assembly
open to or frequented by the public; any place to which the public or a
substantial group of persons has access; highways; transportation facilities;
and places of amusement.



      (2)   "Private premises" means any dwelling, house, building,
or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private
residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule, lobby, hallway, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.



      (3)   "Property" means any money, personal property, real
property, thing in action, evidence of debt or contract or article of value
of any kind.



   (b)   Offenses.  The offense of disorderly conduct is committed if
a person:



      (1)   Disturbances.



         A.   Generally.  Makes or excites any disturbance or
contention in or upon any tavern, store, grocery, manufacturing establishment
or other business place, or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public
building, public lakes, public waterways, grounds or park, public place,
private premises, or at any election or other public meeting where citizens
are peaceably and lawfully assembled.



      (2)   Prostitute.  Is a common prostitute;



      (3)   Window peeper.  Is a window peeper;



      (4)   Illegal occupation or business.  Engages in an illegal
occupation or business;



      (5)   Public intoxication.  Is under the influence of
alcohol, a controlled substance, other drugs or a combination thereof in a
public place and is either directly endangering the safety of another person
or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance;



      (6)   Indecent conduct.  Is engaged in indecent or obscene
conduct in a public place;



      (7)   Vagrant.  Is a vagrant;



      (8)   Begging.  Is found begging in a public place;



      (9)   Loitering.



         A.   Prostitution house. Is found loitering in a house
of ill fame or prostitution, or in a place where prostitution or lewdness is
practiced, encouraged or allowed;



         B.   Illegal business. Knowingly loiters in or about a
place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted;



         C.   Public building. Loiters in or about a police
station, police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building
or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment or
legal services, or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances;



         D.   School buildings. Loiters or remains in or about a
school building or grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving
custody of or responsibility for a pupil, or any other specific, legitimate
reason for being there, and not having written permission from a school
administrator; or



         E.   Controlled substances. Knowingly loiters or remains
in any place where the use of controlled substances is practiced, encouraged
or allowed;



      (10)   Jostling.  Is found jostling or roughly crowding
people unnecessarily in a public place;



      (11)   Malicious Use of Telephone. Maliciously uses any
service provided by a communication's common carrier with the intent to
terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other
person, or to disrupt the peace and quiet of any other person, by any of the
following:



         A.   Threatening physical harm or damage to any person
or property in the course of a telephone conversation;



         B.   Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or
telegraph message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill,
has suffered death or has been a victim of a crime or of an accident;



         C.   Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a
connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone
and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone,
thereby interfering with any communication service; or



         D.   Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive
language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a
telephone conversation;



   (12)   False fire alarms. Raises a false alarm of fire at any
gathering or in any public place; rings any bell or operates any mechanical
apparatus, electrical apparatus or combination thereof for the purpose of
creating a false alarm of fire; or raises a false alarm of fire orally, by
telephone or in person;



   (13)   False police reports. Willfully and knowingly makes a false
report of the commission of any crime or other emergency, including, but not
limited to, a bombing, an attempted bombing or a threat to bomb, knowing the
same to be false;



   (14)   Fireworks. Fires, discharges, displays or possesses any
fireworks, except those which are permitted by State law;



   (15)   Admitting person for prostitution. Is seventeen years of age
or older and receives or admits, or offers to receive or admit, any person
into any place, structure, house, building or vehicle for the purpose of
prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or knowingly permits any person to
remain in any such place for any such purpose;



   (16)   Soliciting prostitution. Is seventeen years of age or older
and accosts, solicits or invites another in any public place or in or from
any building or vehicle, by word, gesture or any other means, to commit
prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act;



   (17)   Offering prostitution. Engages or offers to engage the
services of a female person, not his spouse, for the purpose of prostitution,
lewdness or assignation by the payment in money or other forms of
consideration;



   (18)   Obstructions on government property. Intentionally obstructs,
impairs or hinders the performance of a governmental function or the use of
government property by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical
interference or an obstacle.



      For purposes of this paragraph, "government" includes any
principal subdivision or agency of the United States, the State, the City or
any agency of local government operating within the City. "Governmental
function" includes any activity which a public agency or public servant is
legally authorized to undertake.



   (19)   Obscene material. Publishes, sells, offers for sale, gives
away, exhibits or possesses for such purposes any obscene book, pamphlet,
paper, picture, statuary, image or representation; or



   (20)   Crowds. Engages, encourages or abets the collection of
persons and crowds in a public place for an illegal purpose.



(Ord. 536. Passed 3-25-91; Ord. 908.  Passed 8-8-16.)



662.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 668
Railroads



668.01   Speed limit.



668.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Notice of hearing of municipal planning commission re master plan - see
M.C.L. Sec. 125.38



   Railroad crossings - see M.C.L. Secs. 253.1 et seq., 253.51 et seq.,
469.1 et seq.



   Railroads generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 462.2 et seq., 463.1 et seq.,
750.511 et seq.



   Railroad property - see M.C.L. Secs. 469.1 et seq.



668.01  SPEED LIMIT.



   (a)   No railroad engine, car or train of cars shall be run or
operated on any railway in the City, at any street crossing, at a greater
rate of speed than thirty-five miles per hour.



   (b)   The Chief of Police of the City and all State Police Officers
are hereby also authorized to enforce this section.



(Ord. 221. Passed 8-31-64.)



668.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 688
Weapons and Explosives



688.01   Discharge of firearms.



688.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Storage and transportation of explosives - see M.C.L. Sec. 29.3a



   Arson - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.71 et seq.



   Construction or possession of explosive devices - see M.C.L. Sec.
750.211a



   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF. 662.01(b)(14)



688.01  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   No person shall discharge any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, air
rifle, air compression gun or any other firearm in the City.



(Ord. 111. Passed 11-22-43.)



688.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



Howell, MI, Code of Ordinances


PART EIGHT - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE



   TITLE TWO - Business Regulation



      Chap. 802.   Alcoholic Beverage Sales.



      Chap. 803.   Cable Television Franchises.



      Chap. 804.   Cable Television Rates.



      Chap. 806.   Commercial Recreational Establishments.



      Chap. 810.   Business Licenses and Regulations.



      Chap. 860.   Oil and Gas Wells.



      Chap. 862.   Precious Metal and Gem Dealers.



      Chap. 868.   Secondhand and Junk Dealers.



      Chap. 872.   Street Vendors and Peddlers.



      Chap. 873.   Transient Merchants.



      Chap. 876.   Taxicabs.



   TITLE FOUR - Taxation



      Chap. 890.   General Regulations.



      Chap. 892.   Special Assessments.



      Chap. 894.   Real Estate Tax.



      Chap. 896.   Tax Increment Finance Authority.



      Chap. 898.   Local Development Finance Authority.



      Chap. 899.   Brownfield Redevelopment Authority.



TITLE TWO - Business Regulation



CHAPTER 802
Alcoholic Beverages Sales



802.01   Application for new licenses.



802.02   Restrictions on issuance of licenses.



802.03   Terms of licenses.



802.04   Reservation of authority.



802.05   License hearing; statement of findings and determination.



802.06   One-day licenses.



802.07   Objections to renewals and requests for revocation.



802.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Intoxicating liquors generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 436.1 et seq.



   Sales on Sundays and municipal election days - see M.C.L. Sec. 436.19e



802.01  APPLICATION FOR NEW LICENSES.



   (a)   Applications for a license to sell beer and wine or spirits,
whether an existing license is being transferred or a new license is to be
issued, shall be made to Council, in writing, on the form provided by
Council, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by duly authorized
agent thereof, if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath or
affirmation, and shall contain the following statements and information:



      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant, in the case
of an individual, or, in the case of a co-partnership, of all general and
limited partners, or, in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses
of the officers, directors and each shareholder;



      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of
birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the date and place of his or her
naturalization;



      (3)   The character of business of the applicant and, in the
case of a corporation, the object for which it was formed. If the applicant
is a corporation, copies of its Articles of Incorporation, a Certificate of
Good Standing from the State and the three most recent Michigan Annual
Reports shall be attached.



      (4)   The period of time the applicant has been in business;



      (5)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license, including seating
capacity, if a license is granted, and current seating capacity, if
applicable;



      (6)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has made
application for a similar or other license on premises other than those
described in the application and the disposition of such application;



      (7)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted
of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any
matter or thing contained in this chapter or the laws of the State;



      (8)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of
the laws of the State or of the United States or any ordinance of the City in
the conduct of its business;



      (9)   A statement showing the costs of improvements or
construction, accompanied by a current financial statement for an individual
applicant, partnership or corporation, certified by a certified public
accountant and/or a commitment letter from a lending institution, if funds
for construction or improvement will come from borrowing;



      (10)   A statement showing the date the applicant applied to
the Liquor Control Commission for a license, with a copy of the application
made to the Commission attached;



      (11)   A statement showing the business experience of the
applicant, including experience in the liquor business, and the names and
addresses of establishments where the experience was obtained. If the
applicant does not have the necessary experience in the operation of an
establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises, then the type and number of employees who will be hired who do
possess that background and experience, including the names and addresses of
establishments where the experience was obtained, shall be described. If the
business will be conducted by a manager or agent, information regarding the
experience of that manager or agent, including the names and addresses of
establishments where the experience was obtained, which must be commensurate
with that of the applicant, shall be set forth.



      (12)   A list of business references;



      (13)   A statement showing the hours of operation
contemplated, if a license is granted, and showing the current hours of
operation, if applicable;



      (14)   A statement showing the number of persons (new or
additional) who would be employed if the license is issued, describing the
types of positions to be



held by such employees, and a statement as to whether they would be working
full-time or part-time;



      (15)   A statement showing the straight line distance of the
establishment from residential areas on all sides and also existing
establishments serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises,
or selling packaged beer, wine or liquor, that are located within one-half
mile of the applicant's proposed location;



      (16)   A statement indicating that if approval of the license
is granted by Council, the applicant will file a cash bond in the principal
amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000), the condition of such bond being
that the applicant for such license will commence the liquor business within
six months after final approval and issuance of such license by the State
Liquor Control Commission, if the applicant already has a building, or, if
the applicant will construct a building in which to use the liquor license,
that the applicant will immediately commence construction and begin the
liquor business within six months of issuance or as soon thereafter as
possible;



      (17)   A statement that the applicant will appear for a
personal interview with Council if the applicant is selected as a finalist
for issuance of the license, and if Council so requests; and



      (18)   A certification that the information contained in the
application, together with its attachments and enclosures, is true, to the
best of the applicant's knowledge and belief, and that all information
prepared by agents of the applicant is likewise true, to the best of the
applicant's knowledge. The applicant shall also consent to allow the Chief of
Police to conduct a routine investigation into the applicant's background and
shall acknowledge that any false statement made in the application or its
attachments or enclosures constitutes grounds for denial of the application.



   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by complete sealed
building drawings and site plans, showing the entire structure and premises
(including the area (in square feet) and elevations) and in particular the
specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall
demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities
and, where appropriate, adequate plans for visual landscaping and screening
of the refuse disposal facilities from adjacent parcels, and for noise
control.



(Res. 84-1. Passed 2-6-84.)



802.02  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.



   No license referred to in Section 802.01 shall be issued to:



   (a)   A person whose license issued by the Liquor Control Commission
has been revoked for cause, in this or in any other community;



   (b)   A person who, at the time of the application for, or renewal
of, any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon
a first application under this chapter or any statute or administrative rule
of the Liquor Control Commission;



   (c)   A co-partnership, unless all of the general and limited
partners of such copartnership qualify to obtain a license;



   (d)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
a shareholder thereof, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder
for any reason;



   (e)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications
required of the licensee;



   (f)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal
or State law involving moral turpitude, embezzlement or fraud, or concerning
the manufacture, consumption, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or
narcotics, controlled substances or drugs which are prohibited by Act 368 of
the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, being M.C.L. 333.1101 et seq.;



   (g)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the
license is to be issued, or a person who or which does not have sufficient
financial assets to carry on or maintain the business;



   (h)   Any law enforcing public official or any member of Council,
and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor,
either as an owner, employer or employee;



   (i)   Premises where there exists a violation of applicable
building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, zoning regulations,
public health regulations or any other applicable law;



   (j)   Premises where the sale of beer, wine or spirits is not shown
to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the
site, such as, but not limited to, food sales, motel operations or
recreational activities;



   (k)   Premises where it is determined, by a simple majority of
Council, that adequate parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities,
screening and noise and nuisance control do not exist or will not exist
within a reasonable period following commencement of operations;



   (l)   Premises where a nuisance does exist or will exist;



   (m)   Premises determined by Council, by a simple majority vote, to
be inappropriate, considering the desirability of establishing a site in
developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated, undeveloped areas;
the attitude of adjacent residents and property owners; traffic safety;
accessibility to the site from abutting roads; capability of abutting roads
to accommodate the commercial activity; distance from public or private
schools for minors; proximity of inconsistent zoning classifications; and
accessibility from primary roads or State highways; and



(Res. 84-1. Passed 2-6-84.)



   (n)   Any person who or which is in default to the City for any
reason, whether because of nonpayment of any moneys due the City or because
of the nonperformance of any act required of the applicant for the benefit of
the City. Council may, at its discretion, grant a reasonable time extension
for compliance when it is deemed appropriate.



(Res. 84-20. Passed 7-9-84.)



802.03  TERMS OF LICENSES.



   Approval of a license shall be for the period of continued compliance
with this chapter. Any applicant/licensee who fails to continue to meet the
criteria contained in this chapter shall be the subject of a hearing pursuant
to this chapter in order to determine whether the City should file objections
to the renewal or request revocation by the Liquor Control Commission.
Approval of a license shall be with the understanding that any necessary
remodeling or new construction for the use of the license shall be commenced
immediately after approval by the Liquor Control Commission. Any unusual
delay in the completion of such remodeling or construction shall be
considered just cause for revocation of the license.



(Res. 84-1.  Passed 2-6-84.)



802.04  RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY.



   No applicant for a liquor license has the right to the issuance of such
license to him, her or it, and Council reserves the right to exercise
reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the
issuance of such license. Additionally, no applicant for a liquor license has
the right to have such application processed, and Council further reserves
the right to take no action with respect to any application filed with it.
Council further reserves the right to maintain a list of all applicants and
to review the same when, at its discretion, it determines that the issuance
of an additional liquor license is in the best interests of the City and will
meet the needs and convenience of its residents.



(Res. 84-1.  Passed 2-6-84.)



802.05  LICENSE HEARING; STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND DETERMINATION.



   Council shall grant a public hearing upon a license application when,
at its discretion, it determines that the issuance of an additional liquor
license is in the best interests of the City and will meet the needs and
convenience of its residents. Following such hearing, Council shall submit to
the applicant a written statement of its findings and determination as to
whether or not issuance of the license would be in the best interest of the
City. Such determination shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with the
restrictions set forth in Section 802.02 and consideration of all information
contained in the application.



(Res. 84-1. Passed 2-6-84.)



802.06  ONE-DAY LICENSES.



   The City Manager may waive any of the provisions of this chapter that
are unreasonable or burdensome in the case of charitable, fraternal or
religious organizations that are making application for a one-day liquor
license.



(Res. 84-1. Passed 2-6-84.)



802.07  OBJECTIONS TO RENEWALS AND REQUESTS FOR REVOCATION.



   (a)   Procedure. Before filing an objection to a renewal or request
for revocation of a license with the Liquor Control Commission, Council shall
serve the license holder, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days
prior to the hearing, with notice of the hearing, which notice shall contain
the following information:



      (1)   A notice of the proposed action;



      (2)   Reasons for the proposed action;



      (3)   The date, time and place of the hearing; and



      (4)   A statement that the licensee may present evidence and
testimony and confront adverse witnesses.



   Following the hearing, Council shall submit to the license holder and
the Commission a written statement of its findings and determination.



   (b)   Criteria for Nonrenewal or Revocation. Council shall recommend
nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it that, based
upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, either of the
following is true:



      (1)   There is a violation of any of the restrictions set
forth in Section 802.02; or



      (2)   A nuisance is being maintained upon the premises.



(Res. 84-1.  Passed 2-6-84.)



802.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 803
Cable Television Franchises



803.01   Purpose.



803.02   Definitions.



803.03   Franchise required.



803.04   Application for and issuance of franchises; duties of grantees.



803.05   Construction timetable.



803.06   Competition.



803.07   Rates and charges.



803.08   Franchise fee payments by grantees.



803.09   Insurance.



803.10   Indemnification.



803.11   New developments.



803.12   General capability.



803.13   Service to customers.



803.14   Parental lock-out.



803.15   Other business activities.



803.16   Conditions of street occupancy.



803.17   Technical standards.



803.18   Maps, records and reports.



803.19   Transfer of rights.



803.20   Construction, performance bond and letter of credit.



803.21   Review, renewal, termination and cancellation.



803.22   Purchase option.



803.23   Removal.



803.24   Continuity of service.



803.25   Guaranty of parent.



803.26   Right of privacy.



803.27   Rights of residents.



803.28   Tampering with cable equipment.



803.29   Cable Television Commission. (Repealed)



803.30   Liability of grantees in libel actions.



803.31   Waiver.



803.32   Acceptance of agreement and incorporation of application and
chapter by reference.



803.33   Severability.



803.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Encroachments on highways and roads - see M.C.L. Secs. 247.1 et seq.



   Construction and maintenance of facilities - see M.C.L. Secs. 247.183
et seq.



   Television and radio generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 484.301 et seq.,
750.507 et seq.



   Cables improperly located; insurance - see M.C.L. Sec. 500.3123



   Cable television rates - see B.R. & T. Ch. 804



   Television tower - see Zoning Code



   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



803.01  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate the construction,
maintenance and operation of cable television systems in the City of Howell
and to provide for the granting of franchises for the construction,
maintenance and operation of cable television systems. 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.



   (b)   "Cable Television Commission" means the advisory body created
by this chapter to recommend measures in connection with the enforcement and
development of this chapter.



   (c)   "Cable television service" means the delivery to subscribers,
via a cable system, of video programming, data services and ancillary audio
and data signals and any associated upstream or downstream data or polling
information directly or incidentally related to the delivery of such
programming, and any upstream or downstream institutional programming.



   (d)   "City" means the City of Howell.



   (e)   "Community antenna television system,"  "CATV system" or
"cable system" means a system of cables or other electrical or optical
conductors and equipment used or to be used primarily to receive television
and/or radio signals directly or indirectly from the atmosphere and to
transmit such signals via cable or other equipment to subscribers in the City.



   (f)   "Council" means the City Council of the City of Howell.



   (g)   "Federal Communications Commission" or "FCC" means the present
Federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934,
or any successor agency created by the United States Congress.



   (h)   "Franchise" means a nonexclusive, limited authorization
awarded by ordinance for the construction, maintenance, upgrade and operation
of a CATV system in the City.



   (i)   "Grantee" means any holder of a CATV franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter.



   (j)   "Gross revenues" means any and all receipts and revenues,
including revenue from advertising or data services, received directly or
indirectly from all sources and/or users other than transactions related to
the sale or lease of real property by a grantee, not including any taxes on
services furnished by a grantee and imposed on any subscriber or user by any
governmental unit, and collected by a grantee. Revenues that are derived as a
portion of a national or regional service shall be computed on a per
subscriber basis if such determination cannot be achieved by other means.



   (k)   "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization.



   (l)   "Subscriber" means any person who contracts with the grantee
for, or is in any manner lawfully provided with, cable services.



   (m)   "User" means any person who is provided the use of the
grantee's CATV system, channels, equipment or facilities.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.03  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   No person shall install, construct, maintain or otherwise operate a
CATV system in the City without first having obtained a franchise.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.04  APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF FRANCHISES; DUTIES OF GRANTEES.



   (a)   Council may grant one or more franchises for the construction
and operation of a CATV system in the City after consideration of the
applicants for such franchise as may be before it. Any franchise shall be
granted subject to this chapter and the City Charter.



   (b)   The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any
time, such additional franchises for a CATV system as it deems appropriate.
Additional franchises shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate or
damage any rights previously granted to any other grantee.



   (c)   In the event a franchise application is filed proposing a
franchise territory which overlaps in whole or in part an existing area, a
copy thereof shall be served by the applicant by registered mail upon the
current franchised grantee or grantees. Proof that a copy of the franchise
application has been served upon the current grantee(s)shall be provided to
the City. No application for overlapping franchise territory shall be
processed until proof of service has been furnished by the applicant and no
such application shall be granted without full public hearing on the request.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, it is not the intent of
this chapter to either require or prohibit overbuilding.



   (d)   Applications for a new, renewed or amended franchise shall be
made in such form as the City may prescribe by resolution and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application review fee as the City may
prescribe by resolution.



   (e)   Any franchise, and the rights, privileges, authority, and
responsibilities established, shall take effect and be in force from and
after final approval by Council, and shall continue in force and effect for a
period established by the franchise not to exceed fifteen years from the date
of approval, only if, within thirty days after the date of the granting of
the franchise, the grantee files with the City Clerk its unconditional
acceptance of the franchise, all required letters of credit, construction
bonds and insurance certificates, and pays to the City Clerk all reasonable
costs incurred by the City in preparing, considering and awarding the
franchise, including legal, engineering, technical, publication and other
expenses. If a grantee fails to comply with this subsection, it shall acquire
no rights, privileges or authority whatsoever.



   (f)   Grantees shall, within sixty days after the execution of a
franchise, apply to the Federal Communications Commission, any State agency
and any appropriate utility companies for all necessary pole line agreements,
authorizations or registrations for the construction of a cable system, and
for all permits then normally available. The failure of a grantee to timely
apply for such pole lease agreements, authorizations or registrations shall
render the franchise null and void and forfeit the grantee's security.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.05  CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE.



   Grantees shall insure that 100 percent of the homes in the City, except
where prohibited by private property owners, are capable of receiving the
services of the CATV system within eighteen months from the execution of the
franchise, in accordance with the terms of the application submitted by the
grantee. If, for any reason, a grantee shall fail or neglect to complete the
required installation and be unprepared to furnish cable service by the
specified date, the franchise shall be null and void and have no force or
effect.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.06  COMPETITION.



   Believing that competition between providers of telecommunications
services will result in lower rates, better service and greater innovation,
it is the intent of the City to create an environment which supports fair and
open competition between providers of telecommunications services. Franchises
issued after the effective date of this section shall contain and/or be
subject to the following provisions:



   (a)   Near-Universal Service. A franchise shall be required to serve
all persons requesting service in the City currently served by other
franchises.



   (b)   Franchise Fee. For use of the public rights of way required to
provide the service identified in subsection (a)hereof, a franchisee shall be
required to pay the same level of franchise fee paid by other providers of
similar services up to the maximum franchise fee permitted to be collected by
Federal or State law or regulation.



   (c)   Customer Standards. A franchisee shall comply with the more
stringent of the customer service standards of the franchise: those from time
to time adopted by the franchisee and revealed publicly or those from time to
time adopted by the FCC. A franchisee shall be required to purchase the
equipment necessary to measure such compliance and shall produce reports at
least quarterly to demonstrate compliance with the applicable standard.



   (d)   PEG Support. A franchisee shall donate use of the public,
educational and governmental ("PEG") channels for use by the City or its
designees. A franchisee shall also provide financial support for the use of
the PEG channels and the development of programming for those channels.
Minimally, a franchisee shall donate the number of channels that corresponds
to the same number of channels donated by other providers of similar services
in the year preceding the issuance of a franchise to such franchisee. A
franchisee shall further provide financial support for the operation of the
PEG channels in an amount equal to the same level of financial support
provided by other providers of similar service in the year immediately
preceding issuance of the franchise; provided that in no event shall the
level of financial support paid by a franchisee be less than any other
franchise. If, owing to adequate financial support for PEG channels by
existing franchisees, the City determines that additional PEG funding is not
required, then the City, upon a determination by its Council, may direct the
expenditure of equivalent funds provided hereunder for public purposes it
deems proper.



   (e)   Fair Competition. If more than one franchise is granted in the
City to provide video telecommunications services, then each holder of a
franchise to provide similar services shall have the option, on thirty days
written notice to the City, to adopt and comply with all the terms of the
franchise subsequently granted to another provider.



   (f)   Utility Rate Payor Protection. If the person requesting a
franchise to deliver video or other types of programming and/or information
services also provides telephone or other public utility service to residents
of the City, the grantor shall require the submission of all detailed
information and financial projections from the person requesting the new
franchise reasonably necessary to ensure that revenue from the public utility
operation is not proposed to be used as a subsidy for delivery of video
services. The grantor shall further require that the new franchisee is a
separately established company, that all financial records be separately
maintained and auditable by the grantor and that all necessary assurances of
financial performance be provided by an entity other than that which offers
such public utility service to the residents of the City. Cross subsidization
of services by a franchisee shall be considered a material breach of the
franchise agreement.



   (g)   Utility Easements and Rights of Way. No person shall use City
utility easements and public rights of way without the issuance of a permit
therefor and except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter and the engineering
construction standards of the City.



      Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications for the proposed construction. Plans and specifications for
proposed utilization of City utility easements and public rights of way shall
be submitted to the City Planning Department for processing and review. No
plans and specifications shall be approved and no permit shall be issued
unless the following conditions are met:



      (1)   A franchise has been awarded to the applicant by the
City.



      (2)   Adequate space is reserved in the City utility easements
and public rights of way for competitors offering the same services as the
applicant.



      (3)   The applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the
City and existing users of City utility easements and public rights of way
from all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles,
rearranging attachments and placing underground facilities, and all other
incidental costs, including those incident to administration, inspections,
engineering and legal review, incurred by the City or other users of City
utility easements and public rights of way.



      (4)   The plans and specifications have been reviewed by all
other users of City utility easements and public rights of way.



      (5)   A franchisee shall file pole attachment agreements with
the City.



      (6)   A.   Arbitrator:  The applicant has executed
separate agreements relating to conflict resolution with each other user of
affected City utility easements and/or public rights of way, which agreements
shall include provisions related to damage of facilities, restoration of
service and payments of costs. Council shall appoint a telecommunications
arbitrator for the purpose of resolving disputes between franchisees
regarding the construction, maintenance, repair or replacement of facilities.
The arbitrator shall be employed on a consulting basis with all fees, costs
and expenses incurred by the City in connection with referral of a dispute to
the arbitrator, to be born by the franchisees as provided herein. The Chief
Executive Officer shall, upon written request by any franchisee, direct the
telecommunications arbitrator to resolve a dispute. Each franchisee shall
deposit with the City an amount equal to 110 percent of the fees estimated by
the arbitrator to be incurred in connection with the matter. The decision of
the arbitrator shall be binding on the franchisees. The arbitrator shall
require the losing party to pay 100 percent of the arbitrator's fees and
costs and such additional reasonable sum calculated to reimburse the winning
franchise for costs of repair or replacement of damaged facilities for lost
revenue and for the expenses incurred in connection with the arbitration.



         B.   Changes to approved plans shall be made only with
the prior approval of the City. Detailed "as built" plans shall be submitted
for all new construction or installations in City utility easements and
public rights of way.



         All franchisees shall be subject to the dispute resolution
provisions of this chapter.



   (h)   Open Markets. If any person requesting a franchise for the
provision of competing telecommunications services currently offers telephone
service to any resident in the City, then the grantor may condition the new
franchise on an agreement by such person that:



      (1)   It will waive any rights that may be held under the law
to object to other telecommunications services providers offering telephone
service within the franchise area; and



      (2)   It will negotiate in good faith with other franchisees
on issues necessary to ensure effective competition in providing telephone
service, including, without limitation, telephone number portability,
interconnection to facilities and equal access to emergency 911 service.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.07  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (a)   Subscribers and users shall be notified of all increases in
rates and service charges at least thirty days before the effective date
thereof. Notice of such actions shall promptly be filed with the City Clerk.



   (b)   Grantees shall not discriminate in the assessment, levy,
charge, imposition or collection of rates and service charges on the basis of
age, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex or marital status.
This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit establishing discounts as
provided in subsection (j)hereof.



   (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with City-wide promotional
campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers or users.



   (d)   Grantees shall provide subscribers with itemized bills.
Grantees may not require subscribers to pay for any cable service more than
one month in advance. Grantees shall require no other advance payment. This
subsection shall not be construed to prohibit an advance payment for
installation of services or for security deposits.



   (e)   In the event that a subscriber fails to pay a rate or service
charge when the same is properly due and owing, a grantee may disconnect the
subscriber's service outlet upon giving ten days written notice.



   (f)   If a grantee collects a deposit or advance charge on any
service or equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the grantee shall
provide such service or equipment within five days of the collection of the
deposit or charge or it shall refund such deposit or charge within two days.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed:



      (1)   To relieve a grantee of any responsibility to
subscribers or users under any agreements into which it enters with them; or



      (2)   As limiting a grantee's liability for fines or penalties
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or any franchise for violation
or breach of any provision thereof; or



      (3)   As limiting a grantee's liability for damages because of
its failure to provide the service for which the deposit or charge was made.



   (g)   In the event that a subscriber terminates any cable service
prior to the end of a pre-paid period, the pro-rata portion of any pre-paid
rate which represents payment for services which are no longer to be rendered
shall be refunded promptly, but in no case more than forty-five days after
receipt of the request for termination.



   (h)   A grantee shall not charge a security deposit greater than the
equipment's actual cost to the grantee. Any security deposit collected by a
grantee shall be returned to the subscriber upon the termination of service
by the subscriber and return of such equipment undamaged, with allowances for
reasonable wear and tear, and the payment of any outstanding balance due and
payable.



   (i)   The City expressly reserves the right, upon reasonable notice
and opportunity for comment by a grantee, to regulate whatever rates for the
provision of cable services and service charges that the City is authorized
to regulate by law. The City may adopt, by resolution, procedural guidelines
for regulating rates subject to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, as amended or as amended in the future.



   (j)   A grantee shall reduce the rates for its basic service tier
("BST," defined as that tier which includes local television broadcast
signals and public, educational and governmental channels, if any) by not
less than ten percent. This discount shall be made available to all
subscribers choosing to purchase the basic service tier only. A grantee may,
at its option, recoup reductions in revenue occasioned by the discount
reduction by increasing rates on other service tier offerings; provided,
however, that the grantee's adjustment of its rates on tiers other than the
BST shall not in the aggregate be greater than the actual level of revenue
lost through the discount reduction. A grantee shall be under no obligation
to reduce any rate pursuant to this subsection if any cable programming
service tier becomes subject to rate regulation or if the grantee is
otherwise prohibited from recouping revenue reductions on the BST through
rate adjustments on other programming tiers.



   (k)   The grantee may not deny, delay, interrupt or terminate
existing cable service or the use of existing channels, facilities and
equipment to subscribers or users because the City denies a request for a
rate or service charge increase, unless such  delay, interruption or
termination is approved by the City.



   (l)   No rate or service charge of any kind that the City lawfully
regulates shall be charged or collected from subscribers or users by the
grantee without the express or implied consent of the City.



   (m)   Grantees may request rate or service charge increases at any
time.



   (n)   Grantees shall file with the City on or before December 31 of
each year a full schedule of all subscriber and user rates and service
charges.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.08  FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENTS BY GRANTEES.



   (a)   A grantee shall pay to the City for the use of its streets,
public places and other facilities, as well as for the City's maintenance,
improvement and supervision, a monthly franchise fee in an amount equal to
five percent of the gross revenue received by the grantee. Payments due the
City under the terms of this subsection shall be paid quarterly on or before
the twenty-fifth day following the end of the quarter. The City shall be
furnished a certificate with each payment reflecting the gross revenue, the
deductions and the computations for the period covered by the payment.



   (b)   Franchise fee payments shall be in addition to any other tax,
charge, fee or payment due the City by a grantee.



   (c)   Not less than annually, a grantee shall provide the City with
an unqualified opinion of an independent certified public accountant
certifying the accuracy of the monthly franchise fee payments paid within the
preceding twelve months.  Said certification shall be prepared in accordance
with generally accepted accounting standards as established by the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB).



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.09  INSURANCE.



   (a)   A grantee shall at all times during the life of a franchise
carry and require its contractors and subcontractors to carry Federal and/or
State personal and public liability insurance in an amount as shall be
reasonably determined by the City.



   (b)   All required insurance coverage shall provide for thirty days
notice to the City in the event of material alteration or cancellation of
such coverage prior to the effective date of such material alteration or
cancellation.  Failure of the grantee to provide appropriate insurance
certificates to the City within sixty days after the execution of a franchise
shall render the franchise null and void.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.10  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (a)   By acceptance of a franchise granted herein, the grantee
agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the grantor, its officers,
boards, commissioners, agents and employees, from any and all actions,
claims, suits, penalties and judgments for damages at law or in equity of any
nature whatsoever relating to, arising out of or through, or alleged to arise
out of or through:



      (1)   The acts or omissions of the grantee, its servants,
employees and agents;



      (2)   The conduct of its business as a cable television
communications service; and



      (3)   The granting of a franchise to a grantee pursuant to
this chapter.



   (b)   A grantee shall defend in the name of the grantor, and shall
pay all expenses incurred in defending the grantor, with regard to all
damages and penalties the City may legally be required to pay as a result of
the license granted hereunder. Damages and penalties shall include, but not
be limited to, damages arising out of the construction, installation,
operation or maintenance of its cable communications system, whether or not
any such act or omission is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter
or the license granted hereunder. Expenses shall include all incidental
expenses, including attorney's fees, and shall also include a reasonable
value of any services rendered by the office of the City Attorney, whether
such services were rendered to the City or in cooperating with counsel
selected by the grantee.



   In all instances where a grantee may be required to indemnify the
grantor, the grantor shall give prompt notification of any claims to the
grantee and shall cooperate with the grantee in the defense thereof.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



   (c)   The grantor shall indemnify and hold the grantee harmless from
any damage resulting from any such acts of the grantor or its officials,
boards, commissions, agents or employees in utilizing any PEG access
channels, equipment or facilities, and for any such acts committed by the
grantor in connection with work performed by the grantor and permitted by the
franchise on or adjacent to the CATV system. Furthermore, the grantor shall
indemnify and hold the grantee harmless from any claims, losses or damages
arising from the use of the emergency broadcast system by the grantor or the
use of a grantee's facilities during an emergency, including, but not limited
to, the transportation and delivery of emergency information such as the
dispatching of police, fire and/or ambulance/rescue crews.



(Ord. 620.  Passed 10-30-95.)



803.11  NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



   (a)   A grantee may improve, upgrade and expand its
telecommunications service/cable television system and cable television
services in order to incorporate new developments in the state of the art. A
grantee shall not implement or provide services other than cable television
services without the express prior consent and approval of the City;
provided, however, that such approval will not be required where State or
Federal law preempts the authority of the City.



   (b)   In addition to those matters required in a franchise, grantees
recognize that a franchise is a bilateral contract between the grantee and
the City. To the extent that the franchise is an exercise of the police power
of the City, it may be changed or modified without a grantee's consent, to
the extent that the modification does not materially alter or affect the
rights granted hereunder to the grantee.



   (c)   A grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and
regulations of the State and Federal government or any administrative agency,
unless released by law. However, if such State or Federal law or regulation
shall require a grantee to perform any service, permit a grantee to perform
any service or prohibit a grantee from performing any service, in conflict
with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the City, a
grantee shall notify the City of the point of conflict believed to exist
between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the City or the
franchise.



   (d)   If any provision of the franchise is held by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal or State
law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court
to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any law,
rule or regulation, said provision may be considered a separate, distinct and
independent part of the franchise, and such holding shall not affect the
validity and enforceability of all other provisions. In the event that such
law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or
otherwise changed, so that the provision which has been held invalid or
modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said
provision shall return to full force and effect and shall be binding on all
parties.



   (e)   If the City determines that a material provision of a
franchise is affected by action of a court or of the State or Federal
Government, the City shall have the right to modify any of the provisions to
such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and
purpose of the franchise.



   (f)   For new housing developments in the City, a grantee shall
provide cable service to the development within six months of the completion
of the first owner- occupied housing unit.



   (g)   For existing business and new commercial construction, service
will be installed by a grantee as long as the same is economically feasible
for the grantee, or there is aid in construction to the business or
commercial enterprise. The grantee may also take into account its ability to
recoup its investment within a reasonable time when installing its service
into an existing or new business or commercial setting.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.12  GENERAL CAPABILITY.



   (a)   In furtherance of the general policy that the services
provided be innovative and modern, a grantee will actively pursue a
continuous policy of incorporating new technical developments into the system
to reflect the state of the art. Further, should a grantee, its parent, its
subsidiary or a related company provide a service to any other community
which it or they service within the State of Michigan, the same service shall
be provided in the City, exclusive of pilot/test services. The City may waive
this requirement upon an affirmative demonstration by the grantee that such
service would be impractical or infeasible within the City due to population,
density, technical considerations, economic feasibility or other relevant
factors.



   (b)   Each CATV system shall, at minimum:



      (1)   Distribute in color and in stereo all television signals
which it so receives.



      (2)   Make available to subscribers, upon request and at a
reasonable cost, an RF switch (A-B switch) permitting conversion from cable
to antenna reception.



      (3)   Have a 550 megahertz bandwidth which shall be capable of
carrying seventy-seven television channels or a combination of video, FM,
audio or digital information downstream, and clarify and define any and all
upstream capabilities.



      (4)   Use fiber optic technology whenever operationally,
economically and technically practical in the subscriber and institutional
networks.



      (5)   Provide public, educational and governmental access
channels.



      (6)   Make installations of its CATV system, maintain such
system and provide basic service to the City Hall, police stations, fire
stations, other public and governmental buildings, each public school,
charter school, college, technological school and parochial school, and each
public library in the City, without charge. Installations, including up to
five outlets per building, shall be made at reasonable locations in each
building as shall be required by the City and the schools.



      (7)   In the event of an emergency or other urgent community
need and upon the request of the City, make available its facilities to the
City for the duration of the emergency. Each cable television system shall
include an emergency alert capability which will permit the City, in times of
emergency, to override by remote control the audio and video of all channels
simultaneously. Each cable television system shall include the capability to
activate the emergency override at the City's headquarters for civil defense,
disaster and emergency services.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.13  SERVICE TO CUSTOMERS.



   (a)   A CATV system shall be designed for operation twenty-four
hours per day and shall endure service interruptions only for good cause and
for a reasonable time. Interruptions of service shall be for the shortest
time possible.



   (b)   A grantee shall maintain an office within Livingston County
which shall be open to the general public during normal business hours.
Office hours shall be no less than 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, with extended hours one evening per week and Saturdays, if the demand
and use so warrant.



   (c)   A grantee shall have a publicly listed local telephone number.
A grantee shall employ an operator, maintain a telephone answering device or
otherwise be able to receive subscriber telephone calls twenty-four hours per
day, each day of the year. A log shall be maintained by a grantee listing all
subscriber complaints, their disposition and all service interruptions
affecting five or more subscribers. Said log shall be available for
inspection by the City upon reasonable notice.



   (d)   A grantee shall maintain installation and repair service
capable of making installations within seven days and repairs within
forty-eight hours after a request.



   (e)   Upon failure of a grantee to remedy a loss of service within
twenty-four hours of receipt of notification of such loss from a subscriber,
the grantee shall automatically rebate one-thirtieth of the regular monthly
charge to each subscriber so affected, for each twenty-four hours or fraction
thereof, until service is restored, unless restoration is prevented by a
cause beyond the control of the grantee.



   (f)   A grantee shall not deny, delay or otherwise burden cable
service or use of access facilities or otherwise discriminate against
subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national
origin or marital status. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit
establishing discounts, as provided in Section 803.07(j).



   (g)   Any change made by a grantee in its programming (channels
carried), except those of an emergency nature beyond the grantee's control,
shall not become effective until the grantee notifies the City Clerk and its
subscribers at least thirty days in advance. Notification must be made in
writing to each subscriber.



   (h)   Every cable television system franchise issued pursuant to
this chapter shall provide for not less than three channels, one each for the
public, educational and City access channels, capable of carrying digital,
video and audio transmissions pursuant to the provisions of the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, Section 611 (47 USC 531).



   (i)   This chapter shall not be construed to limit the authority of
a grantee to make payments in support of the use of public, educational and
governmental access channels.



   (j)   Use of facilities and equipment for public access upon the
cable television system shall be made available at a reasonable location as
specified by the grantee and based upon reasonable notice, without rental or
other like charges whatsoever, for use twenty-four hours per day, seven days
a week, in connection with the production of public access programming to be
cablecast upon the cable television system. Personnel for training and
assistance shall be available during normal business hours. First-time users
shall not be required to make a deposit; however, the grantee may charge any
user its cost of repairing any equipment damaged by abuse or negligence and
may demand payment and a deposit of an equal amount prior to re-issuing
equipment to the same user. A grantee shall establish reasonable rules and
procedures designed to promote the utilization of such public, educational
and governmental access programming, subject to the approval of the City,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (k)   A grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to coordinate the
cablecasting of public, educational and/or governmental access programming
upon the CATV system at the same time and upon the same channel designations
as such programming is cablecast upon other cable television systems within
the area.



   (l)   To the extent that it is technically and economically
feasible, the cable system shall be interconnected with other cable systems
within or contiguous to the City so as to enable each cable system to carry
and cablecast the public, educational and governmental access programming of
the other cable systems. Interconnection of cable systems may be done by
direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate
method. The cost of such interconnection shall be equally shared by each
grantee.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.14  PARENTAL LOCK-OUT.



   The grantee shall make available to all subscribers, at a reasonable
charge and upon written request, a device which provides "parental guidance"
or "lock-out" features permitting the subscriber, at his or her option, to
eliminate comprehendible video and audio reception of any channel.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.15  OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.



   Neither a grantee nor any shareholder of a grantee shall engage in the
business of selling, repairing or installing television or radio receivers
within the City during the life of a franchise. This section shall not
prohibit the installation of special devices or appliances by a grantee which
are not normally available.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.16  CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.



   (a)   The poles, wires and appurtenances of a grantee's system shall
be located, erected and maintained upon existing utility facilities wherever
feasible. A grantee shall use underground equipment where other utilities are
underground and where City ordinance requires underground installation.



   (b)   A grantee shall be allowed, subject to appropriate
regulations, to set its own poles, anchors, guys and similar facilities
within public rights of way within the City when necessary and upon the
securing of permits from the City.



   (c)   All facilities erected by a grantee within the City shall be
so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public
rights of way and public places and to cause minimum interference with the
rights and conveniences of adjoining property owners.



   (d)   In case of disturbance or damage to any street, sidewalk,
alley, public way, other public property or private property, a grantee
shall, at its own expense, promptly and in a manner acceptable to the City or
to a private property owner, replace, repair and otherwise restore such
disturbance of damage.



   (e)   If, at any time during the term of a franchise, the City shall
properly elect to undertake public building or construction, altering the
grade, alignment or location of any street, sidewalk, alley or public way, a
grantee shall, upon reasonable notice from the City, promptly remove and
relocate its facilities at its own expense and in a manner acceptable to the
City.



   (f)   A grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall
install and maintain industry standards and services for preventing failures
and accidents which would cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.



   (g)   A grantee shall not erect or otherwise install any poles,
buildings, underground or above-ground facilities, anchors, guys or any other
type of structure or equipment on private property without first obtaining
appropriate easements from the private property owners.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.17  TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (a)   Each grantee shall construct, install and maintain its cable
television system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental
requirements and technical standards equivalent to those established by the
Federal Communications Commission.



   (b)   Each grantee shall at all times comply with the National
Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); the National
Electrical Code (National Fire Protection Association); applicable Federal,
State and local regulations; and codes and other applicable ordinances of the
City. If any codes conflict, the grantee shall comply with the most
protective.



   (c)   The CATV system shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property within the City where the grantee may have
equipment located.



   (d)   All working facilities, conditions, and procedures used or
occurring during construction of the cable television system shall comply
with the standards of the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.



   (e)   Construction, installation and maintenance of a cable
television system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner and
in close coordination with public and private utilities serving the City,
following accepted industry construction procedures and practices and working
through existing committees and organizations.



   (f)   All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations
shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
consideration.



   (g)   Any antenna structure used in a cable television system shall
comply with the standards of construction, marking and lighting of antenna
structures that are required by the United States Department of
Transportation.



   (h)   RF leakage (ingress and egress) shall be checked on an ongoing
basis at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove that no
harmful interference signal combinations are possible. Radiation shall be
measured adjacent to any existing or proposed aeronautical navigation
licensed radio service or any other communication radio site to prove no
harmful interference.



   (i)   A grantee shall develop an adequate preventive maintenance
policy. Such policy shall be available for inspection by the City.



   (j)   The system will have upstream capability for audio and video
origination from Howell City Hall, from a location at Howell public schools
and from the Livingston Educational Service Agency, to be distributed
system-wide on the assigned channel.



   (k)   Fiber optic or other suitable connections between all City and
County government, educational and library facilities within the City, with
capability to provide for full two-way audio, video and data communications,
shall be provided by a grantee without cost, so long as the City can prove
reasonable need for the interconnect. This interconnect shall be done at any
review of the franchise pursuant to this chapter.



   (l)   The system shall be capable of two-way data communication, or
shall be easily upgradeable thereto.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.18  MAPS, RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (a)   Upon request, a grantee shall provide the City with current
maps of its existing and proposed installations.



   (b)   Annually, a grantee shall file with the City Clerk a copy of
its annual financial reports, including its annual income statement
applicable to its Michigan operations, which include the City, a balance
sheet and a statement of its properties devoted to CATV operations. A grantee
shall submit such other reasonable information as may be requested by the
City with respect to its property and its revenues, expenses or operations
within the City.



   (c)   Annually, a grantee shall furnish to the City a current
listing of its users, officers, owners, partners, shareholders, bondholders
and any guarantor who holds five percent or more of the shares therein.



   (d)    An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the
grantee of all subscriber and user complaints regarding the cable system. A
procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of
the system to quickly and reasonably remedy such complaints. Complete records
of the grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept. Each
customer's files and records shall be made available for inspection upon
request by the customer during normal business hours.



   (e)   A current, independent polling service opinion survey report,
which identifies satisfaction and dissatisfaction among subscribers and users
with cable services, facilities, equipment and personnel offered by the
grantee, shall be submitted to the City on or before the first anniversary of
the franchise agreement and every third year thereafter. Surveys shall also
require reports on additional services that subscribers would like to see
added to the then-existing cable service.



   (f)   A grantee shall submit to the City such other information or
reports in such form as are maintained by such grantee and at such times as
the City may reasonably request.



   (g)   A grantee shall allow the City to make inspections of any of
the grantee's facilities and equipment at any time upon one day's notice or,
in case of emergency, upon demand without notice.



   (h)   Subject to the privacy rights of Section 803.26 and to Federal
and State laws and regulations, the City shall have the right to inspect, at
any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans,
income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance
test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the
operation of the CATV system. Access to the aforementioned records shall not
be denied by the grantee on the basis that the records contain proprietary
information.



   (i)   All records and reports required under this section, except as
otherwise provided, are to be provided to the City and shall be available for
public inspection in the City Clerk's office during normal business hours.



   (j)   Willful refusal, failure or neglect of the grantee to provide
any of the records or reports required to be provided to the City under this
section, after thirty days notice by the City of such willful refusal,
failure or neglect, shall be deemed to be a material breach of the franchise
and shall subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to the City under the franchise or this
chapter.



   (k)   Any materially false or misleading statement or representation
knowingly made by a grantee in any report required under the franchise shall
be deemed a material breach of the franchise and shall subject the grantee to
all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the
City.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.19  TRANSFER OF RIGHTS.



   (a)   Prior approval of the City shall be required where ownership
or control of more than twenty-five percent of the right of control of a
grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none
of whom already owns or controls twenty-five percent or more of the right of
control, singularly or collectively, of the grantee.



   (b)   No franchise or portion of a franchise may be sold,
transferred or assigned, nor may more than twenty-five percent of the right
of control of a grantee be transferred, to a person or group of persons
acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls twenty-five percent
or more of the right of control, singularly or collectively, until such sale,
transfer or assignment of a franchise or transfer of a right of control shall
first have been offered to the City. Such offer shall be made at a price not
greater than, and on terms equivalent to, that made to the offer or by a bona
fide bidder for such franchise or right of control. The City maintains the
right to have any such franchise, part or portion, or the right of control
sought to be transferred, appraised to determine said equivalency. The City
shall accept or reject the offer within ninety days. This subsection shall
not be deemed to restrict a transfer by bequest or descent of stock of the
grantee, nor shall this subsection restrict the franchise from being assigned
for security for loans.



   (c)   A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has
occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or
group of persons acting in concert of twenty-five percent of a grantee.



   (d)   A grantee shall not transfer, sell or assign any portion of
its interest in the franchise or in its CATV system without prior approval of
the City, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. The grantee shall
have the responsibility:



      (1)   To show to the satisfaction of the City whether the
proposed purchaser, transferee or assignee (the proposed transferee), which,
in the case of a corporation, shall include all officers, directors and
persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or more of its
voting stock, or any of the proposed transferee's principals:



         A.   Has ever been convicted of or held liable for acts
involving moral turpitude (including, but not limited to fraud,
misrepresentation to any Federal or State agency, or the violation of any
securities law), or is presently under an indictment, investigation or
complaint charging such acts;



         B.   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud,
deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him or them by any court
of competent jurisdiction;



         C.   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or unusual
administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a CATV system.



      (2)   To establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the City
the financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current
financial data for the proposed transferee and such other data as the City
may request.



      (3)   To establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the City
that the financial standing of the proposed transferee is such that the
proposed transferee shall be able to maintain and operate the cable system
for the remaining term of the franchise.



   (e)   Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement, in a form
and containing conditions approved by the City, that it will assume and be
bound by all of the provisions, terms and conditions of the franchise and all
applicable Federal, State and local laws, and, further, that the transferee
shall be liable and obligated under said documents.



   (f)   Nothing in any approval by the City of an authorization of any
transfer or assignment of any ownership interest shall be construed to waive
or release any rights of the City in and to the streets, public ways and
public places of the City, or as a release of any of the City's police
powers, or as an exercise of eminent domain. Notwithstanding the above,
neither the City nor the grantee shall use any request for transfer or
transfer of control procedure or process to renegotiate the terms and
conditions of the franchise.



   (g)   The occurrence of any event which constitutes either an act of
bankruptcy by the grantee, as defined in the Federal Bankruptcy Act, or
placement of the grantee into receivership; or the issuance of any order to
the grantee or any of its stockholders by a government agency or court of
competent jurisdiction to divest any interest relating to the CATV system; 
or the entry of any judgment against the grantee which, in the opinion of the
City, impairs the grantee's credit; or the grantee's failure to meet its
financial obligations on a continuing basis, shall be deemed an unauthorized
transfer and assignment under the provisions of this subsection and shall:



      (1)   Be deemed a material breach and default of the
franchise; and



      (2)   Subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies
prescribed in the franchise and to all other remedies, legal and equitable,
which are available to the City.



   (h)   The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may,
at the option of the City, terminate the franchise and accelerate all of the
obligations and rights thereunder, including, but not limited to, the right
of the City to purchase the cable system. The grantee shall notify the City
of any occurrence which constitutes an unauthorized transfer and of the entry
of any judgment against it within twenty-four hours of knowledge of such
occurrence. From and after any of the occurrences enumerated, the grantee
shall not make, execute or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage,
contract, conditional sales contract loan, lease, pledge, sale, pole
agreement or any other agreement or hypothecation concerning any of the
facilities or property, real or personal, of the CATV system, without the
written approval of the City, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.20  CONSTRUCTION, PERFORMANCE BOND AND LETTER OF CREDIT.



   (a)   A grantee shall, within thirty days of the execution of the
franchise, file with the City Clerk an irrevocable bank letter of credit,
from a bank approved by the City, in the amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000), and the grantee shall also obtain and maintain, at its
cost and expense, a corporate surety bond with a company authorized to do
business in the State of Michigan and acceptable to the City, in an amount
equal to the estimated cost of the project. The purpose of the irrevocable
bank letter of credit and the corporate surety bond is to guarantee the
timely construction and full activation of the CATV system. The letter of
credit and the corporate surety bond shall be for the purpose of allowing
recovery by the City of any and all damages, losses or costs suffered by the
City resulting from the failure of the grantee to satisfactorily complete and
fully activate the CATV system throughout the City.



   (b)   When the CATV system is completed to the satisfaction of
Council, the corporate surety bond may be reduced to ten thousand dollars
($10,000) and maintained for the duration of the franchise to secure the
grantee's obligations under the franchise.



   (c)   The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement:



"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor the intention not to renew be exercised by the surety until sixty
days after receipt by the City of Howell, by registered mail, of a written
notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.21  REVIEW, RENEWAL, TERMINATION AND CANCELLATION.



   (a)   To provide for technological, economic and regulatory changes
in the state of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal
procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the CATV system
and to achieve a continuing advanced, modern system for the City, the City
and the grantee shall comply with the following review provisions:



      (1)   The City, at its sole discretion, may hold franchise or
grantee performance review hearings upon resolution by the Council and thirty
days public notice. All such review hearings shall be open to the public and
notice shall be given by advertisement twice in a newspaper of general
circulation at least one week before each session, at the sole expense of the
grantee. In addition, the grantee shall announce the date and time of each
such session on each of at least five days immediately preceding each session
at a minimum of six regularly scheduled intervals daily on the CATV system.



      (2)   Topics for discussion and review at review hearings
shall include, but shall not be limited to, services, rate structure, free or
discounted services, the application of new technologies, system performance,
services provided, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints,
rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, underground processes and
developments in the law. Either the City or the grantee may select additional
topics for discussion at any regular or special review hearing.



      (3)   There shall be a review of capital funding for
interconnections for schools, government access and other issues as set forth
above, every five years, during the term of the franchise, for purposes of
reviewing those items as set forth in paragraph (a)(2) hereof. Where there
are disputes between the City and the grantee that cannot be resolved, the
arbitration procedure outlined in Section 803.06(g)(6)A. shall be followed,
except that the costs for such arbitration shall be borne equally between the
City and the grantee.



   (b)   The procedure for considering the renewal or termination of a
franchise shall be as follows:



      (1)   Pre-proposal procedure. During the six-month period
which begins with the thirty- sixth month before the franchise expiration
date, the City may, on its own initiative, and shall, at the request of the
grantee, commence proceedings which shall afford the public in the City
appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of identifying future
cable-related community needs and interests and reviewing the performance of
the grantee under the franchise during the then current franchise term. Upon
completion of these proceedings, the grantee seeking renewal of the franchise
may, on its own initiative or at the request of the City, submit a proposal
for renewal.



      (2)   Information required. Any such proposal shall contain
such material as the City may require, including proposals for an upgrade of
the cable system. The City may establish a date by which such proposal shall
be submitted.



      (3)   Post-proposal procedure. Upon submittal by a grantee of
a proposal to the City, the City shall provide prompt public notice of such
proposal and shall, during the four-month period which begins on the
completion of any proceeding held pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) hereof, renew
the franchise or issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not
be renewed and, at the request of the grantee or on its own initiative,
commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt public notice
of such proceeding to consider whether:



         A.   Compliance with the franchise. The grantee has
substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and
applicable law.



         B.   Evaluation of service. The quality of the grantee's
service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and
billing practices, but without regard to the mix of programming, programming
quality or the level of cable services or other services provided over the
system, has been reasonable in light of community needs.



         C.   Capabilities of grantee. The grantee has the
financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities
and equipment as set forth in the grantee's proposal.



         D.   City's future needs. The grantee's proposal is
reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests,
taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.



      (4)   Fair hearing; notice. In any proceeding under paragraph
(b)(3) hereof, the grantee shall be afforded adequate notice, and the grantee
and the City, or its designee shall be afforded a fair opportunity for full
participation, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence
related to issues raised in the proceedings held pursuant to paragraph (b)(1)
hereof), to require the production of evidence and to question witnesses.  A
transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. At the completion of the
proceeding, the Council shall issue a written decision granting or denying
the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding and
transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state
the reasons therefor.



      (5)   Denial of renewal. Any denial of a proposal for renewal
shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the
factors described in paragraphs (b)(3)A. through D. hereof, pursuant to the
record of the proceedings required in paragraph (b)(4) hereof. The Council
may not base a denial of renewal on the factors described in paragraph
(b)(3)A. or B. hereof without first providing the grantee with notice
describing the infraction and providing the grantee a reasonable opportunity
to correct the deficiency. The City is prohibited from denying a request for
renewal in any case in which it is documented that the City has waived its
right to object or has effectively acquiesced, unless this prohibition is
changed or amended by the prevailing Federal or State law in effect during
this renewal proceeding.



      (6)   Optional procedure. Notwithstanding the provisions of
paragraphs (b)(1) through (5) hereof, a grantee may submit a proposal for
open renewal of a franchise pursuant to this paragraph at any time, and the
City may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for
comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings
held pursuant to this section have commenced). The provisions of paragraphs
(b)(1) through (5) hereof shall not apply to a decision to grant or deny a
franchise renewal under this paragraph. The denial of a renewal pursuant to
this paragraph shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is
submitted in accordance with paragraphs (b)(1) through (5) hereof.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.22  PURCHASE OPTION.



   The City may exercise an option to purchase the CATV system within a
period of ninety days after the expiration, termination or revocation of the
franchise. The purchase price to be paid by the City shall be the fair market
value of the cable system as a going concern.  Should the grantee and the
City not agree on the purchase price, such value shall be determined by a
three-member board to be selected under the rules of the American Arbitration
Association. The cost of such arbitration shall be equally shared by the
grantee and the City. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the
grantee does not waive any rights or defenses to this provision that a
grantee would have pursuant to law.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.23  REMOVAL.



   (a)   Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a franchise, if
the franchise is not renewed and if neither the City nor an assignee
purchases the CATV system, the grantee may remove any underground cable from
the streets which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed
without trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of
cable to be removed. The grantee shall not remove any underground cable or
conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the streets along the
extension of cable to be removed, except as hereinafter provided. The grantee
shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any underground cable or conduit,
by trenching or opening of the streets along the extension thereof or
otherwise, which cable or conduit is ordered to be removed by the City based
upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the City, that removal is
required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or to promote
future utilization of the streets for public purposes. Any order by the City
to remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than
thirty calendar days following the date of expiration of the franchise. A
grantee shall file written notice with the City Clerk not later than thirty
calendar days following the date of expiration, termination or revocation of
the franchise of its intention to remove the cable intended to be removed and
a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall
be subject to approval and regulation by the City. Removal shall be completed
not later than twelve months following the date of expiration of the
franchise. Underground cable and conduit in the streets which is not removed
shall be deemed abandoned, and title thereto may be vested in the City, at
the sole option of the City.



   (b)   Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a franchise, if
the franchise is not renewed and if neither the City nor an assignee
purchases the system, the grantee, at its sole expense, shall, unless
relieved of the obligation by the City, remove from the streets all
above-ground elements of the cable television system, including, but not
limited to, amplifier boxes, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and cable
attached to or suspended from poles, which are not purchased by the City or
its assignee.



   (c)   The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment
permits, licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and
deposit such security as are required by applicable ordinances of the City.
The grantee shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with
all such applicable ordinances and shall restore the streets to the same
condition they were in before the work of removal commenced.  The work of
removal shall be completed not later than one year following expiration of
the franchise. 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.24  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.



   It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available
services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are
honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify
or sell the CATV system, or the City terminates, revokes or fails to renew
the franchise within a reasonable time, or the City elects to purchase the
CATV system, the grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that the
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the
circumstances, provided, however, that such obligation shall not continue for
a period in excess of eighteen months and that the right and obligations
herein provided for shall continue for a like period. In the event of
purchase by the City or a change of grantee, the current grantee shall
cooperate with the City in maintaining continuity of service to all
subscribers. In the event that an interruption of service is required by the
grantee for modification, repairs or the like, the interruption shall be as
brief as possible and at times when the viewing audience is at a minimum.
Records of such interruptions shall be kept.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.25  GUARANTY OF PARENT.



   The effectiveness of a franchise is expressly conditioned upon the
execution and delivery to the City by each parent of the grantee of an
unconditional guaranty of the timely performance of all obligations of the
grantee, said guaranty to be in a form acceptable to the City.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.26  RIGHT OF PRIVACY.



   (a)   No personally identifiable subscriber information shall be
made public without the specific written permission of the subscriber.



   (b)   A grantee shall not transmit any signal to or from any
dwelling or any other building without the express authorization of the owner
of said dwelling or other building. Where said owner has leased said dwelling
or other building or a portion thereof, said express authorization shall be
obtained from the lessee and not from the owner.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.27  RIGHTS OF RESIDENTS.



   (a)   An owner or operator of an apartment building, condominium,
nursing home or any other rental facility shall not interfere with or charge
a fee for the installation of cable facilities for the use of a lessee of
such property or premises, except that such owner or operator may require:



      (1)   Installation to conform to reasonable conditions
necessary to protect the safety, appearance and functioning of the premises;



      (2)   The grantee, occupant or tenant to pay for the
installation, operation or removal of such facilities; or



      (3)   The grantee, occupant or tenant to agree to indemnify
the owner or operator for any damage caused by the installation, operation or
removal of such facilities.



   (b)   No grantee shall reimburse or offer to reimburse any person,
nor shall any person demand or receive reimbursement from a grantee, for the
placement upon the premises of such person of those facilities of the grantee
that are necessary to connect such person's premises to the distribution
lines of the grantee to provide cable service to said premises.



   (c)   A grantee may not take any action which would diminish or
interfere with the privilege of any tenant or other occupant of any such
building to use or avail himself or herself of master or individual antenna
equipment.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.28  TAMPERING WITH CABLE EQUIPMENT.



   (a)   A person who willfully or maliciously damages or causes to be
damaged any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of a grantee, or who
commits any act with intent to cause damage to any wire, cable, conduit,
apparatus or equipment of a grantee, or who taps, tampers with or connects
any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit or equipment of a grantee with
intent to obtain a signal or impulse therefrom without authorization of the
grantee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (b)   This section shall not prevent a grantee from removing,
disconnecting or otherwise rendering inoperable any of the grantee's
apparatus or equipment attached or in any way connected to such person's
facilities, if done for reasonable cause.



   (c)   The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this
section and in Section 803.99 are in addition to the penalties and remedies
for theft of cable service provided by Federal and State law. 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.29  CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION. (Repealed)



   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Section 803.29 was repealed by Ordinance 899, passed
December 21, 2015.)



803.30  LIABILITY OF GRANTEES IN LIBEL ACTIONS.



   A grantee or its agents shall not, in an action for slander or for
publishing a libel, be held liable in damages for or on account of any
defamatory matter uttered, telecast, cablecast or published over the
facilities of the grantee by any person whose utterance, telecast, cablecast
or publication is not, under the provisions of any law of the United States
or any regulation, ruling or order of the Federal Communications Commission,
subject to censorship or control by the grantee.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.31  WAIVER.



   A grantee shall agree not to oppose intervention by the City in any
suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a party. A grantee shall agree to
abide by all provisions of this chapter and its franchise and shall further
agree that it will not at any future time set up as against the City any
claim that the provisions of this chapter or its franchise are unreasonable,
arbitrary or void. 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.32  ACCEPTANCE OF AGREEMENT AND INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION AND CHAPTER
BY REFERENCE.



   Upon execution of a franchise by a grantee, the grantee agrees to be
bound by all of its terms and conditions, accepts unconditionally the
franchise and promises to comply with and abide by all of its terms,
provisions and conditions. The grantee also agrees to provide all services
set forth in its application and proposal and to provide cable television
services within the confines of the City of Howell, and, by its acceptance of
the franchise, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that its
application and proposal is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part
of the agreement. In addition, the grantee specifically agrees that this
chapter is incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise. In the
event of a conflict between the application and proposal of the grantee, this
chapter and the franchise, that provision which provides the greatest benefit
to the City, in the opinion of the Council, shall prevail. 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.33  SEVERABILITY.



   (a)   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word
of the franchise or this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.



   (b)   If a material provision of a franchise is affected by action
of a court or of the State or Federal Government, the City and the grantee
may modify any such provision to such reasonable extent as may be necessary
to carry out the full intent and purpose of the franchise. 



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



803.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section
202.99.



(Ord. 615.  Passed 9-5-95.)



CHAPTER 804
Cable Television Rates



804.01   Adoption of FCC rules; file copy.



804.02   Public notice of rate schedules or increases; filing of written
comments; file copies.



804.03   Adoption of proprietary information procedures; file copy.



804.04   Conflicts with franchises.



804.05   Violation of rate decisions or refund orders; adoption of federal
procedures; monetary forfeiture.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Encroachments on highways and roads - see M.C.L. Secs. 247.1 et seq.



   Construction and maintenance of facilities - see M.C.L. Secs. 247.183
et seq.



   Television and radio generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 484.301 et seq.,
750.507 et seq.



   Cables improperly located; insurance - see M.C.L. Sec. 500.3123



   Cable television franchises - see B.R. & T. Ch. 803



   Television tower - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



804.01  ADOPTION OF FCC RULES; FILE COPY.



   The City hereby adopts by reference rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) as set forth in 47 CFR Chapter 1, Part 76, Subpart N,
regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and
associated equipment, as amended. A copy of such rules is available in the
office of the City Clerk for public inspection and copying during normal
business hours.



(Ord. 596.  Passed 2-7-94.)



804.02  PUBLIC NOTICE OF RATE SCHEDULES OR INCREASES; FILING OF WRITTEN
COMMENTS; FILE COPIES.



   After a cable operator has submitted for review its existing rates for
the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase
in these rates, the City Clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and
costs, giving interested parties, including the cable operator, a reasonable
opportunity to file written comments, which shall be available in the office
of the City Clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business
hours. 



(Ord. 596.  Passed 2-7-94.)



804.03  ADOPTION OF PROPRIETARY INFORMATION PROCEDURES; FILE COPY.



   The City hereby adopts by reference procedures set forth in 47 CFR
Section 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by the
cable operator in a rate regulation proceeding.  A copy of such procedures
is available in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection and
copying during normal business hours.



(Ord. 596.  Passed 2-7-94.)



804.04  CONFLICTS WITH FRANCHISES.



   In the event of a conflict between this chapter and a cable television
franchise, the provisions of this chapter shall control.



(Ord. 596.  Passed 2-7-94.)



804.05  VIOLATION OF RATE DECISIONS OR REFUND ORDERS; ADOPTION OF FEDERAL
PROCEDURES; MONETARY FORFEITURE.



   A cable operator who willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a
rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator
shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture not to exceed twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000) for each violation or each day of a continuing violation,
not to exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), as determined by
Council, in accordance with the procedures set forth in 47 USC 503(2)(D),
(3)(A) and (B), and (4)(A), (B) and (C), which the City hereby adopts by
reference.  A copy of such procedures is available in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 



(Ord. 596.  Passed 2-7-94.)



CHAPTER 806
Commercial Recreational Establishments



806.01   Definitions.



806.02   License required.



806.03   License application; fee.



806.04   Effective period and revocation of license



806.05   Issuance of license.



806.06   Exemptions.



806.07   Minors in billiard or pool halls, pinball arcades and electronic
or video arcades.



806.08   Revocation of licenses.



806.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Coordinated collection of State license fees - see M.C.L. Sec. 205.1



   Ordinances re bowling alleys, pool and billiard rooms - see M.C.L. Sec.
750.141



   Children in pool and billiard rooms - see M.C.L. Sec. 750.141



   Discrimination - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.146, 750.147



806.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Billiard hall, pool hall" and "pinball arcade" mean an
establishment whose principal business is the sale of the commodities
indicated or the use of the facilities furnished for the aforesaid purposes.



(Ord. 382. Passed 7-16-79.)



   (b)   "Bowling alley" means a place open to the public which is
fitted up with bowling alleys for the playing at which alleys a fee is
charged.



   (c)   "Skating rink" means a place open to the public which is
fitted up and made suitable for roller skating and for which a fee is charged.



   (d)   "Electronic or video arcade" means an establishment whose
principal business is the sale or use of electronic and/or video games of any
kind and by whatever name known.



   (e)   "Any other commercial recreational establishment" means an
indoor or outdoor recreational operation or facility which is open to the
public and for which a fee is charged.



806.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate, maintain or keep a pool or billiard hall, a
pinball arcade, a bowling alley, a skating rink, an electronic or video
arcade or other commercial recreational establishment without first obtaining
a license therefor as provided in this chapter.



806.03  LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.



   Any person desiring to operate or maintain a pool or billiard hall, a
pinball arcade, a bowling alley, a skating rink, an electronic or video
arcade or other commercial recreational establishment in the City, shall make
an application to the City Manager or his or her authorized representative,
in writing, for a license therefor, which application shall state the name of
the owner of such business and where it is to be located, including a site
plan and the character of the business, within the provisions of this
chapter, which he or she proposes to operate. Each application shall be
accompanied by a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such
applications shall be referred to by the Manager or his or her representative
to Council at its next regular meeting, and all licenses granted hereunder
shall be granted only upon a majority vote of Council. No license shall be
granted unless a majority of Council finds that such business operation is in
a proper zone under the Zoning Code and will not be a nuisance in the area
where it is to be located or constitute a detriment in any way to such area.



806.04  EFFECTIVE PERIOD AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Upon a majority vote as herein provided for, Council shall grant
licenses to operate pool and billiard halls, pinball arcades, bowling alleys,
skating rinks, electronic or video arcades and other commercial recreational
establishments in the City upon the payment of the license fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Each license so granted shall be for a period of not to
exceed one year, shall expire on May 1 of each year and may be revoked by
Council upon a majority vote at any time.



(Ord. 201. Passed 3-20-61.)



806.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   If favorable action is had by Council upon an application for a license
under this chapter, the City Manager or his or her authorized representative
shall forthwith issue and grant a written license to the applicant whose
application received the favorable action of Council.



806.06  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to operations of public
institutions, such as schools, or to municipal corporations, service clubs
and religious organizations.



(Ord. 201. Passed 3-20-61.)



806.07  MINORS IN BILLIARD OR POOL HALLS, PINBALL ARCADES AND ELECTRONIC OR
VIDEO ARCADES.



   (a)   No owner, manager or employee of a pool hall, billiard hall,
pinball arcade or electronic or video arcade shall allow any person under the
age of seventeen years to enter and remain upon the premises of such pool
hall, billiard hall, pinball arcade or electronic or video arcade, except in
the following manner:



      (1)   Minors who are fourteen, fifteen or sixteen years old
may be upon the premises until the hour of 9:00 p.m. if accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.



      (2)   Minors who are fourteen, fifteen or sixteen years old
may be upon the premises unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian until
the hour of 9:00 p.m., provided that the owner, manager or employee of any
establishment subject to this section has upon the premises and available for
lawful inspection a permission slip signed by the parent or legal guardian of
such unaccompanied minor, duly notarized, granting such minor permission to
be upon the premises, unaccompanied, until the curfew hour.



      (3)   Permission slips obtained pursuant to this section shall
be maintained upon the business premises at all times and shall be made
available for inspection by police officers upon request.



      (4)   The curfew for minors who are fourteen, fifteen or
sixteen years old shall be extended to 10:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday
nights only.



      (5)   Minors under the age of fourteen years may be permitted
to enter and remain upon the premises until the hour of 6:00 p.m. only if
accompanied at all times by a parent or legal guardian.



(Adopting Ordinance)



   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
nonprofit organization, private club or religious, fraternal, municipal,
educational or other organization which maintains billiard tables or pinball
machines for the use of its members, nor to any enterprise where the use of
such machines and equipment is merely incidental to the principal activity of
such business.



(Ord. 382. Passed 7-16-79.)



806.08  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   Upon certification from a court of competent jurisdiction that the
owner or operator of a particular business has been convicted three times for
violations of any of the provisions of this chapter occurring within a
twelve-month period, the City shall revoke the license of such owner or
operator issued under this chapter.



(Ord. 382. Passed 7-16-79.)



806.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202. 99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 810
Business Licenses and Regulations



810.01   Adoption by reference.



810.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The City Business Licenses and Regulations Ordinance, Articles 1
through 6, is hereby adopted.  The full text of the City Ordinance is
attached to Ordinance No. 811, passed May 19, 2008, and is hereby
incorporated as Appendix A to this Chapter 810.



(Ord. 811.  Passed 5-19-08.)



APPENDIX A
TABLE OF CONTENTS



ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE, CONSTRUCTION, VALIDITY, AND SEVERABILITY



Section 1.01   Title.



Section 1.02   Purpose.



Section 1.03   Severability.



ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS FOR BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS



Section 2.01   Definitions.



ARTICLE 3
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY



Section 3.01   Licenses Required.



Section 3.02   Multiple Businesses.



Section 3.03   Licensed Businesses.



Section 3.04   License Application.



Section 3.05   License Year.



Section 3.06   Conditions of Issuance; Issuance.



Section 3.07   Where Certification Required.



Section 3.08   Certificate of Other Governmental Agencies.



Section 3.09   Howell City Police Chief's Certificate.



Section 3.10   Building Official's Certificate.



Section 3.11   Compliance.



Section 3.12   Suspension and Revocation.



Section 3.13   Procedure for Suspension or Revocation of License.



Section 3.14   License Renewal.



Section 3.15   Financial Assurances.



Section 3.16   Late Renewals.



Section 3.17   Right to Issuance.



Section 3.18   Fees - When Paid.



Section 3.19   Exhibition of License.



Section 3.20   Exhibition on Vehicle and Machine.



Section 3.21   Displaying Invalid License.



Section 3.22   Transferability; Misuse.



Section 3.23   Misuse-Automatic Revocation.



ARTICLE 4
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS



Section 4.01   Purpose and Intent.



Section 4.02   License Required for Sexually Oriented Business; Penalty
for Violation of Article.



Section 4.03   Application.



Section 4.04   Review Process; Bases for Denial.



Section 4.05   License Expiration; Renewal; Application and Renewal Fees;
Continued Right to Inspection Premises.



Section 4.06   Suspension; Revocation.



Section 4.07   Appeals.



Section 4.08   Transfer of License.



ARTICLE 5
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS



Section 5.01   Purpose and Intent.



Section 5.02   Authority.



Section 5.03   Definitions.



Section 5.04   License Required.



Section 5.05   Inspection of Body Art Facilities.



Section 5.06   Plan Review Requirement.



Section 5.07   Practitioner Permit Required.



Section 5.08   Body Art Prohibitions.



Section 5.09   Exemptions.



Section 5.10   Client Notice Requirements.



Section 5.11   Required Records.



Section 5.12   Standards for Premises.



Section 5.13   Required Procedures for Preparing Body Area.



Section 5.14   Required Procedures for Performing Body Art.



Section 5.15   Suspension or Revocation of Licenses or Permits.




ARTICLE 6




Section 6.01   Misdemeanor Penalties.



ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE, CONSTRUCTION, VALIDITY, AND SEVERABILITY



Section 1.01  Title.



   The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known and cited as the
"Business Licenses and Regulations Ordinance" of the City of Howell.



Section 1.02  Purpose.



   The purpose of this Chapter is to assist the City with information to
provide more adequate police and fire protection; more comprehensive and
informed planning and zoning for uses of land and structures within the City;
to ensure the proper operation of businesses within City boundaries; to
establish regulations and requirements related to operation of certain
businesses in the City; to ensure the habitability of dwelling units being
leased to others or otherwise being occupied by others than the owner and/or
persons related to the owner; and to establish a registry of businesses
operating within the City for the general information for the public and for
the promotion of the City and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.



Section 1.03  Severability.



   If any part of the requirements of this Chapter is found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be void or unenforceable, all remaining parts of
this Chapter shall remain fully valid and enforceable.



ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS FOR BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS



Section 2.01  Definitions.



   As used in this Chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:



   (1)   "Business" means any trade, occupation, profession, privilege,
work, commerce or other activity owned or operated for a profit, or with the
intent to produce a profit, by any person within the City. "Business" shall
also include the offering to others for purposes of occupancy through rental
or lease agreements, or by other mutually acceptable agreements leading to
occupancy, the occupancy of dwelling units in any form to other than the
owner and/or persons related to the owner.



   (2)   "Cause" defined.



   Cause means the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any
condition to exist in connection with any business for which a license is
granted under the provisions of this Chapter, or upon any premises or
facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is:



      a.   Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the
public;



      b.   Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature;



      c.   The arrest and conviction of the licensee for any crime
involving moral turpitude;



      d.   Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted;



      e.   Forbidden by the provisions of this Code or any other
duly established rule or regulation of the City applicable to the business
for which the license has been granted;



      f.   Nonpayment of personal property taxes, real property
taxes or any other obligation due and payable to the City relating to the
licensed premises;



      g.   Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the
licensed premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following:



         1.   An existing violation(s) of building, electrical,
mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory
codes or ordinances,



         2.   A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of
licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace,
order and tranquility of the neighborhood,



         3.   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the
licensed premises free from litter, debris or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties;



         4.   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the
licensed premises in accordance with an approved site plan.



      h.   Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the
licensed premises by the City's agents or employees in connection with the
enforcement of this Code.



   (3)   "City Clerk" and "City Council" mean, respectively, the City
Clerk and the City Council of the City of Howell.



   (4)   "Licensing agent" means the City Clerk or, in the absence of
the Clerk, the acting Clerk or other such City official or employee as may be
designated by resolution of the City Council.



   (5)   "Person" means any individual, partnership, association or
corporation.



ARTICLE 3
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY



Section 3.01  Licenses Required.



   No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or
carrying on of any business for which any license is required by any
provision of this Chapter without first obtaining a license from the City in
the manner provided for in this Article.



Section 3.02  Multiple Businesses.



   Any person operating, conducting or carrying on any business which
requires a license by this Chapter shall obtain an individual license for
each business being conducted.  The grant of a license for one trade,
profession, business or privilege requiring a license shall not relieve the
person from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for each
such business. In the event the business is a rental building containing more
than one dwelling unit, only one license is required for each individual
rental building, although multiple dwelling units occupied by multiple
tenants may be contained within the individual building.



Section 3.03  Licensed Businesses.



   The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by
Livingston County or the State of Michigan to engage in the operation,
conduct or carrying on of any business shall not exempt such person from the
necessity of securing a license or permit from the City if such license or
permit is required by this Chapter.



Section 3.04  License Application.



   Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, every person required to
obtain a license from the City to engage in the operation, conduct or
carrying on of any business, shall make application for said license to the
City Clerk upon forms provided by the City Clerk and shall state under oath
or affirmation such facts, as may be required for, or applicable to, the
granting of such license.



Section 3.05  License Year.



   Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain licenses, the license
year shall begin January 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on
December 31st of that year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance
of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license
renewals shall be applied for sixty (60) days prior to the annual expiration
date, and issued at least fifteen (15) days prior to the annual expiration
date.



Section 3.06  Conditions of Issuance; Issuance.



   (a)   No license or permit required by this Chapter shall be issued
to any person who is required to have a license or permit from Livingston
County, the State of Michigan, or any other regulatory agency, until such
person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof that
all fees pertaining thereto have been paid. No license shall be granted to
any applicant therefore until such applicant has compiled with all of the
provisions of this Code applicable to the business for which application for
license is made.



   (b)   All business licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon
the recommendation of the Howell City Police Chief, Building Official, and
any other City Official who shall be responsible for the investigation of any
business license application.



Section 3.07  Where Certification Required.



   No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of
the City is required prior to the issuance thereof until such certification
is made.



Section 3.08  Certificate of other Governmental Agencies.



   In all cases where the certification of any other governmental agency,
including but not limited to the Livingston County Health Department, is
required prior to the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such
certification shall be submitted at the time of application for a license to
the City. No license shall be issued by the City until other required
governmental approvals are obtained and proof of such approval presented to
the City Clerk.



Section 3.09  Howell City Police Chief's Certificate.



   Certification of the Howell City Police Chief is required prior to the
issuance of any license by the City Clerk. Such certification shall be based
upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the person
making application for such licenses proposed to conduct or is conducting the
business complies with all the fire regulations and other applicable
regulations of the State of Michigan, County of Livingston, other applicable
regulatory agencies, and of the City.



Section 3.10  Building Official's Certificate.



   In all cases where the carrying on of a business involves the use of
any structure or land, a license therefore shall not be issued until the
Building Official shall certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by
Ordinance No. 722 of this Code (the Zoning Ordinance), and that the business
premises or structures are in compliance with all applicable codes and
regulations.



Section 3.11  Compliance.



   (a)   No license shall be issued to any person unless he has
complied with all of the provisions of this Code and with all of the
provisions of all other laws, provisions of other ordinances, and rules and
regulations applicable to the business, including but not limited to all
building, health and fire codes, and the same is in full compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance.



   (b)   No license shall be issued to any applicant whose business
use, either alone or in combination with other businesses on the same
property, violates any terms of the site plan or other approvals granted by
the City governing the property. Any business which expands operations beyond
its existing site plan, subdivides its business premises or sublets its
business facilities shall be subject to a new site plan review or other
required use approvals, unless waived by the City, and shall comply with any
additional site plan requirements or other require approvals as mandated by
the City Zoning Ordinance before a business license or renewal thereof is
granted.



   (c)   A license is required for every business entity within the
City and for each business entity on a singular property. Any business entity
conducting multiple operations within the City on noncontiguous lots or
parcels shall obtain a license for each site. No business license shall be
issued to any business utilizing a street address which has not been approved
by state or local authorities.



Section 3.12  Suspension and revocation.



   The City Council may suspend or revoke for cause any license issued by
the City in the manner provided in this Chapter.



Section 3.13  Procedure for suspension or revocation of license.



   (a)   If the Building Official and/or Howell City Police Chief
determines that any licensee has committed a violation of this Chapter, the
Building Official or Howell City Police Chief shall prepare a report in
writing specifying (1) the specific factual details of such violation(s), and
(2) the particular Code subsection(s) violated.



   (b)   The Building Official or Howell City Police Chief shall file
the original report so prepared with the City Manager. The City Manager shall
conduct an investigation of the facts contained in such report, and upon
belief that such facts provide evidence of a violation of this Title, shall
provide a copy to City Council, and serve a copy of such report upon the
licensee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail.



   (c)   Within twenty (20) days from the date such report has been
filed with the City Council, the City Clerk shall set a date for a hearing
before council on the alleged violation(s) for a determination by City
Council as to whether or not City Council shall suspend or revoke the
license.  Notice of the hearing shall be served by the City Clerk upon the
licensee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail
not less than seven (7) days before a scheduled hearing date, and such notice
shall advise the licensee of its right to be represented by legal counsel at
the hearing before the City Council.



   (d)   At all such hearings, the licensee shall have the legal right
to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any adverse
witnesses, by being able to present witnesses in its own behalf, by being
allowed to present arguments, personally or through legal counsel in its own
behalf.



   (e)   The City Council shall prepare a written statement of its
findings within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of all such hearings and
shall serve such findings with the licensee either personally or by
registered mail. If the City Council decided that the license shall be
suspended or revoked, the licensee shall forthwith surrender the same to the
licensing agent and shall not thereafter conduct, operate or carry on the
business for which the license was granted unless and until the license is
restored and a new license issued to him.



Section 3.14  License renewal.



   Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a
license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application.
Should an application for a new license or a renewal of an existing license
be denied by the City, the denied applicant may utilize the procedure set
forth in Section 3.13 of this Article as an appellate process by filing with
the City Clerk a written request for a hearing before the City Council. Such
request must be served upon the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the
applicants receipt of the denial notice.



Section 3.15  Financial Assurances.



   Where the provisions of this Code require that the applicant for any
license or permit furnish a financial assurance, such financial assurance
shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper City officer,
or, whether the amount thereof is specified in this Code or by resolution of
City Council, in the amount so required. The form of such financial assurance
shall be acceptable to the City Attorney. In lieu of a financial assurance,
an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more policies of
insurance in the same amounts providing the same protection as called for in
any such financial assurance; and such policies of insurance shall be
approved as to substance by the City official issuing said license or permit
and as to form by the City Attorney.



Section 3.16  Late Renewals.



   All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time
said fees shall be due, shall be paid as "late fees" with an additional
twenty-five (25%) percent of the license fee required for such licenses for
the first fifteen (15) days that such license fee remains unpaid, and
thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses, plus
fifty (50%) percent of such fee.



Section 3.17  Right to Issuance.



   If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers
of the City, as provided in this Code, said license shall be granted and
shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for such license.



Section 3.18  Fees - When Paid.



   The fees required by this Chapter for any license or permit shall be
paid at the Finance Department/Treasurer's Office before the granting of said
license or permit.  License Fees shall be those set by resolution of the
City Council.  In the event the business is a rental building containing
more than one dwelling unit, even though only one license is required for
each individual building, a fee shall be paid for each individual dwelling
unit contained within each licensed establishment to cover the costs
associated with the inspection of each individual dwelling unit.



Section 3.19  Exhibition of License.



   No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with
the provisions of this Code upon his person at all times when engaged in the
operation, conduct or carrying on of any business, or maintain the license
where the business is operated at a fixed place in the establishment.  Said
license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in the
place of business.  Every licensee shall produce its license for examination
when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by a City
police officer or by any person representing the City.



Section 3.20  Exhibition on Vehicle and Machine.



   No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or
mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Code such tags
or stickers as are furnished by the City Clerk.



Section 3.21  Displaying Invalid License.



   No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a
duplicate has been issued.



Section 3.22  Transferability; Misuse.



   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be
transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code.
No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the
provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his/her license or
permit to another nor shall he/she make any improper use of the same.



Section 3.23  Misuse-Automatic Revocation.



   In addition to the general penalty provision for violation thereof, any
attempt by a licensee or permittee to transfer his/her license or permit to
another, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Chapter, or
to use the same improperly shall be void and result in the automatic
revocation of such license or permit.



ARTICLE 4
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS



Section 4.01  Purpose and Intent.



   The purpose of this Article is to carry out the intent of Article 6 of
the Howell Zoning Code as it relates to the licensing of sexually oriented
businesses. The purpose and intent of Article 6 of the Howell Zoning Code,
specifically Section 6.25(a), is hereby adopted by reference in this Section
as though the same were fully set forth herein.



Section 4.02  License required for sexually oriented business; penalty for
violation of article.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner to operate a business without a
valid license, issued by the City for the particular type of business. For
purposes of this Chapter, "sexually oriented business" shall mean an adult
arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult novelty or retail store,
adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center or similar
establishment or any place that permits patrons to be filmed or photographed
performing sexually explicit activities or displaying specific anatomical
areas for electronic transmission over the World Wide Web, as each of those
terms are further defined under Title Six, Chapter 1240 (the Zoning
Ordinance). The definition of "sexually oriented business" shall not include
an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or
similar professional person licensed by the State engages in
medically-approved and recognized sexual therapy.



Section 4.03  Application.



   (a)   Any owner desiring to operate a sexually oriented business, as
defined in Article 2 of the Howell Zoning code for which a license is
required, shall first make application to the City Clerk for a license on a
form provided by the City Clerk. The application shall contain the following
information:



   (b)   A description of services to be provided.



   (c)   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers for
the sexually oriented business.



   (d)   The name and permanent residence address of the applicant(s).



      1.   If the applicant is a corporation, the names and
permanent residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and resident
agents of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten (10)
percent of the stock of the corporation, the address of the corporation
itself, if different from the address of the proposed sexually oriented
business, and the name and address of a resident agent in Livingston County,
Michigan.



      2.   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and
permanent residence addresses of each of the partners and of the partnership
itself, if different from the address of the proposed sexually oriented
business, and the name and address of a resident agent in Livingston County,
Michigan.



   (e)   The applicant's two (2) immediately preceding addresses.



   (f)   Proof that each applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.



   (g)   Copy of identification such as driver's license which bears a
date of birth for each individual or partnership applicant(s), officers,
directors, stockholders and resident agent.



   (h)   One front face current portrait photograph of the applicant(s)
at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") and a complete set of
applicant(s) fingerprints which shall be taken by the Howell City Police
Chief or his/her agent.  If the applicant is a corporation, one front face
current portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") of
all officers and resident agents of said corporation and a complete set of
the same officers', directors' and resident agents' fingerprints which shall
be taken by the Howell City Police Chief or his/her agent.  If the applicant
is a partnership, one front-face current portrait photograph at least two
inches by two inches (2" x 2") in size of each partner, including a limited
partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each partner or limited
partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the Howell City Police Chief
or his/her agents.



   (i)   Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant(s) for
the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.



   (j)   Statement of whether or not the applicant(s) has previously
operated a sexually oriented business in this or another municipality or
state;



   (k)   Statement of whether or not the applicant(s) has had a
business license of any kind revoked or suspended and the reason therefore;



   (l)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations not involving a controlled substance or alcohol, including the
dates of conviction(s), nature of the crime(s) and court or tribunal.



   (m)   The names, addresses, birth dates and drivers license numbers
of each employee or independent contractor, who is or will be employed in
said proposed sexually oriented business.



   (n)   The name, address, birth dates and driver's license number of
each individual who will be a manager, acting manager or in charge of each
facility.



   (o)   The name and addresses of any sexually oriented business or
other facility owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be
given in subsection (c).



   (p)   A description of any other business(es) to be operated on the
same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant(s)



   (q)   Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant(s) for the
permit including a LEIN records check of all applicants, employees, officers,
directors, resident agents or stockholders.



   (r)   Such other identification and information necessary to
discover the truth of the matters herein before specified as required to be
set forth in the application.



   (s)   The names, current addresses and written statements of at
least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the
applicant is of good moral character. It the applicant is able, the statement
must first be furnished from residents of the City of Howell, then the County
of Livingston, then the State of Michigan and lastly from the rest of the
United States. These references must be persons other than relatives and
business associates.



   (t)   Evidence of current valid General Liability Insurance with
minimum limits of One Million ($1,000,000.00) Dollars per occurrence, and
Workers Compensation Insurance to comply with all State of Michigan statutory
requirements.



   (u)   A community impact statement. The community impact statement
shall contain, at a minimum:



      1.   A detailed description of the proposed business,
including the names and addresses of the applicant for the license, the
street address and legal description of the proposed business location, a
description of the building and facilities, a description of the merchandise
and services to be offered to the public, a statement of the proposed hours
of operation, a profile of the expected customers, a projection of the market
area, and a list of similar operations for comparison purposes in Michigan.



      2.   A detailed analysis of the existing business community
within one thousand (1000) feet of the proposed location, including the
following information:



         i.   The name of all other businesses within one
thousand (1000) feet of the proposed location;



         ii.   A description of the type of business within the
limits;



         iii.   A profile of the customers or patrons of the
businesses within the limits;



         iv.   A profile of the market area of the other
businesses;



         v.   A description of the trend of economic growth
and/or deterioration of the existing business community within the limits;



         vi.   A signed statement from a qualified property
appraiser registered with the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers or
the Society of Real Estate Appraisers as to the projected impact of the
sexually oriented business on commercial property values within one thousand
(1000) feet of the proposed location.



         vii.   A detailed analysis of the existing residential
community within one thousand (1000) feet of the proposed location, including
the following information:



            A.   A description of the type of residential
housing within one thousand (1000) feet;



            B.   A demographic analysis of the persons living
within one thousand (1000) feet of the proposed location, including an
analysis of the ages, occupations and attitudes of persons living within the
area toward the proposed location of the sexually oriented business;



            C.   A statement as to the proximity of schools,
churches, pubic facilities, rest homes, convalescent homes and licensed
foster care facilities, and an analysis of the impact of the proposed use
upon those uses;



            D.   An analysis of the impact of the proposed
business upon the social environment of the City;



            E.   A signed statement from a qualified property
appraiser registered with the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers or
the Society of Real Estate Appraisers as to the projected impact of the
sexually oriented business on residential property values within one thousand
(1000) feet of the proposed location.



         viii.   A detailed analysis of the zoning within one
thousand (1000) feet of the proposed location with an analysis of the impact
of the proposed use on existing and projected principal permitted uses and
existing and projected permitted uses subject to special approval within
those limits, including:



            A.   A list of alternative locations for the
proposed business;



            B.   A list of alternative uses at the proposed
location.



         ix.   The community impact statement shall also contain:



            A.   A detailed statement setting forth the
statistical procedures and methods used to compile and prepare the community
impact statement;



         B.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
person or persons who prepared the community impact statement.



         x.   All information required by this section shall be
provided at the applicant's expense.



   (v)   Upon the full completion of the application form and the
furnishing of all foregoing information and documentation, the City shall
accept the application for the necessary investigations. The holder of a
sexually oriented business license shall notify the City of each change in
any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten (10) days
after such change occurs.



   (w)   At the time the application is filed, a nonrefundable
application fee, as set forth by City Council resolution, shall be remitted
to the City Clerk and shall be in addition to any other fee required by this
Code.



   (x)   If an owner who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as the
applicant.  If an owner who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10%) percent or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
an applicant. Each applicant must meet all requirements set forth in this
article, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.



   (y)   At the time the completed application for a sexually oriented
business is submitted, the City Clerk will check the application for
completeness of information within ten (10) business days of the date of the
application is submitted.  If the application is determined to be
incomplete, it shall within ten (10) business days be returned to the
applicant with a written statement identifying all deficiencies or missing
information prior to resubmission to the City Clerk.



   (z)   The applicant must acknowledge that all information provided
to the City is true and accurate, and must further agree to be liable for the
payment of the City's legal fees in the event the City is successful in any
administrative or judicial proceedings alleging a violation of these
provisions.



Section 4.04  Review process; bases for denial.



   (a)   Following the determination of completeness of the license
application by the City Clerk, the City Clerk will within fourteen (14)
business days forward the application to the City Council who shall, within
forty-five (45) business days of having received the application from the
City Clerk, make a decision to approve or deny a license to operate a
sexually oriented business.



   (b)   Within the aforementioned forty-five (45) business day period,
written reviews shall be prepared by the Howell City Police Chief, fire
department, department of public services, and building department. As part
of the review process, representatives of the respective City departments may
inspect the proposed premises to determine compliance with the requirements
herein.



   (c)   The following may constitute the basis for denial of a license
to operate a sexually oriented business:



      1.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.



      2.   An applicant is overdue in his or her payment to the City
of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed in relation
to a sexually oriented business.



      3.   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question
or request for information on the application forms.



      4.   An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a
provision of this section, other than the offense of operating a sexually
oriented business without a license, within two (2) years immediately
preceding the filing of the application. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no consideration.



      5.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business has not been approved by the Livingston County Health Department,
Howell City Police Chief, department of public services, fire department, or
building official; or the premises is not in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances.



      6.   The license fee required by this section has not been
paid.



      7.   An applicant has owned, operated or been employed in a
sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding
twelve (12) months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a
sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner.



      8.   An applicant has a record of conviction for an offense
involving gambling, narcotics, prostitution, pandering, pornography, public
indecency, sexual assault, or any violation of any provision of this article
within the preceding two (2) years. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall be of no consideration.



      9.   The applicant is not in compliance with applicable Zoning
Ordinances.



   (d)   A license may also be denied if the Howell City Police Chief
determines that the applicant is presently unfit to operate a sexually
oriented business due to the applicant's overall criminal record, regardless
of the date of any criminal conviction. In determining present fitness or
unfitness under this section, the Howell City Police Chief shall consider the
following factors:



      1.   The extent and nature of past criminal activities;



      2.   The age at the time of the commission of the crime;



      3.   The amount of time that has elapsed since the last
illegal activity;



      4.   The conduct and work activity prior to and following the
illegal activity;



      5.   Evidence of any rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release; and



      6.   Other evidence of present fitness, including letters of
recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers
who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for that person,
the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant resides,
and any other persons in contact with the applicant. It is the responsibility
of the applicant, to the extent reasonably possible, to secure and provide
necessary and reliable evidence required to determine present fitness.



Section 4.05  License expiration; renewal; application and renewal fees;
continued right to inspection premises.



   (a)   A license under this article shall expire on December 31st of
the year of issuance.



   (b)   A licensee under this article shall be entitled to a renewal
of the license after: the Howell City Police Chief has completed a criminal
record cheek; except when the license has been suspended or revoked, upon
presentation of the previous license or presentation of an affidavit as to
its loss of destruction to the City Clerk; filing of a completed renewal form
provided to the City Clerk; payment or a nonrefundable renewal fee as
provided in Section 4.02(a); and review and approval of the renewal
application by the City Council. Application for renewal must be made at
least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the existing license to
allow adequate time for review and decision by the City.



   (c)   The license fees for a sexually oriented business shall be set
by resolution of the City Council, and such fees may from time to time be
changed by resolution of the City Council.



   (d)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Howell City Police Department, Livingston County Health Department, fire
department, department of public service and building department to inspect
the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law prior to or at any time it is occupied or open for
business.



Section 4.06  Suspension; revocation.



   (a)   The City shall suspend a license for a period of thirty (30)
days or until compliance, if it determines that a licensee or any employee of
a licensee has:



      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with this article;



      2.   Knowingly permitted alcohol consumption or engaged in
excessive alcohol consumption on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, with the exception of an adult motel;



      3.   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this article;



      4.   Knowingly permitted gambling by a person on the sexually
oriented business premises;



      5.   Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually
oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers;



      6.   Allowed, authorized, conduct, or engaged in any criminal
activity on the premises;



      7.   Provided any false information to the City on any initial
or renewal application sheet;



      8.   Permitted a person younger than eighteen (18) years of
age to enter or be on the premises; or permitted a person younger than
eighteen (18) years of age to be employed or to perform any services for or
on behalf of the sexually oriented business; or sold or provided any goods,
merchandise or service to a person under eighteen (18) years of age.



   (b)   The City shall revoke a license if a basis for suspension in
Section 4.05(a), above, occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.



   (c)   The City shall revoke a license if it is determined that:



      1.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the City during the application or renewal process;



      2.   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      3.   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      4.   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended;



      5.   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in
subsection (a) or (c) for which the time period required has not elapsed;



      6.   On two or more occasions within a twelve (12) month
period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the
licensed premises of a crime listed in any of the sections above, for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;



      7.   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual
contact to occur in or on the licensed premises;



      8.   Failure to comply with subsection (a) above;



      9.   The plan of operation has been changed or the premises
was enlarged without approval of the City.



   (d)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.



   (e)   Section 4.05 does not apply to adult motels as a ground for
revoking the license.



   (f)   When the City revokes a license or permit, the revocation
shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation
became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City finds that the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted
a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.  If the license was revoked under Subsection
(c), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate
number of years required has elapsed since the termination of any sentence,
parole, or probation.



Section 4.07  Appeals.



   The applicant for a sexually oriented business license may, at any
time, seek prompt judicial review of any act or failure to act by the City
regarding the sexually oriented business license or application for the same.



Section 4.08  Transfer of license.



   A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



ARTICLE 5
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS



Section 5.01  Purpose and Intent.



   The intent of this Article is to safeguard the health, safety and
welfare of the public from the spread of infectious diseases from practices
which prick, pierce, or scar the skin, by regulating the operation of body
art establishments in the City of Howell; to establish environmental health
standards for the conduction of body arts procedure; to regulate the
establishment and practice of body arts services; to authorize the City of
Howell to enforce these standards and regulations by inspections; to require
a license to operate a body art establishment; to require a permit, which
requires the demonstration of knowledge in anatomy and body art technology,
effective sterilization, sanitation, and hygienic and disease-controlling
techniques, for individuals engaged in the practice of body art; and for
providing licensing and permitting procedures and lees.



Section 5.02  Authority.



   This Article is established by the City Council pursuant to Public Act
368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended.



Section 5.03  Definitions.



   a.   "Aftercare" means written instructions given to the client,
specific to the body art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art
and surrounding area. These instructions will include information about when
to seek medical treatment, if necessary.



   b.   "Antiseptic" means an agent that destroys disease-causing
microorganisms on human skin or mucosa.



   c.   "Body Art'' means the practice of physical body adornment by
licensed establishments and permitted practitioners utilizing, but not
limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic
tattooing, branding and scarification. It does not include practices or
procedures which are considered to be medical procedures by the state medical
board, such as hair or skin implants, or plastic surgery.



   d.   "Body art establishments" means any place or premise, whether
public or private, transient, temporary or permanent in nature or location
where the practice of body art, whether or not for profit, is carried out.



   e.   "Body piercing'' means any method of piercing the skin or
mucosa, except the ear, in order to place any object, including, but not
limited to, rings, studs, bars, or other forms of jewelry or ornamentation,
through the skin or mucosa.



   f.   "City" shall mean the City of Howell.



   g.   "Contaminated waste" means any liquid or semi-liquid blood or
other potentially-infectious materials: contaminated items that would release
blood or other potentially-infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid
state if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other
potentially-infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials
during handling; and contaminated sharps and pathological and microbiological
wastes containing blood and other potentially-infectious materials, as
defined in 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1910.1030 (latest edition),
known as "Occupational Exposure to Blood-borne Pathogens."



   h.   "Cosmetic tattooing" means the practice of depositing pigment
into the epidermis, utilizing needles, which is either permanent,
semi-permanent or temporary by someone other than a state-licensed physician.
Cosmetic tattooing shall also mean the same as permanent cosmetics,
dermography, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology and micro-pigment
implantation.



   i.   "Disinfection" means the killing of the microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces which cause disease in humans.



   j.   "Equipment" means all machinery, including fixtures,
containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and
storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in
connection with the operation of a body art establishment.



   k.   "Hand sink" means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold running
water under pressure used solely for washing hands, arms and other portions
of the body.



   l.   "Hot water" means water which is at a constant temperature of
at least 100 degrees Fahrenheit.



   m.   "Instruments used for body art" means hand pieces, needles,
needle bars and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's
body fluid during body art procedures.



   n.   "Invasive" means entry into the body either by incision or
insertion of an instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any
other means intended to compromise the skin or mucosa.



   o.   "Jewelry" means any personal ornament inserted into a
newly-pierced area, which must be made of surgical implant-grade stainless
steel; solid 14k or 18k white or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum;
or a dense, low-porosity plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or
irregular surfaces and has been properly sterilized prior to use.



   p.   "License" means written approval by the City of Howell to
operate a body art establishment.



   q.   "Minor" means an individual under 18 years of age who is not
emancipated under Section 4 of Act no. 293 of the Public Acts of 1968, being
Section 722.4 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.



   r.   "Operate/Operator" means an individual who is self-employed and
conducts his or her own body art establishment, or who is employed by another
person to directly manage the day-to-day activities of a body art
establishment.



   s.   "Permit" means the permitting of individual practitioners
engaged in the practice of body art, through the demonstration of knowledge
by means of the successful completion of a written examination, in anatomy
and body art technology, effective sterilization, sanitation, and hygienic
and disease-controlling techniques, the proper use of single-use sharps and
apparatus, recognition of skin disorders and diseases and other diseases such
as diabetes, which contraindicates the practice of body art, and procedures
required to safely collect and dispose of contaminated waste.



   t.   "Person" means a person as defined in MCL 333.1106 or a
government entity.



   u.   "Practitioner" means any person who controls, operates,
manages, conducts, or practices body art activities, and who is responsible
for compliance with these regulations whether or not actually currently
performing body art activities. The term includes technicians and persons who
assist in the actual performance of body art activities.



   v.   "Procedure surface" means any surface that contacts a client's
unclothed body during a body art procedure or any associated work area that
may require sanitizing.



   w.   "Sanitize/Sanitization" means a treatment of the cleanable
surfaces of equipment by a product registered with the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and which has been approved by the Livingston
County Health Division as being effective in reducing the number of
microorganisms to a safe level.



   x.   "Sharps" means any sterilized object that is used for the
purpose of penetrating the skin or mucosa including, but not limited to,
needles, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass.



   y.   "Sharps container" means a puncture-resistant, leak-proof
container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation and
disposal, and is labeled with the international "biohazard" symbol.



   z.   "Single use" means products or items that are intended for
one-time, one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client
including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper
products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors,
piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencil ink cups, and protective gloves.



   aa.   "Sterilize/Sterilization" means destruction of all forms of
microbiotic life, including spores.



   bb.   "Tattooing" means any method of placing ink or other pigment
into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other
instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of
the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing.



   cc.   "Temporary body art establishment" means any place or premise
operating at a fixed location where a practitioner performs body art
procedures for no more than fourteen (14) days consecutively in conjunction
with a single event or celebration.



   dd.   "Universal precautions" means a set of guidelines and
controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public Safety Workers" in Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6, and as
"Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures",
in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, RR-8.  This method of infection control
requires the employer and employee to assume that all human blood and
specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood
pathogens. Precautions include hand washing, gloving, personal protective
equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles,
other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid-contaminated products.



Section 5.04  License Required.



   a.   A person shall not operate a body art establishment without an
annual license from the City.  Every applicant for a license to maintain,
operate or conduct a body art establishment shall file an application under
oath with the City Clerk's office upon a form provided by the City and pay a
nonrefundable application investigation fee.  Such fee shall be set by
resolution of City Council.  The application shall contain the following
information:



      1.   A description of services to be provided.



      2.   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers
for the body art establishment(s).



      3.   The name and permanent residence address of the
applicant(s).



         i.   If the applicant is a corporation, the names and
permanent residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and resident
agents of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten (10)
percent of the stock of the corporation, the address of the corporation
itself, if different from the address of the body art establishment, and the
name and address of a resident agent in Livingston County, Michigan.



         ii.   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and
permanent residence addresses of each of the partners and of the partnership
itself, if different from the address of the body art establishment, and the
name and address of a resident agent in Livingston County, Michigan.



      4.   The applicant's two (2) immediately preceding addresses.



      5.   Proof that each applicant is at least eighteen (18) years
of age.



      6.   Copy of picture identification such as driver's license
which bears a date of birth and photograph for each individual or partnership
applicant(s), officers, directors, stockholders and resident agent.



      7.   One front face current portrait photograph of the
applicant(s) at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") and a complete set
of applicant(s) fingerprints which shall be taken by the Howell City Police
Chief or his/her agent. If the applicant is a corporation, one front face
current portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") of
all officers and resident agents of said corporation and a complete set of
the same officers', directors' and resident agents' fingerprints which shall
be taken by the Howell City Police Chief or his/her agent. If the applicant
is a partnership, one front-face current portrait photograph at least two
inches by two inches (2" x 2") in size of each partner, including a limited
partner in said partnership, and a complete set of each partner or limited
partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the Howell City Police Chief
or his/her agents.



      8.   Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant(s)
for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.



      9.   The body art or similar business history of the
applicant(s).



      10.   Statement of whether or not the applicant(s) has
previously operating a body art establishment in this or another municipality
or state;



      11.   Statement or whether or not the applicant(s) has had a
business license of any kind revoked or suspended and the reason therefore;



      12.   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations not involving a controlled substance or alcohol, including the
dates of conviction(s), nature of the crime(s) and court or tribunal.



      13.   The names, addresses, birth dates and drivers license
numbers of each employee or independent contractor, who is or will be
employed in said body art establishment.



      14.   The name, address, birth dates and driver's license
number of each individual who will be a manager, acting manager or in charge
of each facility.



      15.   The name and addresses or any body art establishment or
other facility owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be
given in subsection (c) wherein the business or profession of body art is
carried on.



      16.   A description of any other business(es) to be operated
on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant(s).



      17.   Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant(s) for the permit including a LEIN records check of all applicants,
employees, officers, directors, resident agents or stockholders.



      18.   Such other identification and information necessary to
discover the truth or the matters herein before specified as required to be
set forth in the application.



      19.   The names, current addresses and written statements of
at least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the United States that
the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the
statement must first be furnished from residents of the City of Howell, then
the County of Livingston, then the State of Michigan and lastly from the rest
of the United States. These references must be persons other than relatives
and business associates.



      20.   Evidence of current valid General Liability Insurance
with minimum limits of One Million ($1,000,000.00) Dollars per occurrence,
and Workers Compensation Insurance to comply with ail State of Michigan
statutory requirements.



      All information required by this section shall be provided at the
applicant's expense. Upon the full completion of the application form and the
furnishing of all foregoing information and documentation, the City shall
accept the application for the necessary investigations. The holder of a body
art establishment license shall notify the City of each change in any of the
data required to be furnished by this section within ten (10) days after such
change occurs.



      The body art establishment license shall be conspicuously
displayed within the reception area of the establishment. A license shall
clearly indicate whom to contact or call with a complaint. A license is not
transferable and shall not be issued or renewed before the full fee is paid,
the premises, equipment, and operations of the establishment have been
inspected, and the operator has complied with all inspection deficiencies.



   a.   An operator of a licensed establishment shall not allow the
practice of body art procedures until the City of Howell has determined that
all body art practitioners practicing body art at the operator's
establishment are individually permitted.



   b.   A license may be revoked, suspended, or limited, or a license
application denied, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.15, if
after an inspection it is determined that an operator has failed to follow
standard disease control techniques, or has failed to keep required records
of services performed, or has provided services to an underage person without
the required consent and presence of a parent or legal guardian.



   c.   A person shall not operate a temporary establishment for the
performance of body art procedures without a license from the City of Howell
and the Livingston County Health Department. The City may issue a temporary
establishment license for a period of up to fourteen (14) days to provide
body art services outside the physical site of a licensed establishment for
the purpose of product demonstration and promotion, industry trades shows, or
for educational purposes.



   d.   A person shall not operate a mobile body art establishment
within the City of Howell. The City shall not license the use of mobile body
art establishments.



   e.   A person whose license to operate a body art facility has been
revoked, suspended, or limited, or a person whose license application has
been denied, has the right to appeal to the City Council. A request for an
appeal must be in writing, accompanied by the prescribed fee, and submitted
to the City Council within ten (10) days of the City's action. The City
Council may uphold, reverse or alter the action by a majority vote.



   f.   The license, permit, plan review, and hearing fee shall be set
by the resolution of the City Council.



Section 5.05  Inspection of Body Art Facilities.



   a.   The Howell City Police Chief, or his/her designee, shall have
the authority to inspect every premise and location at which the aforesaid
practice is being carried on as often as deemed necessary for the enforcement
of this Chapter. The Howell City Police Chief, or his/her designee, may at
any reasonable time, make inspections of the body art facility to ensure
compliance with this Chapter. All body art facilities within the City of
Howell shall be inspected a minimum of two (2) times per year by the Director
of Public Services, or his/her designee.



   b.   No person shall refuse to permit the Howell City Police Chief,
or his/her designee, after proper identification, to inspect any body art
facility at reasonable hours nor shall any person impede or impair a City
representative from carrying out his or her duties as authorized under this
Article.



Section 5.06  Plan Review Requirement.



   a.   After the effective date of this Article, no person, firm,
association, corporation, or governmental entity shall construct, install,
operate, equip, or extensively alter a body art facility until plans have
been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the Building Official, or
his/her designee.



   b.   The plans and specifications shall be submitted through the
plan review process for approval by the Building Official, or his/her
designee, on forms provided by the City. The plan and specifications shall
comply with the criteria established for the plan review before a license is
issued.



Section 5.07  Practitioner Permit Required.



   a.   The practice of body art shall not be performed without a
permit from the Livingston County Health Division and the City of Howell. The
permit shall be conspicuously displayed within the reception area of any
establishment in which body art is performed. The City shall issue
practitioner permits to individuals who have paid the required permitting
fee, met the requirements of this Article, and who have successfully passed a
written examination offered by the Livingston County Health Division which
demonstrates the practitioner is knowledgeable and proficient in:



      1.   Anatomy and body art technology.



      2.   Effective sterilization, sanitization, and hygienic
techniques: use of single-use sharps and apparatus; and other related
disease-control techniques.



      3.   The discovery and recognition of skin disorders and
disease, and other diseases such as diabetes, which contraindicate the
practice of body art.



      4.   Procedures required to safely collect and dispose of
contaminated waste. The City may accept other certification or credentials it
deems acceptable in lieu of the written examination.



   b.   All practitioners permitted under this Article need to complete
a Hepatitis B vaccination series, or have medical evidence of immunity, or
have an approved medical waiver.  Exceptions for other reasons will be
considered upon written submission to the City.



   c.   A permit may be revoked, suspended, or limited, or a license
application denied, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.15, if
an inspection determines that a practitioner has failed to follow standard
disease control techniques, or has failed to keep required records of
services performed, or has provided services to an underage person without
the required written consent and presence of the parent or guardian.



Section 5.08  Body Art Prohibitions.



   a.   A practitioner shall not perform a body art procedure upon a
person who is under the age of eighteen (18) without the written consent and
presence of a parent or legal guardian of that minor, except a minor
emancipated under the laws of the State of Michigan. A practitioner shall
require positive proof of age from all prospective clients who reasonably
appear to be less than twenty-five (25) years of age, such as driver's
license or equivalent photo identification card, and shall make and keep a
photocopy of that proof of age as part of the permanent client record.



   b.   A practitioner shall not perform a body art procedure upon any
person who appears to be under the influence of alcohol or other drugs.



   c.   A practitioner shall not perform a body art procedure upon a
person who has not completed a medical screening questionnaire. This
questionnaire shall ask whether the client falls within one or more of the
following risk group categories. To protect confidentiality, a client shall
not be asked to specify the risk group.



      1.   History of jaundice or hepatitis.



      2.   History of AIDS, or positive HIV test.



      3.   History of skin disease or skin cancer at site of service.



      4.   History of allergies or anaphylactic reaction to
pigments, dyes or other sensitivities.



      5.   History of Hemophilia.



      6.   Is taking medications which thin blood and prevent
clotting.



      7.   History of any other known medical condition which would
influence or impair the healing process.



   d.   The client shall sign and date a written statement, witnessed
and also signed by the practitioner, that the client does/does not fall
within one of the risk group categories to the client's best knowledge.



Section 5.09  Exemptions.



   a.   Physicians licensed to practice in the State of Michigan, who
use body art procedures as part of patient treatment, are exempt from these
regulations.



   b.   An establishment where the practice is limited to the piercing
of the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized, single use,
stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system only is exempt from the licensing and
permitting requirements of this article.



Section 5.10  Client Notice Requirements.



   a.   Before performing any body art procedure, a prospective client
shall be provided with a written factual information regarding the effects,
risks, and permanence of that body art procedure. This written information
shall first be submitted for approval by the Livingston County Health
Division and the City as to the accuracy and completeness. Before undertaking
a procedure, a client shall acknowledge on a copy of the written information,
that he or she has read and understands the information, and this copy shall
be retained in the permanent file for that client.



   b.   After a procedure is completed, a client shall also be provided
with written instructions, also pre-approved by the Livingston County Health
Division and the City, on proper care of the body art site. These
instructions, known as aftercare, shall, at a minimum, advise the client to
consult a physician at the first sign of infection; shall contain the name,
address and telephone number of the establishment; and shall name the
Livingston County Health Division and the City and the telephone numbers to
which to make a complaint.  If tattooing was performed, this document shall
also specify the colors applied and, when available, the manufacturer or
catalogue identification number of each color applied. This document shall be
executed in at least two (2) copies and signed by both the practitioner and
the client. A copy shall be provided to the client and another shall be
retained in the permanent record.



Section 5.11  Required Records.



   a.   An establishment shall maintain a record of all clients who
have had body art services performed. This record shall indicate the name,
address, telephone number, and date of birth of the client; a signed and
dated acknowledgment by the client that they understand the pre-procedure
information; a medical screening questionnaire signed and dated by the
client; a description of procedures performed, and name of each practitioner
performing the services; proof of age, where relevant; proof of parent or
guardian consent and presence, where relevant; and a receipt signed and dated
by the client acknowledging they have received a copy of the aftercare
instruction and pigment identification.



   b.   These records shall be retained for at least five (5) years by
the owner of the establishment. These records shall be made available to the
Livingston County Health Division and City representatives immediately upon
request, but shall otherwise be maintained in confidence.



Section 5.12  Standards for Premises.



   A body art establishment shall meet the inspection criteria and
standard operating procedures established by the Livingston County Health
Division.



Section 5.13  Required Procedures for Preparing Body Area.



   a.   Before performing a procedure, the skin of and surrounding the
area where the procedure is to be performed, shall be washed with
antimicrobial soap or treated with iodine, as appropriate.



   b.   If shaving of the area is necessary, safety razors with
single-use blades, or disposable razors, shall be used and discarded after
each use. If safety razors with disposable blades are used, the reusable
holder shall be autoclaved after each use. After shaving, the shaved area
shall be washed with antimicrobial soap and the washing pad shall be
discarded after a single use.



   c.   In the event of blood flow, all products used to check the flow
or to absorb the blood shall be single-use and shall be disposed as
bio-hazard waste.



Section 5.14  Required Procedures for Performing Body Art.



   a.   A practitioner shall maintain a high degree of personal
cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices and wear clean clothing when
performing body art procedures. Before performing procedures, a practitioner
shall thoroughly wash hands in hot running water using liquid antimicrobial
soap, scrubbing for at least one (1) minute, then rinse and dry hands with
disposable paper towels. This procedure shall be repeated as often as needed
to remove contaminants.



   b.   While performing procedures, a practitioner shall wear
disposable medical gloves. The gloves shall be disposed, at a minimum, after
each client.



   c.   If, while performing a procedure, a glove is pierced, torn, or
otherwise contaminated, the glove shall be immediately discarded and hands
washed thoroughly before a new glove is applied. Any item dropped on the
floor or otherwise contaminated shall be immediately discarded and a new one
used.



   d.   All reusable instruments used for body art shall be cleaned
thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an antimicrobial soap solution
and hot water or by an appropriate disinfectant, to remove blood and tissue
residue and placed in an ultrasonic unit which shall be operated in accord
with the manufacturer's instructions.



   e.   After cleaning, all reusable instruments used for body art
shall be packed individually in paper peel-packs and sterilized. All paper
peel-packs shall be dated with an expiration date not to exceed thirty (30)
days. Sterile equipment shall not be used after the expiration date without
first re-packaging and re-sterilizing.



   f.   All reusable instruments used for body art shall be sterilized
in an autoclave using procedures outlined in the inspection criteria approved
by the Livingston County Health Division. The autoclave shall be used,
cleaned, and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. A
copy of the manufacturer's instructions must be kept available on the
premises for inspection by the Livingston County Health Division and the City
of Howell.



   g.   Each holder of a license to operate a body art establishment
shall demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attaining
sterilization by conducting a monthly spore test through an independent
certified laboratory. The license shall not be issued or renewed until
documentation of satisfactory testing is presented to the Livingston County
Heath Division and the City of Howell. Test records shall be kept for at
least five (5) years by the establishment owner and made available to the
City upon request. If the body art facility is notified by the testing entity
that a test result is positive for biologic growth, the body art facility
shall immediately cease all operations and notify the Livingston County
Health Division. Operations in the body art facility cannot resume until test
results that are negative for biologic growth have been provided to the
Livingston County Division and the City of Howell by the testing entity and
all reusable instruments in the body art facility have been re-sterilized.



   h.   After sterilization, an instrument used for body art shall be
stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly covered container reserved
for storage of only such instruments.



   i.   All instruments used for body art shall remain stored in
sterile packages until immediately prior to performing a body art procedure.
When assembling instruments used for performing a body art procedure, a
practitioner shall wear disposable medical gloves and use techniques to
ensure that the instruments and gloves are not contaminated.



   j.   All inks, dyes, pigments and sharps shall be specifically
manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall not be
adulterated.  Immediately before applying a tattoo, the quantity of dye to
be used for the tattoo shall be transferred from the dry bottle and placed
into sterile single-use paper or plastic cups.  Upon completion of the
tattoo, these single-use cups and all of their contents shall be discarded.



   k.   All sharps shall be sterilized prior to use and stored in paper
peel-packs in the manner prescribed above.



   l.   Single-use sharps shall not be used for more than one (1)
client for any reason. After use, all single-use needles, razors and other
sharps shall be immediately disposed in an approved sharps container.



   m.   All body art stencils shall be single-use and disposable.
Petroleum jellies, soaps and other products used in the applications of
stencils shall be dispensed and applied to the area to be tattooed with
sterile gauze or in a manner to prevent contamination of the original
container and its contents. The gauze shall be used only once and then
discarded.



Section 5.15  Suspension or Revocation of Licenses or Permits.



   a.   A license or permit issued under this Article may be suspended
temporarily by the City of Howell for failure of the holder to comply with
one or more requirements of this Chapter.



   b.   If a license or permit is to be suspended, the City of Howell
shall give the holder prompt notice and the suspension shall occur
immediately upon receipt of the notice.



   c.   If a license or permit is suspended, the holder may apply at
any time for immediate reinstatement of the license.



   d.   After a re-inspection fee is paid, the City of Howell shall
respond promptly and in no more than fourteen (14) working days to a request
for reinstatement. If re-inspection determines that the holder has come into
compliance with this Chapter, the license shall be promptly reinstated.



   e.   For serious or repeated violations of the requirements of this
Article, the City of Howell may revoke a license or permit. Before issuing a
permanent revocation, the City shall give notice to the holder in writing of
its intent and the reasons for revocation. A person who has been denied or
had a license or permit revoked as required by this Chapter, shall have the
right of appeal by petition in writing to the City Clerk and such appeals
shall be heard before the City Council pursuant to Section 3.13 of this
Chapter.



ARTICLE 6



Section 6.01  Misdemeanor Penalties.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions or this Chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and be subject to the penalty provided in Section 202.99 of
the Howell City Code.



CHAPTER 860
Oil and Gas Wells



860.01   Permit required.



860.02   Permit fee.



860.03   Permit application; bond.



860.04   Issuance of permits.



860.05   Hours of operation.



860.06   Violations as nuisances; abatement.



860.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Oil and gas generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 319.1 et seq., 486.251 et seq.



   Flammable materials and explosives - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



860.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall locate and commence to sink or drill any well for oil
or gas in the City without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City.



(Ord. 95. Passed 6-26-30.)



860.02  PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for the permit required by Section 860.01 shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00).



860.03  PERMIT APPLICATION; BOND.



   Any person desiring to locate, sink or drill a well for oil and gas in
the City shall, before beginning the sinking or drilling of such oil or gas
well, file with the City Manager or his or her authorized representative a
written application for permission to do so. Such application shall set forth
the exact location of the well by giving the legal description of the
property on which the well is to be drilled; if upon platted land, the lot
number or fraction thereof and the name of the plat; if upon unplatted land,
the section, fraction of section, township and range thereof; the distance of
the proposed well from the nearest property lines and the distance in two
directions to the nearest building or buildings; the purpose for which it is
to be sunk or drilled; the intended depth of the well; and such other
information as is required by Council. Such application shall be signed by
the owner of the proposed well or his, her or its authorized representative.
Such application shall also be accompanied by a bond in the sum of one
million dollars ($1,000,000), with a surety or sureties to be approved by
Council, for the purpose of indemnifying the City and all adjacent property
owners for any loss, damage or harm occasioned by the sinking or drilling of
such well or its operation, whether the same is occasioned by reason of
negligence of the driller or operator thereof or otherwise.



860.04  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   The application for the permit required by Section 860.01 shall be
referred to Council at its next regular meeting and a permit to locate, sink
and drill shall be granted if, in the majority opinion of Council, the
location of such proposed oil and gas well is such that it will not be
detrimental to the public good generally and not be detrimental to adjacent
property and not tend to create a public nuisance or public hazard
detrimental to the inhabitants of the City and adjacent property owners.



   Council, under its general police power, shall refuse to grant permits
to locate oil and gas wells in any place which would be a public nuisance and
endanger the person and property of the inhabitants of the City and tend to
destroy or decrease the value of private property as now used and established.



   Council shall, by its refusal to grant permits, protect business and
residential areas of the City from encroachment.



(Ord. 95. Passed 6-26-30.)



860.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Any permit to drill an oil or gas well issued by Council under this
chapter shall state and fix in a reasonable manner the hours of the day
during which construction, drilling or operation thereof may continue in such
manner as not to destroy the peace, quiet or comfort of the residents of the
neighborhood wherein the well is located.



(Ord. 95. Passed 6-26-30.)



860.06  VIOLATIONS AS NUISANCES; ABATEMENT.



   The attempted location, sinking or drilling of an oil or gas well in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and an action for the abatement of such nuisance may be brought in
the name of the City by the City Attorney in a court of competent
jurisdiction. Such remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided for in
Section 860.99.



(Ord. 95. Passed 6-26-30.)



860.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202. 99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 862
Precious Metal Dealers



862.01   Definitions.



862.02   Certificates of registration.



862.03   Records of transactions.



862.04   Waiting period before sale.



862.05   Purchase of precious items from minors or criminals;
identification required.



862.06   Investigation of violations.



862.99   Penalty.



Appendix I.   Certificate of registration.



Appendix II.   Record of transaction.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Usury - see M.C.L. Sec. 438.31



   Transient merchants - see M.C.L. Secs. 445.371 et seq.



   Pawnbrokers - see M.C.L. Secs. 445.471 et seq., 446.201 et seq.



   Theft generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.356 et seq.



862.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Agent or employee" means a person who, for compensation or
valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer.



   (b)   "Dealer" means a person, corporation, partnership or
association which, in whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of
repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items
from the public in the State.



   (c)   "Gold" means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967
and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in
combination with its alloys or any other metal.



   (d)   "Jewelry" means an ornamental item made of a material that
includes a precious gem.



   (e)   "Local police agency" means the Police Department.



   (f)   "Platinum" means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of
195.09 and the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in
combination with its alloys or any other metal.



   (g)   "Precious gem" means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire,
opal, amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz,
tourmaline, turquoise or pearl.



   (h)   "Precious item" means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item
containing gold, silver or platinum. "Precious item" does not include the
following:



      (1)   Coins, commemorative medals and tokens struck by, or on
behalf of, a government or private mint;



      (2)   Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and
commodity exchanges;



      (3)   Items at the time they are purchased directly from a
dealer registered as provided in this chapter, a manufacturer or a wholesaler
who purchased them directly from a manufacturer;



      (4)   Industrial machinery or equipment;



      (5)   An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer
where the item was purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales
receipt;



      (6)   An item which is received for alteration, redesign or
repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and which is
returned directly to the customer;



      (7)   An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark
or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than five dollars
($5.00);



      (8)   Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold,
silver or platinum which are recoverable as a by-product; or



      (9)   Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having
a greater value, which difference in value is paid by the customer.



   (i)   "Silver" means elemental silver having an atomic weight of
107. 869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in
combination with its alloys or any other metal.



(Ord. 415. Passed 9-8-81.)



862.02  CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.



   (a)   No dealer shall conduct business in the City unless the dealer
has obtained a valid certificate of registration therefor from the Police
Department, a sample of which appears at the end of this chapter as Appendix
I.



   (b)   A dealer shall apply to the Police Department for a
certificate of registration, paying a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover
the reasonable cost of processing and issuing the certificate, and providing
the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and thumbprint of the applicant;



      (2)   The name and address under which the applicant does
business; and



      (3)   The names, addresses and thumbprints of all agents or
employees of the dealer. Within twenty-four hours after hiring a new
employee, the dealer shall forward to the Police Department the name, address
and thumbprint of the new employee.



   (c)   Upon receipt of the application for registration provided for
in subsection (b)hereof, the Police Department shall issue a certificate of
registration in accordance with this section.



   (d)   Upon receipt of the certificate from the Police Department,
the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of
business.



   (e)   Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or
address under which he or she does business, the dealer shall notify the
Police Department of the change.



(Ord. 415. Passed 9-8-81.)



862.03  RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS.



   (a)   A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each
transaction, a sample of which appears at the end of this chapter as Appendix
II. Each such record shall be legibly written in ink in English and shall be
filled out in triplicate by the dealer or an agent or employee of the dealer
with one copy going to the Police Department, pursuant to subsection
(c)hereof, one copy going to the customer and one copy to be retained by the
dealer, pursuant to subsection (e)hereof. At the time a dealer receives or
purchases a precious item, the dealer or the agent or employee of the dealer
shall ensure that the following information is recorded accurately on a
record of transaction form:



      (1)   The dealer's certificate of registration number;



      (2)   A general description of the precious item received or
purchased, including its type of metal or precious gem. In the case of
watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number
of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks
inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description.



      (3)   The date of the transaction;



      (4)   The name of the person conducting the transaction;



      (5)   The name, date of birth, driver's license number or
State personal identification card number and street and house number of the
person with whom the transaction is made, together with a legible imprint of
the right thumb of the person with whom the transaction is made. If that is
not possible, then a legible imprint of the left thumb or a finger of that
person shall be used. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be
required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The
thumbprint or fingerprint shall be made available to the Police Department
only during the course of a police investigation involving a precious item
described on the record of transaction. After a period of one year from the
date of the record of transaction, if a police investigation concerning a
precious item described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the
dealer and the Police Department shall destroy, and not keep a permanent
record of, the record of transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or
who changes his or her business address to another local jurisdiction, either
within or outside the State, shall transmit the records of all transactions
made by him or her, within one year before his or her closing or moving, to
the local police agency.



      (6)   The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item;



      (7)   The form of payment made to the customer, such as check,
money order, bank draft or cash. If the payment is by check, money order or
bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order or
bank draft.



      (8)   The customer's signature.



   (b)   The record of each transaction shall be numbered
consecutively, commencing with the number one and the calendar year.



   (c)   Within forty-eight hours after receiving or purchasing a
precious item, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form
to the Police Department. Such forms received by the Police Department shall
not be open to inspection by the general public. The Police Department shall
be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction
forms and ensuring that the record of transaction forms are used only for the
purpose for which they were received.



   (d)   The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious
item received shall be open to an inspection by the County Prosecuting
Attorney, the Police Department and the Michigan State Police, at all times
during the ordinary business hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing
business, a dealer is deemed to have given consent to the inspection
prescribed by this subsection. The record of transaction forms of a dealer
shall not be open to inspection by the general public.



   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, each record of a
transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after
the transaction to which the record pertains.



   (f)   The form of the record of transaction shall be provided by the
dealer, shall be eight and one-half by eleven inches in size and shall be as
set forth in Appendix II immediately following the text of this chapter.



(Ord. 415. Passed 9-8-81.)



862.04  WAITING PERIOD BEFORE SALE.



   A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer
for seven calendar days after it is received, without any form of alteration
other than that required to make an accurate appraisal of its value.



(Ord. 415. Passed 9-8-81.)



862.05  PURCHASE OF PRECIOUS ITEMS FROM MINORS OR CRIMINALS; IDENTIFICATION
REQUIRED.



   No dealer or agent or employee of a dealer shall knowingly receive or
purchase a precious item from a person:



   (a)   Who is less than eighteen years of age or who is known by the
dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or
receipt of stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the
person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another;



   (b)   Unless such person presents a valid driver's license or a
valid State personal identification card.



(Ord. 415. Passed 9-8-81.)



862.06  INVESTIGATION OF VIOLATIONS.



   As soon as the Police Department discovers a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended, the
Department shall immediately notify the County Prosecuting Attorney of such
violation and perform such investigation as the Prosecutor directs.



(Ord. 415.  Passed 9-8-81.)



862.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202. 99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)




APPENDIX I
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION





Precious Metal and Gem Dealer





   In accordance with Chapter 862 of the Codified Ordinances of the City
of Howell, enacted pursuant to Act 95 of the Public Acts of 1981 of the State
of Michigan, this certificate, duly signed and authorized by the Police
Department for the City of Howell, is issued to
__________________________________________.



   This certifies that such person is registered as a dealer in precious
items in accordance with such chapter and statute within the City.



   This certificate is not assignable and expires automatically at such
time as the holder ceases to be a dealer in precious items or ceases to do
business within the Howell City limits.



                  Howell Police Department



Dated:                               



                  By



Certificate Number            




   TO BE POSTED IN A CONSPICUOUS PLACE



(Ord. 415.  Passed 9-8-81.)




APPENDIX II
RECORD OF TRANSACTION




Dealer certificate
No.               No.            



         (Printed on form)      (Transaction number printed



                     on form)



(1) Description of property -    



   



   



(2)                  ,
19___         (3)            



   (Date)                  (Name of dealer/employee)



(4)                           , 19____



   (Name of customer)            (Date of birth)



                  ,            



   (Driver's license no./            (Street address)



   Mich. personal ID no.)



                     ____________________



                     (City & State)   (Zip)



(5)                  



   (Price paid)



(6)                     



   (Check number, bank draft



   number, money order number



   or cash)



 

 

 

 

 
 



 



   Thumbprint                           



                     (Signature of customer)



(Ord. 415.  Passed 9-8-81.)



CHAPTER 868
Secondhand and Junk Dealers



868.01   Secondhand and junk dealers defined.



868.02   License required.



868.03   License application; consent of adjacent property owners.



868.04   License fee.



868.05   Enclosure required.



868.06   Issuance of licenses; location of business; effective period and
transferability of licenses.



868.07   Identification signs; records.



868.08   Responsibilities of purchasers.



868.09   Responsibilities of peddlers.



868.10   Prohibited transactions.



868.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Usury - see M.C.L. Sec. 438.31



   Secondhand dealers - see M.C.L. Secs. 445.401 et seq.



   Junk yards - see M.C.L. Secs. 445.451 et seq.



   Pawnbrokers - see M.C.L. Secs. 445.471 et seq., 446.201 et seq.



   Accumulations of junk - see GEN. OFF. 622.04



   Storage of junk vehicles - see GEN. OFF. 622.05



868.01  SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS DEFINED.



   As used in this chapter, "secondhand dealer" and "junk dealer" mean a
person whose principal business is that of purchasing, selling, exchanging or
receiving secondhand articles of any kind, tool steel, aluminum, copper,
brass, lead pipe or tools and lighting and plumbing fixtures.



(Ord. 157. Passed 7-2-56.)



868.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or junk
dealer in the City without first obtaining a license to do so from the City
Manager or his or her authorized representative, subject to the provisions of
this chapter authorizing such person to carry on such business.



868.03  LICENSE APPLICATION; CONSENT OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS.



   An application for the license required by Section 868.02 shall
indicate the applicant's name, his or her business and residence address for
the past five years and whether or not he or she has ever been convicted of a
crime. At the time of filing such application, the applicant shall also file
with the City Manager or his or her authorized representative the written
consent of more than thirty-five percent of the property owners, within a
radius of one City block of such junk business or contemplated junk business
where such business is located or to be located in a residential community,
consenting to the operation of such junk business in such location.



868.04  LICENSE FEE.



   At the time of filing the application for the license required by
Section 868. 02, the applicant shall deposit with the City Manager or his or
her authorized representative the annual license fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00), the same to be returned to the applicant if the license is denied.



868.05  ENCLOSURE REQUIRED.



   No license shall be granted to an applicant to conduct a junk business
or contemplated junk business unless the location at which the business is to
be carried on is completely enclosed by a tight board or solid metal fence at
least ten feet in height.



(Ord. 157. Passed 7-2-56.)



868.06  ISSUANCE OF LICENSES; LOCATION OF BUSINESS; EFFECTIVE PERIOD AND
TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.



   The City Manager or his or her authorized representative may, from time
to time, grant to any suitable person a license authorizing such person to
carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or junk dealer, subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Such license shall designate the particular place
in the City where such person is to carry on such business and no person
receiving such license shall carry on such business at any place other than
as designated in such license. The Manager or his or her representative shall
not grant a license to any person doing or desiring to do a junk business in
any residential community where sixty-five percent or more of the property
owners within a radius of one City block of such junk business or
contemplated junk business petition the Manager not to do so. However, if a
person has no regular place of business, a license shall be issued to such
person to carry on the business of secondhand dealer or junk dealer either by
automobile or truck. Such licenses shall be for a period of one year from the
date of issuance, unless revoked for cause, and shall not be transferable.



868.07  IDENTIFICATION SIGNS; RECORDS.



   Secondhand dealers and junk dealers shall post in a conspicuous place
in or upon their shop, store, vehicle, boat or other place of business, a
sign having their name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon, and shall
keep a separate book open to inspection by a member of the Police Department
or other person, in which shall be written, in the English language, at the
time of the purchase or exchange of such articles, a description thereof, the
name, description and residence of the person from whom the same was
purchased and received, and the day and hour when such purchase or exchange
was made. Each entry shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the
number one.



(Ord.  157.  Passed 7-2-56.)



868.08  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PURCHASERS.



   Articles purchased or exchanged, as provided in this chapter, shall be
retained by the purchaser thereof for at least fifteen days before disposing
of them, in an accessible place in the building where such articles are
purchased and received. A tag shall be attached to such articles in some
visible and convenient place, with a number written thereon, to correspond
with the entry number in the book required to be kept by Section 868.07. Such
purchaser shall prepare and deliver, on Monday of each week, to the Chief of
Police of the City, before 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy, written in
the English language, from such book, containing a description of each
article purchased or received during the preceding week, the hour and day
when the purchase was made, and the description of the person from whom it
was purchased. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the
person subscribing his or her name thereto. However, this section shall not
apply to old rags, waste paper and household goods. Further, nothing herein
contained shall make it necessary for the purchaser to retain articles
purchased from persons having a fixed place of business after such articles
have been reported. (Ord. 157. Passed 7-2-56.)



868.09  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PEDDLERS.



   If the purchase or receiver, by exchange or otherwise, is a peddler or
goes about with a vehicle to purchase or obtain, by exchange or otherwise,
any of the articles referred to in Section 868.01, and does not have a place
of business in a building, he or she need not retain such articles for
fifteen days before selling them, provided that on Monday of each week he or
she files with the Chief of Police of the City a report showing the place of
business of the person to whom such sale was made and a copy of the record,
required by Section 868.07 to be kept in a separate book, of the articles
purchased or received during the preceding week, including a description of
such articles sold, to whom sold and his or her place of business.



(Ord. 157. Passed 7-2-56.)



868.10  PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS.



   No secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall purchase or receive, by sale,
barter, exchange or otherwise, any article mentioned in this chapter from any
person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, nor
from any person who is at the time intoxicated, nor from an habitual
drunkard, nor from any person known by such secondhand dealer or junk dealer
to be a thief or an associate of thieves or a receiver of stolen property,
nor from any person he or she has reason to suspect of being such.



(Ord. 157. Passed 7-2-56.)



868.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



   If a person is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, the license issued to such person shall be deemed to have been
revoked ipso facto and such person shall not be permitted to carry on such
business in the City for a period of one year after such conviction.



(Ord.  157.  Passed 7-2-56.)



CHAPTER 872
Street Vendors and Peddlers



872.01   Definitions.



872.02   Licenses required.



872.03   License applications; issuance.



872.04   Health cards; furnishing of information to police.



872.05   License fees; exemption.



872.06   Rules and regulations.



872.07   Transferability of licenses.



872.08   License revocation or suspension.



872.09   Conduct of business under license suspension.



872.10   Inspection of licensed premises and vehicles.



872.11   Investigation of criminal record.



872.12   Exemptions.



872.13   Lighting requirements for motor vehicles.



872.14   Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) permit required.



872.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Hawkers and peddlers generally - see M.C.L. Sec. 445.371 et seq.



   Transient merchants generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 445.371 et seq.



   Littering and distribution of handbills - see GEN. OFF. 652. 05



   Responsibilities of peddlers re secondhand and junk dealers see B.R. &
T. 868.09



   Trespassing - see GEN. OFF. 658.03 Loitering - see GEN. OFF.
662.01(b)(9)



872.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this Chapter, unless a different meaning is clearly
indicated:



   (a)   "Police Department" means the Police Department of the City
and the authorized officers or agents.



   (b)   "Street vendor" means:



      (1)   A person, whether a principal such as a corporation,
limited liability company, partnership or an agent such as an officer,
managing member, partner, employee or sub-contractor, who goes in and upon
the public streets, alleys, ways, parks and places of the City, traveling
from place to place or from door to door of homes, offices, stores, hotels,
restaurants or other places of business, engaged in selling at retail, or
offering or taking orders to sell, barter, canvass or peddle to members of
the public or to regular customers, any article of food, goods, wares,
merchandise or other products not produced, manufactured or made by such
person. However, a merchant having an established place of business, with a
stock of goods, who is engaged in making deliveries only, shall not be deemed
to be a street vendor, as regulated in this chapter.



      (2)   A person who, in the operation and conduct of his or her
business, manufacturers, produces or distributes products, food, goods, wares
or merchandise, in and about the streets of the City displaying and offering
such goods, wares or merchandise for sale, who takes orders for such sale or
who sell at retail to the public or to established customers.



      "Street vendor" includes "huckster" and "peddler", as such words
are commonly used.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.02  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   No person shall use public streets or public places for the purpose of
engaging in the occupation or business of street vendor in the City without
first obtaining a license to do so as provided in this chapter.  Further, no
person shall operate as a street vendor in the City without first obtaining a
license for each piece of vehicular equipment or container used in connection
with such operation.  A person who is a street vendor and does not use a
vehicle or container in connection with their occupation or business, but who
carries the merchandise being sold, or samples, facsimiles or pictures in his
or her hands or pockets, is required to obtain a license as though he or she
sells from a container.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.03  LICENSE APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE.



   Any person who desires to operate as a street vendor shall make and
file with the City Clerk a written application stating the applicant's name,
the name and address of the principal or owner of the business if the
applicant is acting as agent, residence, federal identification number, place
where he or she intends to do business, kind of business, kind and
description of the articles to be sold or offered for sale, the type of
vehicle equipment to be used, the number of vehicles to be licensed, proof of
insurance for all vehicles, citizenship status of the applicant, whether or
not the applicant has ever been convicted of violating a law of any state or
of the United States or of any ordinance of this City or any other City or
political subdivision of any state in the country.  If so convicted, the
application shall include details pertaining to such violation.  The
individual, primary officer, managing member, managing partner or any
employee or subcontractor of the applicant must submit to an individual
criminal and Michigan Secretary of State background check pursuant to Section
872.11.  A copy of the applicant's Michigan sales tax license shall be
attached to the application, except for an applicant selling only food for
human consumption as defined in section 4g of Act No. 167 of the Public Acts
of 1933, being section 205.54g of the Michigan Compiled Laws. If the
applicant is acting as agent for another person, the applicant shall cause to
be filed with the City Clerk a power of attorney appointing the City Clerk
the agent of the principal on whom service of process may be made in any suit
commenced against the principal.  The applicant shall at the same time
deposit five hundred dollars ($500.00) with the City Clerk, or file a surety
company bond for that amount. The applicant shall also pay the City Clerk a
one hundred dollar ($100.00) non-refundable application fee.  The City Clerk
shall issue to the applicant the license if satisfied that the business to be
conducted by the person is not intended to cheat or defraud the public, there
is written approval for issuance of the license by the Chief of Police and
upon payment of a fifty dollars ($50.00) license fee.  A license issued
under this section shall expire on the December thirty-first after its
issuance.  Not more than ten days after issuing a license, the City Clerk
shall send a copy of the license and the completed application to the State
Treasurer.  The license shall be displayed at the request of any police
officer, member of the public, regular/established customers, or the City
Clerk.



(Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed 3-26-07.)



872.04  HEALTH CARDS; FURNISHING OF INFORMATION TO POLICE.



   (a)   No street vendor's license shall be issued to an applicant who
proposes to sell food products if such applicant has not received from the
City Clerk or his or her authorized representative a health card which
substantiates that the bearer of the card has had a physical examination by a
reputable physician within six months of the application, has met all
requirements of the City and is a suitable person to carry such a card.



   (b)   Before such a license is issued, information shall be
furnished by the applicant to the Police Department as to the kinds,
condition, ownership and place of storage of the vehicle or vehicles he or
she will use in carrying on the business of street vendor, the nature and
scope of his or her business, the route or routes which he or she will follow
and such other similar information as may be deemed necessary to protect the
general welfare of the public.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.05  LICENSE FEES; EXEMPTION.



   No license fee shall be charged to a person, or for any vehicle which
he or she operates, for vending within the City on behalf of a nonprofit
organization or corporation.



(Ord. 236.  Passed 8-15-66; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.06  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to reasonable rules
and regulations of the departments of the City authorized to enforce this
chapter.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.07  TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.



   Every license issued under this chapter shall cover one person, vehicle
or means of conveyance, and a new license shall be obtained by the purchaser,
transferee or assignee of such equipment each time a licensed wagon, vehicle
or means of conveyance is sold, transferred or assigned and is again used in
a manner regulated by this chapter.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.08  LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (a)   Every license issued under this chapter shall be issued on the
express condition that such license shall be suspended or revoked in the
event of failure or refusal of the part of the licensee to comply with this
chapter, which suspension or revocation shall be made as provided in
subsection (b) hereof.



   (b)   No license shall be revoked except for cause upon proof of
charges, filed with the City Clerk or his or her authorized representative,
by a person in any of the departments of the City authorized to enforce this
chapter or to approve the issuance of a license, specifying with reasonable
detail any of the following facts, which facts are hereby declared to be
grounds for suspending a license issued under this chapter:



      (1)   That the licensee made one or more fraudulent statements
or misrepresentations or concealed material information in the application
for the license;



      (2)   That such licensee has violated or permitted a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter which injuriously affects the public
health, safety, morals or welfare;



      (3)   That any of the provisions of this chapter has been
violated in connection with operation for which the licensee was responsible
and of which the licensee was aware or, in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, should have been aware;



      (4)   That the licensee has been convicted of any crime which
was perpetrated on or in connection with the licensed vehicle or premises; or



      (5)   That the licensee has carried on or permitted to be
carried on any unlawful or illegal act on or in connection with such licensed
vehicle.



   (c)   Upon the filing of such charges, the person making such
charges shall notify the City Clerk and the City Clerk shall suspend the
license involved and shall give to such licensee a notice of such suspension
together with a copy of the charges specifying the facts on which the
suspension was made.  The notice shall either be by personal service upon
the licensee or by first class mail to the licensee's address on the
application.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.09  CONDUCT OF BUSINESS UNDER LICENSE SUSPENSION.



   No person shall conduct a business or activity or operate a vehicle for
which business, activity or vehicle a license is required under this chapter,
when such license has been suspended or revoked.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.10  INSPECTION OF LICENSED PREMISES AND VEHICLES.



   A person authorized to enforce this chapter, or any authorized
inspector from any department of the City whose approval must first be
obtained before a license is issued under this chapter, is hereby authorized
to inspect the premises and any and all vehicles and equipment, licensed or
governed by this chapter, at any reasonable hour of the day or night for the
purpose of enforcing this chapter or determining that any and all provisions
of ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the City pertinent thereto are
being complied with.  No person shall prevent or attempt to prevent anyone
so authorized from making an inspection provided in this section or interfere
with or attempt to interfere with such an inspection.



(Ord. 231. Passed 12-6-65; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.11  INVESTIGATION OF CRIMINAL RECORD.



   No license provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the City
Clerk or his or her authorized representative until the Chief of Police has
made a complete search of the criminal record, if any, and as allowed by law
of the licensee and has filed with the City Clerk in writing, the findings of
such search, accompanied by his or her written approval or disapproval of the
application of the licensee, based upon the findings of such search. No such
license shall be issued if, in the opinion of the Chief, the applicant for
such license is not a fit person to conduct business in the City. If such
application is not approved by the Chief, the application shall be denied and
the reasons shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk by the Chief.



(Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed 3-26-07.)



872.12  EXEMPTIONS.



   No license fee shall be charged to a person, or for any vehicle which
he or she operates, who proposes to sell produce raised by him or her; to a
mechanic selling articles made by him or her; or to a person operating as a
street vendor for a charitable purpose who has been honorably discharged as a
war veteran from the Armed Forces of the United States.  At the time that
any such person or mechanic claims such an exemption from a license fee, such
person or mechanic shall swear by affidavit, setting up facts which entitle
him or her to such exemption, and such affidavit shall be filed with the City
Clerk along with the application for the license.



(Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed 3-26-07.)



872.13  LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES.



   No person shall use a motor vehicle in the act of vending products on
the streets of the City unless such vehicle is equipped with and utilizes
simultaneously blinking amber warning lights, clearly visible from the front
and rear of the vehicle when the vehicle is stopped for the purpose of making
sales.



(Ord. 359. Passed 8-15-77; Ord. 748.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 796.  Passed
3-26-07.)



872.14  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (MDOT) PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (a)   The City of Howell hereby authorizes persons, firms and
corporations to sell or offer for sale or display or attempt to display for
sale goods, wares, produce, fruit, vegetables or merchandise upon any state
trunk line highway in the City so long as said person, firm, or corporation
has secured a permit for such activities from MDOT and the same comply with
the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 873 and Article 6 of Chapter 1240 of
the Howell City Code.



   (b)   The authorization, set forth above, shall remain in force and
effect so long as the permitted activities do not create an unsafe situation
and do not interfere with transportation along any state trunk line highway
in the City pursuant to Public Act 1 of 2005.



(Res. 05-12.  Passed 5-23-05; Ord. 796.  Passed 3-26-07.)



872.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 873
Transient Merchants



873.01   Definitions.



873.02   License; necessity.



873.03   License; contents of application, consent to service, deposit of
bond, fee, expiration.



873.04   Investigation of criminal record.



873.05   Deposit; subjection to claim, disposition of balance.



873.06   License; invalidation by exhaustion of deposit, revocation.



873.07   Transient merchant; evidence.



873.08   Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) permit required.



873.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Street vendors and peddlers - see B.R. & T. Ch. 872



873.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this act:



   (a)   "Transient merchant" means any person, firm, association, or
corporation engaging temporarily in a retail sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise, in any place in this City and who, for the purpose of conducting
business, occupies any lot, building, room, or structure of any kind.  The
term shall not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   A person selling goods, wares, or merchandise of any
description raised, produced or manufactured by the individual offering the
same for sale.



      (2)   A person soliciting orders by sample, brochure or sales
catalog for future delivery or making sales at residential premises pursuant
to an invitation issued by the owner or legal occupant of the premises.



      (3)   A person handling vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm
products at any established city market.



      (4)   A person operating a store or refreshment stand at a
resort or having a booth on or adjacent to the property owned or occupied by
him or her. This includes the sale of hot dogs, hamburgers, snow cones,
peanuts, chips and/or other non-alcoholic beverages or other similar products
as determined by the City Manager or his or her designee, from a
temporary/portable stand.  The sale of such products must comply with all
requirements of the Livingston County Health Department.



      (5)   A person operating a stand on any fairgrounds or City
park property.



      (6)   A person selling at an art fair or festival or similar
event at the invitation of the event's sponsor if all of the following
conditions are met:



         A.   The sponsor is a governmental entity or nonprofit
organization.



         B.   The person provides the sponsor with the person's
sales tax license number.



         C.   The sponsor provides a list of the event's vendors
and their sales tax license numbers to the City Clerk, the county treasurer
and the state treasurer.



   (b)   "Person" includes any individual, corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, or two or more persons having a joint or common
interest.



(Ord. 749.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



873.02  LICENSE; NECESSITY.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or
agent, to engage in business as a transient merchant in the City without
having first obtained a license in the manner provided.



   (b)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not give
permission for the transient merchant to conduct or set up business in the
City, Livingston County, or State of Michigan rights-of-ways within the
City.  A transient merchant must set up business on private property, with
the permission of the property owner, in an area zoned for the type of
activity in which the transient merchant is engaged, and shall otherwise
comply with all applicable requirements set out in Section 6.19 of the Howell
Zoning Code. Further, a transient merchant may set up business on any
sidewalk area in the Central Business District, as zoned, with permission of
the property owner who abuts the sidewalk area so affected. The transient
merchant must set up the area used for the business and leave no less than a
five foot pedestrian access as established by City ordinance.  The transient
merchant shall not block visibility at intersections or corners of streets
and must not pose any safety hazard to the public whatsoever.



   (c)   The area in which the transient merchant sets up business
shall not diminish or reduce the number of parking spaces so required, if
any, in the area or locale in which the transient merchant sets up business,
pursuant to the Howell City Zoning Code.



(Ord. 749.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



873.03  LICENSE; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION, CONSENT TO SERVICE, DEPOSIT OF
BOND, FEE, EXPIRATION.



   Any person desiring to engage in a business under this chapter shall
make and file with the City Clerk a written application stating the
applicant's name, residence, federal identification number, place where he or
she intends to do business, and kind of business.  The individual, primary
officer, managing member, managing partner or any employee or subcontractor
of the applicant must submit to an individual criminal and Michigan Secretary
of State background check pursuant to Section 872.11.  A copy of the
applicant's Michigan sales tax license shall be attached to the application,
except for an applicant selling only food for human consumption as defined in
section 4g of Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of 1933, being section 205.54g
of the Michigan Compiled Laws. If the applicant is acting as agent for
another person, the applicant shall cause to be filed with the City Clerk a
power of attorney appointing the City Clerk the agent of the principal on
whom service of process may be made in any suit commenced against the
principal.  The applicant shall at the same time deposit five hundred
dollars ($500.00) with the City Clerk, or file a surety company bond for that
amount.  The applicant shall also pay the City Clerk a one hundred dollars
($100.00) non-refundable application fee.  The City Clerk shall issue to the
applicant the license if satisfied that the business to be conducted by the
person is not intended to cheat or defraud the public, there is written
approval for issuance of the license by the Chief of Police and upon payment
of a fifty dollars ($50.00) non-refundable license fee. A license issued
under this section shall expire on the December thirty-first after its
issuance. Not more than ten days after issuing a license, the City Clerk
shall send a copy of the license and the completed application to the State
Treasurer.  The license shall be displayed in full view at the place of
business.



(Ord. 749.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



873.04  INVESTIGATION OF CRIMINAL RECORD.



   No license provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the City
Clerk until the Chief of Police has made a complete search of the criminal
record, if any, and as allowed by law of the licensee and has filed with the
City Clerk, in writing, the findings of such search, accompanied by his or
her written approval or disapproval of the application of the licensee, based
upon the findings of such search.  No such license shall be issued if, in
the opinion of the Chief, the applicant for such license is not a fit person
to conduct business in the City.  If such application is not approved by the
Chief, the application shall be denied and the reasons shall be submitted in
writing to the City Clerk by the Chief.



(Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



873.05  DEPOSIT; SUBJECTION TO CLAIMS, DISPOSITION OF BALANCE.



   Deposits made with the City Clerk as required by Section 873.03 shall
be subject to claims of creditors and claims for local license fees on behalf
of any city, village or township in all cases where a judgment has been
obtained against such transient merchant in any court in this state and the
time for appealing such judgment has expired. In such cases garnishment
proceedings may be commenced in such court against said City Clerk.  It
shall thereupon be the duty of the City Clerk to remit to any such court any
balance of said cash deposit remaining in his or her hands not exceeding the
amount of said judgment, for the purpose of satisfying the same. Any balance
of said cash deposit remaining in the hands of the City Clerk four (4) months
after the expiration of said license shall be remitted to such transient
merchant, provided if, at such date, the City Clerk shall have received
notice of any suit then pending against said transient merchant, said deposit
shall not be returned until sixty (60) days after the termination of such
suit.



(Ord. 749.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



873.06  LICENSE; INVALIDATION BY EXHAUSTION OF DEPOSIT, REVOCATION.



   Any such license shall be void as soon as the deposit made with the
City Clerk, as provided in Section 873.03, has been exhausted because of
garnishment suits as mentioned in the preceding section.  The City Clerk may
revoke any license issued by him or her for good cause shown, after giving
the licensee reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard.



(Ord. 749.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



873.07  TRANSIENT MERCHANT; EVIDENCE.



   Transaction of business as defined in Section 873.01 of this chapter by
any person for a period of less than six (6) months consecutively shall be
prima facie evidence that such person was a transient merchant within the
intent and meaning of this chapter.



(Ord. 749.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



873.08  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (MDOT) PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (a)   The City of Howell hereby authorizes persons, firms and
corporations to sell or offer for sale or display or attempt to display for
sale goods, wares, produce, fruit, vegetables or merchandise upon any state
trunk line highway in the City so long as said person, firm, or corporation
has secured a permit for such activities from MDOT and the same comply with
the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 872 and Article 6 of Chapter 1240 of
the Howell City Code.



   (b)   The authorization, set forth above, shall remain in force and
effect so long as the permitted activities do not create an unsafe situation
and do not interfere with transportation along any state trunk line highway
in the City pursuant to Public Act 1 of 2005.



(Res. 05-12.  Passed 5-23-05.)



873.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or 10% of the value of
any property impounded pursuant to this section, whichever amount is greater
and court costs. If a peace officer has probable cause to believe that a
person is engaging in a business as a transient merchant without having first
obtained a license in the manner provided for in this chapter, the peace
officer shall immediately take into custody and impound all goods offered for
sale by the transient merchant until the matter has been adjudicated by a
court of proper jurisdiction.



   (b)   Recovery of impounded goods; security.  The transient
merchant may obtain his or her impounded goods prior to adjudication by
paying, either in cash or by security bond, one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
an amount equal to the value of the impounded property, whichever amount is
greater.



   (c)   Sale of impounded goods; notice.  If the transient merchant
is convicted of violating this chapter and fails to pay the fine and court
costs provided in subsection (a) hereof within seven (7) days after the date
of conviction, the Howell City Police Department shall sell the impounded
goods by publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county at least five (5) days before the sale. The notice shall describe the
property and shall state the time and place of public sale at which the
impounded property may be purchased by the highest bidder.



   (d)   Conduct of sale; disposition of proceeds; liability.  The
Howell City Police Department shall conduct the sale and shall deposit from
the proceeds of the sale an amount equal to the fine and court costs provided
in subsection (a) hereof with the court in which the transient merchant was
convicted.  Any proceeds of the sale which exceed the fine shall first be
used to reimburse the Police Department for the Department's actual costs of
sale, with the remaining proceeds, if any, to be returned to the transient
merchant.  By disposing of the property in the manner provided in this
chapter, the Howell City Police Department shall not be liable to the
transient merchant for the sale.



(Ord. 749.  Passed 10-20-03; Ord. 797.  Passed 3-26-07.)



CHAPTER 876
Taxicabs



876.01   Taxicab defined.



876.02   License required.



876.03   License application.



876.04   Limitation on number of taxicabs.



876.05   License issuance, term and fee; mechanical condition of vehicles;
insurance.



876.06   Garageman's certificate.



876.07   Transferability of licenses.



876.08   Taxicab stands.



876.09   Rates.



876.10   Cancellation of licenses.



876.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Carrying passengers; locking of doors - see M.C.L. Secs. 256.531,
256.532



   Application for registration of taxicabs - see M.C.L. Sec. 257.217



   Discrimination - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.146, 750.147



   Uniform Traffic Code - see TRAF. Ch. 410



   Commercial and heavy vehicles - see TRAF. Ch. 420



876.01  TAXICAB DEFINED.



   As used in this chapter, "taxicab" means a motor vehicle used and
driven for hire and engaged in the transportation of passengers for hire in
the City.



(Ord. 118.  Passed 5-6-46.)



876.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab upon the
streets of the City without first obtaining a license therefor from Council
for each of such taxicabs, as herein provided.



(Ord. 118. Passed 5-6-46.)



876.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (a)   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made in
writing and filed with the City Manager or his or her authorized
representative.  Such application shall give the following information:



      (1)   The applicant's name;



      (2)   The applicant's age and address;



      (3)   The applicant's marital status;



      (4)   The make, ownership, engine number, license number and
seating capacity of the automobile or automobiles to be used in the business;
and



      (5)   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
violation of any law of the State or ordinance of the City in the five years
preceding the date of such application.



   (b)   Applications filed with the Manager or his or her
representative under this chapter shall be referred to Council at its regular
meeting.



876.04  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF TAXICABS.



   Council may limit the number of taxicabs licensed to operate in the
City to such a number as is deemed by it to be in the interest of public
safety and welfare. Council may refuse to issue a license when in its opinion
the number of taxicabs already licensed is sufficient for the public safety
and welfare.



(Ord. 118. Passed 5-6-46.)



876.05  LICENSE ISSUANCE, TERM AND FEE; MECHANICAL CONDITION OF VEHICLES;
INSURANCE.



   (a)   Upon approval by Council of an application filed under this
chapter, a license shall be issued to the applicant by the City Manager or
his or her authorized representative, covering the automobile or automobiles
in question, which license shall be effective for a period of one year from
the date of issuance.



   (b)   Before the issuance and delivery of such license, the
applicant shall furnish the Manager or his or her representative with the
following:



      (1)   Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each motor vehicle
licensed;



      (2)   A written statement from a competent garage in the City
that the vehicle or vehicles are in good mechanical order and equipped with
safe tires.



   (c)   Each and every taxicab licensed under this chapter shall have
in full force and effect at all times an insurance policy covering personal
injury and property damage in no less than the following amounts: one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) for each person; three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000) for each accident; and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for
property damage. Duplicate copies of all such insurance policies shall be
submitted to the Manager or his or her representative along with
certification that all premiums have been paid. Failure to comply with this
subsection shall cause an automatic revocation of such license. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation of
this subsection occurs or continues.



876.06  GARAGEMAN'S CERTIFICATE.



   Six months after the issuance of a license under this chapter, the
licensee shall furnish a new garageman's certificate, to comply with Section
876.05(b)(2). Failure to do so shall result in suspension of the license
until such certificate is furnished.



(Ord. 118.  Passed 5-6-46.)



876.07  TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.



   The holder of any license issued under this chapter may substitute one
automobile for another with the written consent of the City Manager or his or
her authorized representative and upon compliance with the provisions of
Section 876.05(b)(2) and (c).



876.08  TAXICAB STANDS.



   Council may, by resolution, locate and designate public taxicab stands.



(Ord. 118.  Passed 5-6-46.)



876.09  RATES.



   Council may, by resolution, determine and fix rates which all licensees
operating under this chapter shall charge for services. Having fixed such
rates by resolution, notice thereof shall immediately be given by the City
Manager or his or her authorized representative to all licensees.



876.10  CANCELLATION OF LICENSES.



   Council may, after a hearing and after notice to any licensee, cancel
any license issued under this chapter under the following circumstances:



   (a)   When the licensee is found to have been violating any of the
provisions of this chapter;



   (b)   When the licensee has been found to make charges other than
those determined and fixed by Council by resolution under the provisions of
this chapter; or



   (c)   When such cancellation is found to be in the interest of the
public welfare and safety. In the event of cancellation, refund shall be made
of the unused prorated portion of the license fee.



(Ord. 128. Passed 3-24-49.)



876.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



TITLE FOUR - Taxation



CHAPTER 890
General Regulations



890.01   Tax day.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 12



   Special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 14; B.R. & T. Ch. 892



   Real estate transfer; documentary stamp tax - see M.C.L. Secs. 207.501
et seq.



   Municipal tax rates - see M.C.L. Secs. 211.107a, 211.203



890.01  TAX DAY.



   (a)   In the year 1950 and each year thereafter, December 31 shall
be the tax day in the City. The taxable status of persons and real and
personal property shall be determined as of the tax day.



   (b)   In the year 1950 and each year thereafter, the City Assessor
shall, on or before the first Monday in March, make and complete the
assessment roll.



   (c)   In the year 1950 and each year thereafter, as provided in
Section 1210(b)of the City Charter, the Board of Review shall meet in the
Council Chambers for the purpose of reviewing and correcting the assessment
roll of the City. The review of assessments shall be completed on or before
the first Monday of April.



   (d)   This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the
General Property Tax Act as last amended by Act 285 of the Public Acts of
1949, as amended, which amendment authorizes such changes in the making,
completing and reviewing of the assessment roll as are herein made, any
provision of the City Charter to the contrary notwithstanding.



CHAPTER 892
Special Assessments



892.01   Application of chapter.



892.02   Authority of Council.



892.03   Petitions for improvement; forms; consideration by Council.



892.04   Investigation of petition; cost estimates.



892.05   Determination of necessity of improvement; additional cost
estimate.



892.06   Action prohibited prior to resolution.



892.07   Contents of resolution.



892.08   Preparation of special assessment roll.



892.09   Notice of proposed assessment; hearings; objections.



892.10   Conduct of hearing; alteration and confirmation of roll.



892.11   Payment schedule.



892.12   Assessment as lien.



892.13   Collection fees.



892.14   Placement on City tax roll; collection; delinquency.



892.15   Partial payment prior to work.



892.16   Segregation of moneys.



892.17   Refunds.



892.18   Additional assessments.



892.19   Reassessments.



892.20   Assessments for hazards or nuisances.



892.21   Bonds.



892.22   Responsibility for costs.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Assessor - see CHTR. Sec. 7.6



   Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 12



   Special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 14



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



   Brownfield Redevelopment Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 899



   Subdivision improvements - see P. & Z. Ch. 1228



892.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   When, by the provisions of the City Charter, the whole or any part of
the cost of any public improvement is to be defrayed by a special assessment
upon the property especially benefited, such assessment shall be made as
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.02  AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL.



   Council may initiate proceedings for any other public improvement,
other than those for which petitions have been filed, whether the cost
thereof is to be defrayed from the general funds of the City or by special
assessments upon the property especially benefited.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.03  PETITIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT; FORMS; CONSIDERATION BY COUNCIL.



   A petition for making a public improvement, any part of the expense of
which will be borne by special assessments, shall be filed with the City
Clerk. Such a petition shall be upon a form furnished by the City. Council,
by resolution, shall prescribe the form of petition to be used. No petition
need be considered by Council unless the same has been signed by the owners
of at least sixty percent of the lands subject to be assessed for the cost of
the proposed public improvement. All petitions filed in accordance with this
chapter during any calendar year shall be considered by Council not later
than January 31 of the next calendar year.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.04  INVESTIGATION OF PETITION; COST ESTIMATES.



   (a)   Upon receipt of a petition requesting a public improvement or
repairs, filed in accordance with Section 892.03, the City Manager shall
investigate the petition. If the Manager finds that the same is in accordance
with this chapter, he or she shall thereupon prepare a cost estimate and
submit the same to Council together with the petition. The cost estimate
shall include the cost of doing the work, engineering and legal fees, land
acquisition if any, advertising fees and any other expenses incidental
thereto.



   (b)   When Council initiates proceedings for a public improvement,
it shall, as a preliminary, direct the Manager to prepare the cost estimate.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.05  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY OF IMPROVEMENT; ADDITIONAL COST ESTIMATE.



   After Council has received the cost estimate provided for in Section
892.04, it shall then determine the necessity of the proposed public
improvement. Before ordering the public improvement to be made, Council shall
cause to be prepared necessary profiles, plans and specifications. The same,
when completed, shall be filed with the Clerk and a further cost estimate
shall be prepared by the City Manager.



892.06  ACTION PROHIBITED PRIOR TO RESOLUTION.



   No contract or expenditure, except for the necessary procedures of
Council and for preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications and
estimates of cost, shall be made for a public improvement, the cost of which
is to be paid in whole or in part by special assessments upon the property
especially benefited thereby, until Council has passed a resolution
determining to proceed with such public improvement.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.07  CONTENTS OF RESOLUTION.



   Upon the filing and consideration of the profiles, plans,
specifications and additional cost estimate provided for in Section 892.05,
Council may then by resolution determine to proceed with the proposed public
improvement. The resolution shall declare what portion of the costs and
expenses shall be assessed against the property to be especially benefited;
specify the sum to be so assessed; specify the boundaries of the property
deemed to be especially benefited; specify whether such special assessment
shall be made according to benefits based on frontage, area or otherwise; and
direct the City Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance
with the resolution.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.08  PREPARATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   The City Assessor shall prepare the special assessment roll and return
the same to Council within thirty days following the passage of the
resolution of Council referred to in Section 892.07. Upon the assessment roll
the Assessor shall enter and describe all the lots, premises and parcels of
land to be assessed, with the names of the persons, if known, who are the
owners thereof and the amount to be assessed against each lot, premises and
parcel in the manner directed by Council and this chapter. The Assessor shall
certify the assessment roll at the time he or she reports and returns the
same to Council. The certification of the Assessor to be endorsed on the
assessment roll may be in the following form:



   STATE OF MICHIGAN      )



                  )) SS



   COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON      )



   I do hereby certify and report that the foregoing is the special
assessment roll and the assessment made by me pursuant to a resolution of
Council of the City of Howell, Michigan, adopted (give date)      , for
the purpose of paying that part of the cost which Council has resolved should
be paid and borne by special assessment (here insert the object of the
assessment)    ; that in making such assessments I have, as near as may be,
and according to my best judgment, conformed to the directions contained in
the resolution of Council hereinbefore referred to, the Charter and the
ordinances of the City relating to such assessments.



Dated                                 



                     City Assessor



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.09  NOTICE OF PROPOSED ASSESSMENT; HEARINGS; OBJECTIONS.



   When a special assessment roll is reported and returned by the City
Assessor to Council, the same shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk
and numbered. Before confirming a special assessment roll, Council shall give
notice to all persons interested by publishing, in a newspaper published and
circulated in the City, once in each week for two weeks in succession, a
notice stating the lots, premises and parcels of land assessed, the names of
the persons, if known, who are the owners thereof, the purpose of the
assessment and the amount thereof. Such notice shall also state the time and
place at which Council shall meet for the purpose of reviewing the assessment
roll and hearing any person so assessed who considers himself or herself
aggrieved thereby. At least ten days prior to the date of the hearing by
Council, the Clerk shall notify the owners of the lots, premises and parcels
of land assessed, by first class mail, so far as the same are known and as
shown on the tax rolls of the City. A person objecting to his or her
assessment may file his or her objections thereto in writing with the Clerk.



(Ord. 209.  Passed 12-10-62.)



892.10  CONDUCT OF HEARING; ALTERATION AND CONFIRMATION OF ROLL.



   At the time and place designated in the notice provided for in Section
892.09, Council and the City Assessor shall meet and hear all persons
interested in such assessments and consider all objections as filed with the
City Clerk. At such time and place, Council shall review the assessment roll
and may alter, change or correct the same if necessary and confirm it as
reported and returned or as altered, changed and corrected. Otherwise,
Council may refer the assessment roll back to the Assessor for revision or
annul it and direct a new assessment, in which case the same proceedings
shall be had as in the case of original assessment. However, in altering,
changing or correcting the roll, Council shall not add any lands not included
in the notice of the original assessment. Further, Council may adjourn and
continue such hearing from time to time. When the special assessment roll has
been confirmed by Council, the Clerk shall endorse a certificate thereof upon
the roll showing the date of confirmation.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.11  PAYMENT SCHEDULE.



   At the time of confirmation of a special assessment roll, Council
shall, in its resolution, state the number of installments in which the
assessment is to be paid, the due date of the first and subsequent
installments and the rate of interest to be charged on unpaid installments,
which rate shall not exceed twelve percent per year. However, the whole
assessment, after confirmation, may be paid to the City Treasurer at any time
in full with accrued interest thereon.



892.12  ASSESSMENT AS LIEN.



   Upon the date of the confirmation of a special assessment roll, the
special assessments thereon shall become a debt due to the City from the
persons to whom they are assessed and shall, until paid, be a lien upon the
property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and
charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as that
which is created by the City Charter for City taxes.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.13  COLLECTION FEES.



   Each special assessment, or each installment of such an assessment when
installment payments are provided for, shall be collected by the City
Treasurer without a collection fee for a period ending on the last day of the
first month following each such due date. Thereafter, the City Treasurer
shall add to the assessment or installment a collection fee of one-half of
one percent for each month or fraction thereof which elapses following the
first month, until the payment of such assessment or installment. All such
collection fees shall belong to the City and be collectible in the same
manner as the collection fees or collection charges for City taxes as
provided in Section 12.21 of the City Charter.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.14  PLACEMENT ON CITY TAX ROLL; COLLECTION; DELINQUENCY.



   (a)   Each special assessment, or each installment of such an
assessment when installment payments are provided for, with accrued interest
thereon, if any, which becomes due on July 1 of a given year, shall be placed
on the tax roll of the City for that year in a column for special
assessments, and thereupon the amount so levied in the tax roll shall be
collected in all respects as are City taxes due on July 1 of that year and
shall be subject to the same fees and charges as are City taxes due on that
date. If uncollected by the following February 20, such amount shall be
returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes, as provided in Section
12.21 of the City Charter.



   (b)   Each special assessment or installment which becomes due other
than on July 1 of a given year shall, if unpaid for ninety days after March 1
of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the assessment or
installment was due, be certified as delinquent to Council by the City
Treasurer. Council shall order such delinquent assessment or installment to
be placed on the tax roll of the City for that year, together with accrued
interest and accrued collection fees in a column for special assessments.
Thereafter, the total amount of such assessment or installment, with interest
and fees, shall be collected in all respects as are City taxes due on July 1
of that year, and such total amount shall be subject to the same fees and
charges as are City taxes due on that date. If uncollected by the following
February 20, such amount shall be returned to the County Treasurer with
unpaid taxes, as provided in Section 12.21 of the City Charter.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.15  PARTIAL PAYMENT PRIOR TO WORK.



   Council, at its discretion, need not proceed with the performance of
the public improvement or repair, the cost of which is to be defrayed in
whole or in part by a special assessment, until twenty-five percent of the
total assessment has been paid into the City Treasury.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.16  SEGREGATION OF MONEYS.



   Except as otherwise provided in the City Charter or by law, moneys
raised by special assessment for a public improvement shall be segregated in
a special fund or account and may be used only to pay for the costs of the
improvement for which the assessment was levied, together with the expenses
incidental thereto, and to repay any money borrowed or advanced therefor,
together with interest which has accrued thereon.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.17  REFUNDS.



   If a special assessment proves greater than the actual cost of the
improvement and the expenses incidental thereto, such excess may be placed in
the General Fund of the City if such excess is five percent or less of the
assessment. Should the assessment prove greater than necessary by more than
five percent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the
then owners of the property assessed. Such refund may be made by credit
against future unpaid installments, to the extent that such installments then
exist, and the balance of the refund shall be in cash. No refund shall be
made which contravenes the provisions of any evidence of outstanding
indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.18  ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS.



   If a special assessment proves to be more than five percent less than
the actual cost of the improvement and the expenses incidental thereto,
Council may order the City Assessor to make an additional pro rata assessment
to cover the deficiency. The additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed
twenty-five percent of the assessment, as originally confirmed, unless a
meeting of Council is held to review such additional assessment. Notice of
any such meeting shall be published and all proceedings taken thereon shall
be in accordance with this chapter as it applies to an original assessment.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.19  REASSESSMENTS.



   Whenever, in the opinion of Council, a special assessment is invalid or
defective by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if
a court of competent jurisdiction adjudges such assessment to be illegal in
whole or in part, Council may, whether or not the improvement has been made
or any part of the assessments has been paid, cause a new assessment to be
made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All
proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be
conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, except
that it shall not again be necessary to prepare plans and estimates of cost,
redetermine the necessity of the improvement or hold a hearing thereon,
unless and to the extent that the cause of irregularity arose in such
proceedings. Whenever a sum or part thereof, levied upon any property for the
assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made
shall be applied toward the reassessment, or if the payment exceeds the
amount of the reassessment, a refund shall be made to the person making such
payment. No judgment or decree, or any act of Council, vacating a special
assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the City upon the premises
assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged
against the same had such charge been lawfully assessed thereupon in
accordance with the procedure established or authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.20  ASSESSMENTS FOR HAZARDS OR NUISANCES.



   The assessment for the cost of the abatement of a hazard or nuisance,
to be made pursuant to Section 3.2(1) of the City Charter, shall be made by
resolution of Council. Notice of the time at which Council will act thereon
shall be given, by publication in a newspaper published and circulating in
the City, once in each week for two weeks in succession, and sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners of the property
constituting or creating such nuisance or hazard, as shown on the last tax
roll of the City. Failure of any such owner to receive such notice shall not
invalidate any such assessment. For the purposes of collection of such
assessment, the adoption of such resolution shall be equivalent to the
confirmation of a special assessment roll. The amount of such assessment
shall become a debt due the City upon the adoption of such resolution, shall
be payable and subject to collection fees and shall be a lien and be
collectible as provided in Sections 892.12, 892.13 and 892.14. This section
shall not apply to those cases falling within the provisions of Section 14.4
of the City Charter.



892.21  BONDS.



   If the payment of a special assessment is divided into installments, as
provided in this chapter, Council may authorize and direct the Mayor and City
Treasurer to issue, in accordance with law, and negotiate at not less than
par, on behalf of the City, bonds bearing not more than twelve percent annual
interest, for the aggregate amount of such special assessment. The maturity
of such bonds shall in all cases correspond substantially in time and amount
to the payment of the assessments for the public improvement for which the
bonds are issued. The proceeds received from the sale of the bonds shall be
deposited with the City Treasurer and disbursed by him or her, on the order
of Council, in payment of the cost and expense of the public improvement for
which they were issued. Such proceeds shall be used for no other purpose. The
proceeds of the extended special assessment, when collected, shall be used
for the payment of such bonds and for no other purpose.



(Ord. 158. Passed 7-2-56.)



892.22  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.



   The policies set forth in this section are established for public
improvements in the City. Such policies will cover projects undertaken in
already-developed areas of the City. It is anticipated that all costs for
public improvements in new development areas will be covered by the developer.



   (a)   Sidewalks.  (EDITOR'S NOTE:  This subsection was repealed by
Ordinance 572, passed February 8, 1993.  See Section 1022.055.)



   (b)   Local street construction.  Upon the receipt of a petition
for the making of a public improvement for local street construction, and
upon the granting of the same, the costs for local street construction will
be borne by the City.



   (c)   Major Street Construction.  Upon the receipt of a petition
for the making of a public improvement for major street construction, and
upon the granting of the same, the costs for major street construction will
be borne by the City.



(Ord. 683.  Passed 9-14-98; Ord. 718. Passed 6-4-01.)



   (d)   Storm Sewer Construction. The City will cover fifty percent of
the cost of storm sewer construction projects. Major drainage area outlet and
retention area work will be fully funded by the City.



   (e)   Sewer and Water Extensions to Previously Developed Property.
For extensions of water and sewer service into areas of the City that were
previously developed, the City will cover thirty-four percent of the cost. In
addition to picking up sixty-six percent of the extension costs, property
owners will pay the appropriate capital charges and tap-in fees. Property
owners may spread the cost of their portion of the work on the tax rolls at
the same interest rate as on any bonds issued by the City for the project or
at any other rate and schedule established by the City Council.



   (f)   Corner Lot Assessment Procedure . In recognition of the added
burden on corner lot owners and realizing that the majority of property
owners do not pay for assessments based on side yard footage (front footage
only), the following procedure will be used to assess costs to corner lot
owners. When work is done and assessed on the shortest side of the property
it will be assessed in the normal procedure based on the footage in the
project area.



      When work is done and assessed on the longest side of the
property, it will be assessed based on the following formula for determining
front footage:



      Assessment Footage - One-half of seventy-five percent of the sum
of the footage of the two sides of the property fronting on the streets.



      Example:




Click here to view image




      (1)   When Street X is reconstructed, assessment to property
owner will be based on 66' since this is the shortest side.



      (2)   When Street Y is reconstructed, assessment to property
owner will be based on the corner lot assessment formula since this is the
longest side.



      Assessment Footage = 1/2 x .75 (66 + 132) = 148.5 = 74.25'



                         2



      (Res. 90-17. Passed 4-9-90.)



   (g)   Local and Major Street Construction Undertaken by City.  All
local street construction and major street construction undertaken by the
City will be paid for from the General Fund of the City, or on bonds that may
be issued by the City for any local or major street construction project, as
the same may be determined by Council.



      (Res. 91-28.  Passed 9-9-91.)



   (h)   Driveway Approaches and Driveway Aprons.  If the City
undertakes any local street or major street construction or reconstruction in
which curb and gutter is installed, then, as to the cost of driveway
approaches and driveway aprons, the cost to the City and the property owner
and the method of payment thereon by the property owner, shall be determined
as set forth in the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 683.  Passed 9-14-98.)



CHAPTER 894
Real Estate Tax



894.01   Administration fee; late charge.



894.02   Poverty exemption guidelines.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 12



   Special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 14; B.R. & T. Ch. 892



   Real estate transfer; documentary stamp tax - see M.C.L. Secs. 207.501
et seq.



   Municipal tax rates - see M.C.L. Secs. 211.107a, 211.203



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



   Local Development Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 898



   Brownfield Redevelopment Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 899



894.01  ADMINISTRATION FEE; LATE CHARGE.



   (a)   The City Treasurer shall add a one percent charge, as a
property tax administration fee, on all taxes, except City taxes, that become
a lien in 1983 and all succeeding years thereafter.



   (b)   The City Treasurer shall add a late penalty charge, equal to
three percent of such tax, upon all taxes paid after February 14 and before
March 1, in addition to the one percent administration fee to the extent
imposed on taxes paid before February 15.



   (c)   The late penalty charge shall be waived by the City for the
homestead property of a senior citizen, paraplegic, quadriplegic, eligible
serviceman, eligible veteran, eligible widow, totally and permanently
disabled person, blind person, or a person who seeks a poverty tax exemption,
as those persons are defined in Chapter 9 of Act No. 281 of the Public Acts
of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L. 206.501 to 206.532, if the person makes a
claim before February 15 for a credit for that property provided by Chapter 9
of Act No. 281 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, if he or she presents
a copy of the form filed for that credit to the Treasurer, and if he or she
has not received the credit before February 15.



(Res. 95-15.  Passed 4-17-95.)



894.02  POVERTY EXEMPTION GUIDELINES.



   (a)   The following shall be the guidelines for the poverty
exemption pursuant to Act 390 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended.  The
City Assessor is hereby charged with setting forth the guidelines found
herein on a separate document and compiling all information relative to
ascertaining a poverty exemption for any taxpayer who qualifies under these
guidelines.  The guidelines are as follows:



      (1)   The applicant may appeal personally by appointment, in
writing or through an agent authorized in writing by the property owner.



      (2)   The applicant shall complete the poverty exemption
application form in advance of the hearing date, including a copy of the
current or prior year Income Tax Returns, both Federal and Michigan, for all
persons residing in the homestead.  This must include the MI 1040 CR showing
the Homestead Property Tax Credit.  Any additional information to be
presented to the Board must be in writing and attached to the application.



      (3)   All applications must be received at the Assessor's
office one full business day prior to the final published session of the
Board of Review.



      (4)   All applications shall be processed by the Assessor's
office to calculate the percentages of household income consumed by property
taxes.  A hardship situation does not exist when property taxes do not
exceed five percent of the total household income.



      (5)   The Board of Review may require a driver's license,
deed, or any form of documentation necessary for verification.



      (6)   An explanation will be required for all household
members over the age of eighteen who are not cited as contributing to the
household income.



      (7)   The property being applied for must be the applicant's
homestead.  The property of a corporation is not eligible for this exemption.



      (8)   Household income may not exceed the poverty level
established annually by the H.U.D. for Livingston County, MI H.U.D. Metro FMR
Area (Extremely Low Category).



      (9)   Poverty exemptions are also limited by:



         A.   A property true cash value equal to or less than
$137,300 (SEV $68,600) for tax year 2009.  In each subsequent year, this
value will be indexed by the average increase/decrease for the residential
class of property as established for equalization purposes.



         B.   One vehicle used for personal transportation and
titled to a member of the household having a value equal to or less than
$15,000.



         C.   Cash on hand, checking/savings not to exceed
twenty-five percent of total household income.



         D.   Non-cash assets for the household shall not exceed
thirty-five percent of the true cash value of the applicant's homestead. 
Non-cash assets do not include the homestead property, household personal
property (clothing, furniture, appliances) or one vehicle as provided above.



      (10)   The Board of Review shall follow these guidelines in
granting or denying an exemption unless the Board of Review determines there
are substantial and compelling reasons why there should be a deviation from
the guidelines.  The substantial and compelling reasons must be noted in
writing and made a part of the official minutes of the meeting in which the
granting/denying of the exemption was voted on.



   (b)   Poverty exemptions are granted for one year only.  Under no
circumstances will a poverty exemption continue for a subsequent year without
a completed and updated application.



(Res. 97-02.  Passed 3-13-97; Res. 09-01.  Passed 1-12-09.)



CHAPTER 896
Tax Increment Finance Authority



896.01   Definitions.



896.02   Determination of necessity.



896.03   Establishment; powers.



896.04   Tax Increment Finance Districts and plans.



896.05   Board of Directors.



896.06   Fiscal year; budget; financial reports.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 12



   Special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 14; B.R. & T. Ch. 892



   Public improvements - see CHTR. Secs. 14.2, 14.3



   Real estate tax - see B.R. & T. Ch. 894



   Local Development Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 898



   Brownfield Redevelopment Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 899



896.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings given to
them in Act 450, Public Acts of Michigan, 1980, unless the context clearly
indicates to the contrary. In addition, as used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Authority" means the Tax Increment Finance Authority of the
City.



   (b)   "Board of Directors" means the Board of Directors of the
Authority, the governing body of the Authority.



   (c)   "Chief Executive Officer" means the Mayor of the City.



(Res. 85-19. Passed 7-8-85.)



   (d)   "District" means a Tax Increment Finance District created
pursuant to Section 896.04.



896.02  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.



   Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests
of the City to halt a decline in property values, to increase property tax
valuation, to eliminate the cause of the decline in property values and to
promote growth within the Tax Increment Finance District by establishing the
Tax Increment Finance Authority pursuant to Act 450, Public Acts of Michigan,
1980. (Res. 85-19. Passed 7-8-85.)



896.03  ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS.



   There is hereby established, pursuant to Act 450, Public Acts of
Michigan, 1980, a Tax Increment Finance Authority for the City. The Authority
shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers
under the title of Tax Increment Finance Authority of the City of Howell. The
Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this State
and shall possess all of the powers provided by law, including all powers
necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this
chapter and Act 450, subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein.
The enumeration of a power in this chapter or in Act 450 shall not be
construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the Authority.



(Res. 85-19. Passed 7-8-85.)



896.04  TAX INCREMENT FINANCE DISTRICTS AND PLANS.



   The Tax Increment Finance Authority will, from time to time by
resolution, create districts and establish finance plans for those districts.
The resolutions will be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.



896.05  BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   The Tax Increment Finance Authority shall be under the supervision and
control of a Board of Directors consisting of nine members. The members shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by Council, and shall hold
office for a term of four years. Of the members first appointed, two members
shall hold office for one year, two members for two years, two members for
three years and three members for four years. All members shall hold office
until the member's successor is appointed.



(Res. 85-19. Passed 7-8-85.)



896.06  FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET; FINANCIAL REPORTS.



   (a)   The fiscal year of the Tax Increment Finance Authority shall
begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, unless
another fiscal year is hereafter adopted by the City.



   (b)   The Board of Directors shall annually prepare a budget and
shall submit it to Council on the same date that the proposed budget for the
City is required by the City Charter to be submitted to Council. The Board
shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has
been approved by Council. The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget
in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed
by revenue bonds where required to do so by the resolution authorizing the
revenue bonds.



   (c)   The Authority shall submit financial reports to Council at the
same time and on the same basis as departments of the City are required to
submit reports. The Authority shall be audited annually by the same
independent auditors auditing the City and copies of the audit report shall
be filed with Council.



(Res. 85-19. Passed 7-8-85.)



CHAPTER 898
Local Development Finance Authority



EDITOR’S NOTE: Resolution 98-12, passed April 13, 1998, approved Bylaws
governing the activities of the Local Development Finance Authority and the
Board of Directors.  Resolution 98-14, passed May 11, 1998, approved a
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan prepared and recommended by
the Authority.  Copies of these resolutions and of the Bylaws and Plan may
be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.



898.01   Determination of necessity; purpose.



898.02   Definitions.



898.03   Creation of authority.



898.04   Termination.



898.05   Description of authority district.



898.06   Board of directors.



898.07   Powers.



898.08   Fiscal year; adoption of budget.



898.09   Publication, recording and filing.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 12



   Special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 14; B.R. & T. Ch. 892



   Real estate tax - see B.R. & T. Ch. 894



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



   Brownfield Redevelopment Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 899



898.01  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY; PURPOSE.



   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best
interests of the public to create a public body corporate which shall operate
to eliminate the causes of unemployment, underemployment and joblessness and
to promote economic growth in the City, pursuant to Act 281.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as given to
them in Act 281 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context
clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Act 281" means Act No. 281 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1986, as amended.



   (b)   "Authority" means the Local Development Finance Authority of
the City of Howell created by this chapter.



   (c)   "Authority District" means the Authority District designated
by this chapter as now existing or hereafter amended, and within which the
Authority shall exercise its powers.



   (d)   "Board" or "Board of Directors" means the Board of Directors
of the Authority, the governing body of the Authority.



   (e)   "Chief Executive Officer" means the Mayor of the City.



   (f)   "City" means the City of Howell, Michigan.



   (g)   "Council" or "City Council" means the City Council of the City.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.03  CREATION OF AUTHORITY.



   There is hereby created pursuant to Act 281 a Local Development Finance
Authority for the City. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and
shall be known and exercise its powers under title of the "LOCAL DEVELOPMENT
FINANCE AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF HOWELL". The Authority may adopt a seal, may
sue and be sued in any court of this State and shall possess all of the
powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by
this chapter and Act 281. The enumeration of a power in this chapter or in
Act 281 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the
Authority.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.04  TERMINATION.



   Upon completion of its purposes, the Authority may be dissolved by the
Council. The property and assets of the Authority, after dissolution and
satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the City.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.05  DESCRIPTION OF AUTHORITY DISTRICT.



   The Authority District shall consist of the territory in the City
described in Exhibit A, attached to original Resolution 98-07, passed March
30, 1998, and made a part hereof, subject to such changes as may hereinafter
be made pursuant to this resolution and Act 281.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.06  BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of the Board.
The Board shall consist of ten board members, seven of whom shall be
appointed by the Chief Executive Officer, subject to approval by the Council,
one of whom shall be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners for the
County of Livingston, two of whom shall be appointed by the chief executive
officer of the local school district. Members shall be appointed to serve for
a term of four years, except that of the members first appointed, an equal
number, as near as is practicable, shall be appointed for terms of one year,
two years, three years, and four years. A member shall hold office until the
member's successor is appointed and qualified. Before assuming the duties of
office, a member shall qualify by taking and subscribing to the
constitutional oath of office. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made
in the same manner as the original appointment but for the unexpired term
only. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The Chairperson of the Board
shall be elected by the Board. The Board shall adopt Bylaws governing its
procedures subject to the approval of the Council. In the event that the
Board determines to employ a Director of the Authority, such Director shall
furnish a bond in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) payable
to the Authority for the use and benefit of the Authority and shall file the
same with the City Clerk of the City.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.07  POWERS.



   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter, the
Authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations
imposed by law and herein.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.08  FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (a)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on July 1st of
each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year
as may hereafter be adopted by the Council.



   (b)   The Board shall prepare annually a budget and shall submit it
to the Council for approval in the manner and at the time, and which budget
shall contain the information, and be prepared in the manner, required of
Municipal departments. The Board shall not finally adopt a budget for any
fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the Council. The Board may,
however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any
improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do
so by the resolution authorizing the revenue bonds.



   (c)   The Authority shall submit financial reports to the Council at
the same time and on the same basis as departments of the City are required
to submit reports. The Authority shall be audited annually by the same
independent auditors auditing the City and copies of the audit report shall
be filed with the Council.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



898.09  PUBLICATION, RECORDING AND FILING.



   This chapter shall be published once after its adoption in full in the
Livingston County Press, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of
Howell, and the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of the chapter with
the Michigan Secretary of State promptly after its adoption.



(Res. 98-07.  Passed 3-30-98.)



CHAPTER 899
Brownfield Redevelopment Authority



899.01   Authority established.



899.02   Authority Board.



899.03   Powers and duties of the Authority.



899.04   Boundaries.



899.05   Rules of the Authority Board.



899.06   By-laws of the Authority.



899.07   Director’s bond.



899.08   Fiscal year; adoption of budget.



899.09   Chapter filed with Secretary of State.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Brownfield Redevelopment Financing Act - see M.C.L.A. 125.2651 et seq.



   Taxation - see CHTR. Ch. 12



   Hazardous material spills - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 620



   Special assessments - see CHTR. Ch. 14; B.R. & T. Ch. 892



   Real estate tax - see B.R. & T. Ch. 894



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



   Local Development Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 898



   Discharge of hazardous materials to sewers - see S.U. & P.S. 1043.02(d)



   Radioactive materials - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



899.01  AUTHORITY ESTABLISHED.



   Pursuant to the provisions of Act 381, the Brownfield Redevelopment
Authority of the City of Howell (the “Authority”) is hereby established.



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.02  AUTHORITY BOARD.



   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board
(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “Authority Board”) to be
comprised of seven members appointed by the Mayor of the City subject to the
approval of City Council.  Of the initial members appointed, three members
shall be appointed for one-year terms of office, two members shall be
appointed for two-year terms of office and two members shall be appointed for
three-year terms of office.  A member shall hold office until the member’s
successor is appointed and qualified.  Thereafter, each member shall serve
for a term of three years.  Each member of the Authority Board shall qualify
by taking and subscribing to the oath of office provided in Section I of
Article XI of the Michigan Constitution of 1963.  An appointment to fill a
vacancy on the Authority Board shall be made by the Mayor for the unexpired
term only.  Members of the Authority Board shall serve without compensation,
but shall be reimbursed for reasonable actual and necessary expenses. 



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE AUTHORITY.



   The Authority shall have the powers as are now or may hereafter be
conferred on authorities established pursuant to Act. 381. 



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.04  BOUNDARIES.



   The Authority shall exercise its powers over any eligible property, as
defined in Act 381, located in the City. 



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.05  RULES OF THE AUTHORITY BOARD.



   The Authority Board shall adopt rules governing its procedures and the
holdings of its regular meetings, subject to the approval of the City
Council.  Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in
the rules of the Authority Board. 



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.06  BY-LAWS OF THE AUTHORITY BOARD.



   The Authority Board may adopt, amend and repeal bylaws for the
regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business, all in accordance
with Section 7(1) of Act 381, and immediately shall forward a copy thereof to
the City Council in care of the City Clerk. 



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.07  DIRECTOR’S BOND.



   In the event the Authority Board employs a Director as authorized by
Section 6(1) of Act 381, the Director, before entering upon the duties of his
or her office, shall post a bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000), payable to the Authority for the use and benefit of the Authority,
approved by the Authority Board and filed with the City Clerk.  The premium
on the bond furnished by the Director shall be deemed an operating expense of
the Authority, payable from funds available to it for expenses of
operations. 



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.08  FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (a)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on July 1 of each
year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as
may hereafter be adopted by the City Council.



   (b)   The Authority shall prepare and approve annually a budget for
the operation of the Authority for the ensuing fiscal year.  The budget
shall be prepared in the manner and shall contain the information required of
municipal departments.  Funds of the City shall not be included in the
budget of the Authority expect those funds authorized in Act 381 or by the
City Council.



   (c)   The Authority shall submit annually to the City Council and
the State Tax Commission a financial report on the status of activities of
the Authority.  The report shall include all of the following:



      (1)   The amount and source of tax increment revenues received;



      (2)   The amount and purpose of expenditures of tax increment
revenues;



      (3)   The amount and principal and interest on all outstanding
indebtedness;



      (4)   The initial taxable value of all eligible property
subject to the Brownfield plan;



      (5)   The captured taxable value realized by the Authority;



      (6)   Information concerning any transfer of ownership of or
interest in each eligible property; and



      (7)   All additional information that the City Council or the
State Tax Commission considers necessary.



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



899.09  CHAPTER FILED WITH SECRETARY OF STATE.



   A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Secretary of
State of the State of Michigan in accordance with Section 4(3) of Act 381.



(Res. 00-38.  Passed 9-25-00.)



PART TEN - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE



   TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas



      Chap. 1020   Streets and Excavations.



      Chap. 1022   Sidewalks.



      Chap. 1024   Trees.



   TITLE FOUR - Utilities



      Chap. 1040   Water.



      Chap. 1042   Sewers.



      Chap. 1043   Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Regulations.



      Chap. 1044   Water and Sewerage Rates and Management.



      Chap. 1046   Gas.



      Chap. 1048   Electricity.



      Chap. 1049   Street Lighting.



      Chap. 1050   Utilities Generally.



      Chap. 1051.   Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight.



   TITLE SIX - Other Public Services



      Chap. 1060   Solid Waste Collection and Disposal.



      Chap. 1062   Parks and Recreational Facilities.



      Chap. 1064   Cemeteries.



      Chap. 1066   Fire and Burglar Alarm Systems.



      Chap. 1068   City Library.



TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas



CHAPTER 1020
Streets and Excavations



1020.01   Definitions.



1020.02   Excavations, damage and obstructions; objects suspended above
public ways.



1020.03   Permits; fees; insurance.



1020.04   Street openings; permit required.



1020.05   Emergency openings.



1020.06   Backfilling.



1020.07   Maintenance of installations in street.



1020.08   Notice of resurfacing.



1020.09   Sewer and water connections.



1020.10   Determination of necessity; notice to abutting property owners.



1020.11   Prohibited openings.



1020.12   Barricades and warning lights.



1020.13   Shoring excavations.



1020.14   Removal of encroachments.



1020.15   Temporary street closings.



1020.16   Parades; permit required.



1020.17   Load security.



1020.18   City policy re limited street improvements.



1020.19   Authority to use street and water systems for car washing.



1020.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Streets and alleys in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4d,
117.4e, 117.4h



   Excavations generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 554.251 et seq.



   Playing games in streets - see GEN. OFF. 622.08



   Obstruction of streets - see GEN. OFF. 622.09



   Assessment policy re street improvements - see B.R. & T. 892.22(b), (c)



   Street lighting generally - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1049



1020.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise:



   (a)   "Street" means all of the land lying between property lines on
either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the City and includes
lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same
are not yet constructed.



   (b)   "Manager" means the City Manager or his or her designate.



1020.02  EXCAVATIONS, DAMAGE AND OBSTRUCTIONS; OBJECTS SUSPENDED ABOVE
PUBLIC WAYS.



   No person shall make an excavation in, or cause any damage to, a street
in the City, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this
chapter. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any
street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this
chapter. However, this provision shall not prohibit such temporary
obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and
things to and from abutting premises, nor shall it prohibit the lawful
parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular
traffic.



   No person shall suspend anything above any sidewalk or within any
street area unless expressly authorized by this chapter, provided that
Council, when in its opinion public safety requires it, may authorize the
erection of fire escapes or similar devices by resolution. This chapter shall
not apply to awnings or marquees when no part thereof is less than seven feet
above the sidewalk grade.



1020.03  PERMITS; FEES; INSURANCE.



   Permits that are authorized in this chapter shall be obtained upon
application to the City Manager upon such forms as he or she prescribes, and
there shall be a charge for each such permit as provided by resolution of
Council. Such permits are revocable by the Manager for failure to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter, rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto and the lawful orders of the Manager and shall be valid only for the
period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under this chapter
shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work
permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the City in
connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and
installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect
and save harmless the City from all damages or actions at law that may arise
or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from
the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Liability
insurance policies that are required to be filed in making application for a
permit shall be as provided by resolution of Council.



   Where, in the opinion of the Manager, a greater risk is involved,
higher limits of coverage may be required up to the maximum limits above
specified.



   A duplicate copy of the original insurance policy, approved as to form
by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk. Where cash deposits
are required with the application for any permit hereunder, such deposit
shall be in an amount prescribed by Council, except as otherwise specified in
this chapter. Such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the City
arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or
in connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done
under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit which is unexpended shall
be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all expenses of the
City, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant.



1020.04  STREET OPENINGS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall make an excavation or opening in or under a street
right of way without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the City
Manager. No permit shall be granted until the applicant posts a cash deposit
and files a liability insurance policy as provided by Council.



   (a)   Street Excavations. No permit shall be granted for making an
excavation or opening within the limits of a street which will result in
permanent or prolonged interference with public use of the streets.



   (b)   Manholes. No permit shall be issued for manholes in any
street, except for public utility uses and openings for fuel supply.



1020.05  EMERGENCY OPENINGS.



   The City Manager may, if public safety requires immediate action, grant
permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that
a permit is obtained on the following business day and that this chapter is
complied with.



1020.06  BACKFILLING.



   All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by
special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter. Any settlement shall be corrected within
four hours after notification to do so.



1020.07  MAINTENANCE OF INSTALLATIONS IN STREET.



   Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter
maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation, or
any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in,
under, over or upon any street which is adjacent to or a part of his or her
estate, shall do so only on the condition that such maintenance is considered
an agreement on his or her part with the City to keep the same and the covers
thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and
condition at all times during his or her ownership or control thereof and to
indemnify and save harmless the City against all damages or actions at law
that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being
under, over, in or upon the street or being unfastened, out of repair or
defective during such ownership or control.



1020.08  NOTICE OF RESURFACING.



   Whenever Council determines to pave or resurface any street, the City
Manager shall, not less than thirty days prior to commencement of
construction, serve notice upon all public utilities, requiring them to
install and repair all necessary underground work in advance of the paving or
resurfacing.



1020.09  SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS.



   When such paving or resurfacing is ordered or declared necessary by
Council, such sewer and water connections as are necessary shall be installed
in advance of such paving or resurfacing. The cost of such connections shall
be charged against the premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby,
and against the owner of such premises. Where such paving or resurfacing is
financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the cost of such sewer
and water connections may be made chargeable against the premises served or
adjacent thereto, as a part of the special assessment for such paving or
resurfacing. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed otherwise than by
special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed
shall be a lien on such premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby,
and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to
the provisions of the City Charter.



1020.10  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY; NOTICE TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.



   The necessity for such sewer and water connections shall be determined
by the City Manager. Such determination shall be based upon the size, shape
and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land
under the Zoning Code, the character of the locality and the probable future
development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. The Manager shall give
written notice of the intention to install such sewer and water connections
and to charge the cost of the same to the premises, to each owner of the land
abutting the street, to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the
records of the City Assessor. Any owner objecting to the installation of any
such sewer or water connection shall file his or her objections, in writing,
within seven days after service of such notice, with the Manager who shall,
after considering each such objection made in writing, make a final
determination of the sewer and water connections to be installed.



1020.11  PROHIBITED OPENINGS.



   No permit to make an opening or excavation in or under a paved street
shall be granted to any person within two years after the completion of any
paving or resurfacing thereof. If a street opening is necessary as a public
safety measure, the City Manager may suspend the operation of this section as
to such street opening. Council may, by resolution, set a fee for a street
opening to be made up to ten years after paving or repaving.



1020.12  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



   All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and
substantially barricaded and railed off and at night shall be provided with
prescribed warning lights. Warning lights which are perpendicular to the flow
of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart and lights which are
parallel to the flow of traffic shall not be over fifteen feet apart. The
Police Chief shall determine what constitutes proper barricading, lighting
and railing.



1020.13  SHORING EXCAVATIONS.



   All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and
substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent
cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or
subsurface structure of the street. The City Manager shall determine what
constitutes proper sheeting and bracing.



1020.14  REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS.



   Encroachments and obstructions in a street may be removed and
excavations refilled. The expense of such removal or refilling shall be
charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or her or
suffered to remain by him or her otherwise than in accordance with this
chapter. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed
in Chapter 14 of the City Charter.



1020.15  TEMPORARY STREET CLOSINGS.



   The City Manager shall have authority to temporarily close any street
or portion thereof when he or she deems such street to be unsafe or
temporarily unsuitable for use. He or she shall cause suitable barriers and
signs to be erected on such street, indicating that the same is closed to
public travel. When any street or portion thereof is closed to public travel,
no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over such street except when such
travel is necessarily incidental to any street repair or construction work
being done in the area closed to public travel or when the Police Chief
allows such travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or
barrier erected pursuant to this section without the authorization of the
Manager.



1020.16  PARADES; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct a parade upon any street without first
obtaining a permit therefor. Such permits shall be issued only upon the
authority of Council. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth by
resolution of Council and shall take into consideration the traffic, time of
day and route over which the parade is proposed to travel.



1020.17  LOAD SECURITY.



   No person shall drop, leave or scatter on any sidewalk, park, alley or
roadway in the City any coal, sand, dirt, gravel, brick, scrap materials or
any other material or substance that is being hauled or carted about in a
truck, trailer, wagon or cart or any other vehicle.



1020.18  CITY POLICY RE LIMITED STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (a)   No petition or request for a street improvement shall be
considered for action unless:



      (1)   It includes the following improvements: the addition of
proper storm drainage structures, excavation and construction of a proper
sand and gravel base, construction of a curb and gutter and addition of a
permanent-type bituminous or concrete wearing surface.



      (2)   It is for improving one or more whole City blocks as
platted.



   (b)   The policy set forth in subsection (a) hereof shall be
deviated from only on approval of Council and only in order to alleviate a
serious deficiency where a proper street improvement does not have sufficient
priority to be scheduled in the reasonably near future.



   (c)   No construction of a curb and gutter shall be permitted in the
street right of way without the approval of Council.



(Res. Unno. Passed 5-4-59.)



1020.19  AUTHORITY TO USE STREET AND WATER SYSTEMS FOR CAR WASHING.



   The City Manager is hereby authorized to grant, at his or her
discretion, to any nonprofit organization, a permit to use the City street
and water systems for car washing under standards and conditions determined
from time to time by him or her.



(Res. Unno. Passed 9-29-75.)



1020.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1022
Sidewalks



1022.01   Construction and repair; compliance required.



1022.02   Line and grade.



1022.03   Permits to construct or repair; fee.



1022.04   Necessity of construction or repair.



1022.05   Partial payment of repair by City.



1022.055   Responsibility for construction costs; method of payment.



1022.06   Notice to repair or construct; action by City.



1022.07   Removal of snow, ice and debris.



1022.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Failure of property owner to keep free of obstructions - see M.C.L.
Sec. 103.4



   Sidewalks generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 691.1401 et seq.



   Duty to keep sidewalks clean - see GEN. OFF. 652.05(d)



   Assessment policy re sidewalk improvements - see B.R. & T. 892.22(a)



   Sidewalk cafes - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Outdoor displays of products or materials intended for retail sale or
rental - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



1022.01  CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   The sidewalks of all public streets and alleys in the City constructed
or repaired after the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 220, passed
June 22, 1964) shall, unless otherwise ordered by Council, be constructed or
repaired in the manner provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 220. Passed 6-22-64.)



1022.02  LINE AND GRADE.



   (a)   All sidewalks constructed or repaired as set forth in this
chapter shall conform to the established grade of the street, unless
otherwise ordered by Council. The line and grade for all walks constructed or
repaired as set forth in this chapter shall be given by the City Manager or
his or her representative, and all of the construction work shall be under
the Manager's supervision and to his or her satisfaction.



   (b)   All sidewalks shall be constructed or repaired to conform with
the plans and standard specifications of the City, which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 220. Passed 6-22-64.)



1022.03  PERMITS TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR; FEE.



   (a)   Every person who constructs new sidewalks or repairs and/or
replaces existing sidewalks in the City shall, for each job, first obtain
from the City Clerk a permit to proceed with the proposed work, such permit
to be issued upon receipt of a permit fee established by Council resolution.
Every permittee shall comply with all requirements as to grade, width,
specifications and all other provisions of this chapter relative to the
laying, constructing and repairing of sidewalks.



   (b)   Council may revoke a permit issued under this chapter for
incompetency or failure to comply with this chapter or the rules,
regulations, plans and standard specifications of the City for the
construction or repair of sidewalks.



   (c)   The City Manager may cause work to be stopped under a permit
granted for the construction or repair of a sidewalk, for any of the causes
enumerated in this section, until the next regular meeting of Council.



(Ord. 626.  Passed 3-18-96.)



1022.04  NECESSITY OF CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR.



   Council shall determine the necessity of construction, repair or
replacement of public sidewalks to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.  The construction of a new sidewalk is required when a vacant
parcel is developed, as well as when there is a building addition or usage
change requiring site plan approval.  Council may waive the new sidewalk
requirement for good cause shown, provided the land owners sign a recordable
instrument guaranteeing construction and payment therefor at a future time as
directed by the City.



(Ord. 472.  Passed 2-17-86.)



1022.05  PARTIAL PAYMENT OF REPAIR BY CITY.



   (a)   The City may authorize payment, from an appropriate budgetary
account, of an amount as determined by resolution of Council, from time to
time, toward the cost of existing sidewalk repair and/or replacement, upon
receipt from the property owner involved of a request for such payment. The
request for payment by the City shall include a statement from the City
Manager approving such request and the amount thereof. No such payment by the
City shall be authorized unless:



      (1)   A sidewalk construction permit was obtained prior to
making such repair and/or payment therefor is recommended by the Manager; or



      (2)   The Manager caused such work to be done pursuant to
Section 1022.06(b).



   (b)   This section shall not apply to the construction of new
sidewalks.



   (c)   Pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, the City shall pay an
amount, to be established by Council resolution, of the replacement cost
through the City's Sidewalk Replacement Program, toward the cost of sidewalk
repair and/or replacement from the appropriate budgetary account upon receipt
from the property owner involved of a request for each payment and upon
compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) hereof. 



(Ord. 626.  Passed 3-18-96.)



1022.055  RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONSTRUCTION COSTS; METHOD OF PAYMENT.



   (a)   Cost of Sidewalks.  The cost of construction of new sidewalks
and the cost of reconstruction or replacement of existing sidewalks shall be
paid as follows:



      (1)   For residential property certified on the City’s tax
records as a homestead at the time of the resolution of necessity for new
sidewalks, the City shall pay the entire cost.  However, if it is found by
official State or local action that the residential property did not qualify
as a homestead, then, upon such an event, this shall be cause for the City to
assess fifty percent of the cost to the property owner pursuant to paragraph
(a)(2) below, and to collect said monies as provided for in this section.



      (2)   For all other properties not zoned as certified,
residential homesteads at the time of construction for new sidewalks, the
City and the property owner shall equally share the cost of installation of
new sidewalks.



      (3)   For new construction of any property regardless of
zoning designation under the City Zoning Code, the property owner and/or
developer shall pay the entire cost for the construction of new sidewalks.



      (4)   For repair and/or replacement of existing sidewalks upon
any property, regardless of zoning designation, the City and the property
owner shall equally share the cost.



   For property owners performing their own sidewalk replacement, the City
shall, based on appropriate documentation, reimburse said property owner at a
rate to be established by Council resolution.



   (b)   Payment for Sidewalks.  Property owners shall pay the cost of
their portion of the sidewalk work in full at the time statements/invoices
are mailed by the City to said property owners. In the event that the
property owners cannot pay or wish to pay in installment payments,
installment payments of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per
year shall be paid by each property owner on or before March 31. 
Notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, the property
owners’ share of the cost of sidewalk work shall be paid in full within
seven years. Statements/invoices for installment payments shall be mailed by
the City on or before December 30 of the year in which work was done. A
statement will be sent each December 1 of successive years until such time as
all payments are made. Interest shall be charged at the rate of one-half of
one percent per month (or any portion thereof) on the unpaid balance,
beginning April 1 of the year succeeding the year in which the work was done.
If the property owner chooses the installment payment method, and any annual
installment payment is not made on or before March 31 of the year in which it
is due, the installment payment, with interest, shall be certified as
delinquent and placed on the tax roll of the City for that year. Such
certification shall make the entire amount due and owing by the property
owner a lien on the real estate and such amount shall be collected in a
method as set forth and provided for in Section 12.21 of the City Charter.



(Ord. 674.  Passed 6-8-98.)



1022.06  NOTICE TO REPAIR OR CONSTRUCT; ACTION BY CITY.



   (a)   Council shall, by resolution, declare the necessity for the
construction or repair of the sidewalk in and on any street in front of or
adjacent to private property. The resolution shall state the names of the
owners, their addresses, and the location of such construction or repair. The
City Clerk shall cause to be prepared two notices. The first notice shall be
a notice sent to the property owners affected, and the second notice shall be
a notice for public hearing, which notice will notify the public at large of
the intention of the City to make such sidewalk improvements and to charge
the cost thereof against the abutting property owner. The form of the notice
sent to affected owners shall set forth the owners assessed, the estimated
amount of sidewalk to be repaired or replaced, any new sidewalk to be
installed and an estimated amount for the work. The notice shall also state
that the property owner may cause such work to be done at his or her expense
in conformity with the plans and specifications on file in the office of the
City Clerk, provided that this work is completed by a date to be determined
by Council after the date of the public hearing. The notice shall also
include the public hearing notice. The form of the public hearing notice
shall state the time and place at which Council shall meet for the purpose of
reviewing the list of sidewalks so affected and hearing any person so
assessed who considers himself or herself aggrieved thereby. The public
notice shall not contain the list of sidewalks so affected, but shall make
reference that the list may be reviewed at the City Clerk's office prior to
the hearing. The notice to property owners shall be sent at least ten days
prior to the date of the hearing by Council, and the City Clerk shall notify
the owners by first class mail, so far as the same are known and as shown on
the tax rolls of the City. The City Clerk shall cause the public notice to be
published, once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least
ten days before the public hearing.



   (b)   At the time and place designated in the notice for public
hearing, Council shall meet and hear all persons interested or affected in
the construction or repair of sidewalks within the City, and shall consider
all objections either given orally at the public hearing or filed with the
City Clerk. At such time and place, Council shall review the resolution of
necessity and the list of owners affected. Council may alter, change, or
correct the same if necessary or may refer the list set forth in the
resolution back to the City Manager for revision.  However, in altering,
changing or correcting the list set forth in the resolution, Council shall
not add any other sidewalk construction or repair not included in the
original resolution, except as is necessitated during on-site construction or
upon the approval of the affected property owner. Further, Council may
adjourn and continue such hearing from time to time. When the list set forth
in the resolution has been set and confirmed by Council, Council shall, by
resolution, approve the resolution of necessity and authorize the City
Manager to commence work on the construction or repair of sidewalks so
affected. The City Manager shall authorize additional sidewalk repair and/or
replacement when, during construction, it is found that such repair and/or
replacement is necessary due to on-site inspection, or at the request of the
property owner to enlarge the affected area for repair and/or replacement. A
change made under these circumstances shall not require further Council
approval or a corrected resolution.



   (c)   If the property owner fails to cause such work to be done
within the time allotted by Council after the date of the public hearing,
then the City Manager shall proceed to have such work done and shall bill the
property owner. The method of payment to be made by the property owner shall
conform to Section 1022.055.



(Ord. 626.  Passed 3-18-96.)



1022.07  REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND DEBRIS.



   (a)   No person owning or occupying any lot or premises abutting
upon any street in the City shall permit sidewalks in front of such lot or
premises to become obstructed by snow, ice or debris so as to inconvenience
and/or endanger public travel thereon. (Ord. 61.  Passed 2-25-19.)



   (b)   No person shall, in any event, permit any snow to remain on
any sidewalk in front of a lot or premises owned or occupied by him or her in
the City, longer than twenty-four hours after the same has fallen.  The
sidewalk shall be cleaned of snow down to the cement base of the sidewalk and
the entire width of the sidewalk.  (Ord. 688.  Passed 3-1-99.)



   (c)   No person shall, in any event, permit any ice to remain on any
sidewalk in front of a lot or premises owned or occupied by him or her in the
City, longer than twenty-four hours after the same has formed.  The sidewalk
shall be reasonably cleaned of ice down to the cement base of the sidewalk
and the entire width of the sidewalk.



   (d)   No person shall permit or cause any building material, wood,
rubbish, article, substance, or merchandise held for sale, to be dropped,
delivered, piled or placed in any way above or upon any sidewalk so as to
obstruct the sidewalk in a manner that inconveniences and/or endangers public
travel thereon except by special permission of the City Council or the City
Manager according to limitations set by the Council.  Merchandise
necessarily delivered on the sidewalks shall be immediately removed to the
interior of the address to which it was destined.



   (e)   If the sidewalks abutting any lot or premises in the City are
not cleaned of snow, ice and/or debris in the manner and within the time
provided in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) hereof, then the City shall
cause such sidewalks to be cleaned at the expense of the City. After such
cleaning by the City, the actual cost thereof shall be certified to by the
City Manager or his or her duly authorized representative and shall become
and be a lien upon the property on which the violation took place.  A
statement for such actual costs plus administrative fee shall thereupon be
sent by first class mail to the property owner or his or her representative
to whom the original notice was given.  Should the obligation as described
by this statement remain unpaid after forty-five days from the date of the
statement, the City Manager or his or her representative may then certify the
delinquent amount, after first adding a penalty of ten percent, to the
Assessor.  At the discretion of the City Manager, this amount shall either
be incorporated into a special assessment roll to be processed in the manner
prescribed by the City Charter and ordinances of the City, or shall be
entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and be
collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general City
taxes against such premises are collected and liens enforced.  In general,
the decision as to whether the obligation shall be made a part of a special
assessment roll or certified directly to the assessing officer for collection
as a City tax shall depend upon the number and magnitude of such outstanding
delinquent statements.



(Ord. 61. Passed 2-25-19; Ord. 863.  Passed 2-11-13; Ord. 875.  Passed
6-10-13; Ord. 876.  Passed 7-8-13.)



1022.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1024
Trees



1024.01   Trimming and pruning required; notice to owner.



1024.02   Wires and lines; mutilation.



1024.03   Boxelder trees prohibited.



1024.04   Proximity of poplar and willow trees to sewers.



1024.05   Width of North Michigan Avenue.



1024.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Box elder trees, female, as nuisance - see M.C.L. Sec. 124.151



   Cutting or destroying - see M.C.L. Secs. 247.235, 247.241, 752.701 et
seq.



   Malicious destruction - see M.C.L. Sec. 750.382



   Vegetation - see GEN. OFF. 622.02



   Landscaping - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



1024.01  TRIMMING AND PRUNING REQUIRED; NOTICE TO OWNER.



   (a)   All trees in the street rights of way of the City shall be
trimmed and pruned by the abutting property owner so that no branch thereof
grows or hangs lower than nine and one-half feet above the level of the
sidewalk.



   (b)   All trees on private property, the branches of which extend
over the line of a street, shall be trimmed and pruned so that no such branch
grows or hangs over the line of the street or sidewalk lower than nine and
one-half feet above the level of the sidewalk.



   (c)   No person shall permit a tree in the public streets of the
City to grow in such a manner, or be or remain untrimmed, so as to defeat the
object of the street lighting system. All such trees shall be trimmed so as
to obstruct as little as possible the efficiency of the street lights without
destroying the beauty and symmetry of such trees.



(Ord. 45. Passed 10-10-05.)



   (d)   If the owner or occupant of any premises, or his or her agent,
allows any tree growing upon his or her premises, or upon that portion of the
street upon which his or her premises abuts, to grow or remain in such a
condition as to violate any of the provisions of this section, the Director
of Public Works shall notify such owner, occupant or agent of the
requirements of this section. Such notice may be verbal or written. If
written, it shall be mailed to the owner of record of the property in
question, certified, return receipt requested. If the property is occupied by
someone other than the owner of record, a copy of the aforesaid written
notice shall also be sent to such occupant.



   If such trees are not properly trimmed by the owner, occupant or agent
within ten days after receipt of such notice, the Director shall forthwith
proceed to trim such trees in accordance with the requirements of this
section.



1024.02  WIRES AND LINES; MUTILATION.



   (a)   Any person running or putting wires or lines through, by or
above a tree in the City shall exercise such care in so doing as not to
destroy the beauty and symmetry of trees for ornamental and shade purposes.
No person shall mutilate, cut or prune a tree without the permission of the
Director of Public Works or without the supervision of the Director.



   (b)   No person shall purposely, knowingly or recklessly cut,
destroy, mutilate or otherwise injure a tree growing in the streets of the
City, or in any public park thereof, or climb any such tree by means of
metallic climbers, or attach or connect any wire thereto, except as otherwise
provided in subsection (a) hereof.



1024.03  BOXELDER TREES PROHIBITED.



   (a)   A female boxelder tree which is or could be the breeding place
for boxelder bugs (leptocoris trivittas) is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and no person shall maintain the same on his or her property after
the notification provided for in subsection (d) hereof.



   (b)   Any such tree located on public lands in the City shall be
removed at City expense and under the direction of the City Manager.



   (c)   The Manager or a person designated by him or her may enter
upon private property to make a field inspection of a boxelder tree and may
remove specimens therefrom for analysis.



   (d)   After such an inspection, the Manager may require, by written
notice addressed to the owner of the premises on which the tree is located or
to the occupant of such premises, the removal of such tree. Such notice shall
give the person so notified a definite time within which to comply with such
notice, which time shall be at least fifteen days following the date of such
notice. If such tree is not removed within the time given in the notice, the
Manager shall report the failure to remove such tree to Council. Council may
thereafter, without further notice, cause such tree to be removed. All costs
involved in the cutting and removal of such tree shall be assessed against
the property upon which such tree is located, on the next general tax
assessment roll of the City.



   (e)   No damages shall be awarded for the destruction of a tree or
for injury to the same in carrying out this section.



(Ord. 228. Passed 3-15-65.)



1024.04  PROXIMITY OF POPLAR AND WILLOW TREES TO SEWERS.



   (a)   No person shall plant, transplant or cultivate any poplar or
willow tree within 200 feet of any storm or sanitary sewer in the City.



   (b)   No person shall grow or permit to grow on his or her premises
any poplar or willow tree within 200 feet of any storm or sanitary sewer in
the City.



   (c)   In the event of a violation of subsection (a) or (b) hereof,
the Director of Public Works, when so directed by Council, may enter on the
premises in question and cut down such poplar or willow tree. The actual cost
of such cutting shall be recorded by the City Clerk and, prior to the making
of the annual assessment roll by the City Assessor, Council shall, by
resolution, direct the cost of such cutting to be levied on the next general
assessment roll, in a special column therefor, against the property involved.



(Ord. 68. Passed 11-11-19.)



1024.05  WIDTH OF NORTH MICHIGAN AVENUE. 



   No person shall widen the paved portion of North Michigan Avenue
between the North Michigan Avenue railroad bridge and 850 feet south of the
right-of-way to M-59 to more than twenty-eight feet, except the Riddle Street
intersection, which is currently thirty-eight feet wide.  No person shall
interfere with the natural life span of any tree within the right-of-way of
North Michigan Avenue as set forth herein, except in case of disease, damage
from natural elements or other casualty.



(Ord. 638.  Passed 10-28-96; Ord. 774.  Passed 9-26-05.)



1024.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



TITLE FOUR - Utilities



CHAPTER 1040
Water



1040.01   Cross connections; inspections.



1040.02   Use of public water supply required when available.



1040.03   City as management agency for water quality management.



1040.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Water quality - see Mich Const. Art. 4, Secs. 22, 52; M.C.L. Secs.
67.38, 323.1 et seq.



   Water supply generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 24; M.C.L. Secs.
46.171 et seq., 123.111 et seq., 325.201 et seq., 486.51 et seq., 486.101 et
seq.



   Municipal utilities - see CHTR. Ch. 16



   Water supply in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4b, 117.4e,
117.4f, 117.35, 123.115



   Polluting and diverting watercourses - see GEN. OFF. 622.03



   Assessment policy re water extensions - see B.R. & T. 892.22 (e)



   Costs for extensions to new developments - see S.U. & P.S. 1050.01



1040.01  CROSS CONNECTIONS; INSPECTIONS.



   (a)   The City hereby adopts a cross connection control program
which shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the
public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are
deemed possible. The frequency of inspection and reinspection, based on
potential health hazards involved, shall be as established by the City
through its cross connection control program and as approved by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). The cross connection control
program shall be amended and changed by the City of Howell Department of
Public Works Superintendent when mandated by the MDEQ.



   (b)   The City of Howell Department of Public Works Superintendent
and/or his/her designated agent may enter, at any reasonable time, upon any
property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the
City, for the purpose of inspecting the water supply system thereof for cross
connections. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding such water supply system. The refusal of such information or the
refusal of access to such property, when requested, shall be deemed evidence
of the presence of cross connections.



   (c)   The City is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service after reasonable notice to the owner, lessee or occupant of any
property wherein any cross connection in violation of this section exists,
and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate
any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service
to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been
eliminated in compliance with this section.



   (d)   The potable water supply made available on the properties
served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible
contamination as specified by this section and the State Plumbing Code. Any
water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which
is not supplied by the potable system shall be labeled in a conspicuous
manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING."



   (e)   This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code or
Chapter 1044 but is supplementary to them.



(Ord. 319. Passed 5-14-73; Ord. 719. Passed 6-18-01.)



1040.02  USE OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED WHEN AVAILABLE.



   (a)   Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall construct
or maintain any private water well within the City limits.



   (b)   Every owner of a house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated in the City and
abutting on a street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public water system of the City, shall, at his
or her own expense, install suitable plumbing facilities therein.  Said
house or building may be connected to an existing private water well as long
as it meets with the approval of the Livingston County Health Department. 
When in the future said private water well fails, then the property owner
shall connect to the public water system, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, provided that the public water system is within 200 feet of
the nearest property line of such house, building or property.  Any private
water well existing as a result of the connection to the public water system
may be used and maintained as provided in subsection (d) hereof or shall be
abandoned pursuant to subsection (e) hereof.



   (c)   A private water well may be constructed and maintained for
domestic use on any property within the City where the public water system is
more than 200 feet away from the nearest property line of said property. 
Said private water well shall be subject to the approval of the Livingston
County Health Department.



   (d)   A private water well may be constructed and maintained for
non-domestic use (such as lawn sprinkling) on any property in the City upon
approval of the City and the Livingston County Health Department.  Said
private water well shall not be interconnected with the public water system.



   (e)   The abandonment of any private water well shall be made by the
owner of such property pursuant to standards set forth by the Livingston
County Health Department. 



(Ord. 622.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1040.03  CITY AS MANAGEMENT AGENCY FOR WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT.



   (a)   Council hereby accepts designation as a management agency for
planing, constructing and/or operating treatment facilities and/or
interceptor systems in accordance with Public Law 92-500 (The Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972).



   (b)   Acceptance of the designation shall include acceptance, in
principle, of responsibility for the collection and payment of a surcharge
based on sewage flow to provide financial support for the functions of
continuing areawide quality management planning and implementation of the
Areawide Water Quality Management Plan.



   (c)   Assumption of such responsibilities accepted herein shall be
deferred until such time as Chapters I and II of the Areawide Water Quality
Management Plan are certified by the Governor and approved by the
Environmental Protection Agency.



(Res. Unno. Passed 1-16-78; Res. Unno. Passed 11-20-78.)



1040.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1042
Sewers



EDITOR'S NOTE:  Chapter 1042, previously a codification of Ordinance 460,
passed June 10, 1985, was re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 588, passed
November 15, 1993.



1042.01   Definitions.



1042.02   Unlawful deposits and discharges; use of sewer required when
available.



1042.03   Permits for building sewers and connections; cost of
installation and repair.



1042.04   Construction requirements of building sewers.



1042.05   Discharge of storm water, etc., into sewers.



1042.06   Interceptors.



1042.07   Damage to system.



1042.08   Right of entry.



1042.09   Violations; notice to correct.



1042.10   Falsification; tampering with meters.



1042.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Sewers and sewer systems generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 24;
M.C.L. Secs. 46.171 et seq., 67.34, 123.241 et seq., 323.151 et seq. 325.201
et seq.



   Municipal utilities - see CHTR. Ch. 16



   Sewers and sewer systems in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4b,
117.4e, 117.4f, 117.35



   Assessment policy re sewer improvements - see B.R. & T. 892.22(d), (e)



   Proximity of poplar and willow trees to sewers - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.04



   Industrial wastewater pretreatment regulations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1043



   Sewerage rates and management - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044



   Costs for extensions to new developments - see S.U. & P.S. 1050.01



   Sewers in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1228.05, 1228.06



   Design of sewerage systems - see B. & H. 1440.07



1042.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise:



   (a)   "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drain
pipes inside the walls of the building and which conveys such discharge to
the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.



   (b)   "Building Inspector" means the person designated by the City
to supervise the operation of the City's Building Department and who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or
her duly authorized representative.



   (c)   "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain
to the public sewer or other place of disposal.



   (d)   "City Manager" means the City Manager and such authorized
representative as he or she may designate.



   (e)   "Garbage" means solid waste from the preparation, cooking or
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, processing or sale of
produce.



   (f)   "Holding tank waste" means any waste from holding tanks, such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump
tank trucks.



   (g)   "Indirect discharge" means the discharge or the introduction
of non-domestic pollutants into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system).



   (h)   "National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit" and
"NPDES permit" mean a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33
USC 1342).



   (i)   "Person" means any individual, partnership, copartnership,
firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or his or her or its legal
representatives, agents or assigns.



   (j)   "POTW treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW designed
to provide treatment to wastewater.



   (k)   "Properly shredded garbage" means wastes from the cooking,
preparation and dispensing of foods that have been cut or shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.



   (l)   "Sewage" means a combination of water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   (m)   "Sewage treatment plant" means an arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.



   (n)   "Sewage works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage.



   (o)   "Sewer" means a pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying
sewage. Specifically:



      (1)   "Combination sewer" and "combined sewer" mean a sewer
receiving both surface run-off and sewage.



      (2)   "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of
abutting property have equal rights and which is controlled by a public
authority.



      (3)   "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and
to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



      (4)   "Storm sewer" and "storm drain" mean a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but which does not carry
sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   (p)   "Storm water" means any flow occurring during or following any
form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   (q)   "Superintendent" means the person designated by the City to
supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or
her duly authorized representative.



   (r)   "User" means any person who contributes or causes or permits
the contribution of wastewater into the POTW.



   (s)   "Wastewater" means liquid and water-carried industrial or
domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities
and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water and storm
water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
into or permitted to enter the POTW.



   (t)   "Watercourse" means a channel in which the flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



1042.02  UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS AND DISCHARGES; USE OF SEWER REQUIRED WHEN
AVAILABLE.



   (a)   No person shall place or deposit or permit to be deposited, in
an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property in the City or in an
area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.



   (b)   No person shall discharge to any natural watercourse in the
City, or in an area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sanitary sewage,
industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with standards established by the State Water
Resources Commission.



   (c)   Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall construct
or maintain any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (d)   Every owner of a house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated in the City and
abutting on a street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, shall, at
his or her own expense, install suitable toilet facilities therein and
connect such facilities directly to the public sanitary sewer, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety days after the date that
official notice to do so has been issued by the City Manager, provided that
the public sanitary sewer is within 200 feet of the nearest property line of
such house, building or property. 



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



   (e)   Any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities
used for the disposal of sewage existing as a result of the connection to the
public sanitary sewer system shall be abandoned by the owner of such property
pursuant to standards set forth by the Livingston County Health Department. 



(Ord. 621.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1042.03  PERMITS FOR BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS; COST OF INSTALLATION
AND REPAIR.



   (a)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection
with, open into, alter or disturb a public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the Building
Inspector. 



   (b)   Connections with the sanitary sewers of the City shall be made
only upon written authorization and permits issued by the City on such forms
and upon payment of such fees as are established from time to time by the
City.



   (c)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of building sewers shall be borne by the owner of the property. 
The owner shall indemnify the City for all loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (d)   All applicants for sewer connection permits shall first submit
plans and specifications of all plumbing construction within the building or
premises, and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of
the State Plumbing Code and all rules and regulations of the State Water
Resources Commission or its affiliates. When such plans and specifications
have been approved by the Building Inspector, a temporary construction permit
shall be issued, subject to a final inspection and approval when construction
is completed and ready for connection with the City sewer system.



   (e)   The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the
Building Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer.  The Building Inspector or his or her
authorized representative shall then inspect the building and plumbing
construction therein, and if such construction meets previous requirements as
approved in the construction permit, the Building Inspector shall issue a
sewer connection permit, subject to this chapter.



   (f)   The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of
existing building sewers and their connection to public sewers shall be borne
by the property owner. Such owner shall make application to the Building
Inspector to perform such work, if it is to be done within the street right
of way, and work shall be according to City specifications.



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



1042.04  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS OF BUILDING SEWERS.



   (a)   The building sewer shall be constructed of vitrified clay
sewer pipe, PVC or cast iron soil pipe, as approved by the Building
Inspector.  The City reserves the right to specify and require the
encasement of any sewer pipe in concrete or the installation of the sewer
pipe in a concrete cradle if the foundation and construction are such as to
warrant such protection in the opinion of the Building Inspector.



   (b)   The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to
the approval of the Building Inspector, but in no event shall the diameter of
the pipe be less than four inches.  The slope of such pipe shall be not less
than one-quarter inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted.



   (c)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  No building sewer shall
be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might
thereby be weakened.  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection
from frost.  The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade.  The line
shall be straight or laid with properly curved pipe and fittings.  Changes
in direction greater than forty-five degrees shall be provided with
clean-outs accessible for cleaning.



   (d)   In all buildings in which a building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by artificial means, approved by the Building
Inspector, and discharged to the building sewer.



   (e)   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and
watertight.  All joints shall be approved by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



1042.05  DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER, ETC., INTO SEWERS.



   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water or roof run-off water to a sanitary
sewer.  Subsurface drainage may be discharged into a sanitary sewer with the
approval of the City Manager or his or her authorized representative,
provided that favorable soil and water conditions will prevent excessive
drainage.



   (b)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to sewers specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the City Manager and/or the State Water Resources
Commission.  Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, with the approval of the City Manager, to a sanitary sewer. 



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



1042.06  INTERCEPTORS.



   (a)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Department of Public Services Director (or his or her
designee) and/or the State Water Resources Commission, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
or any inflammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredient. However, such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Director and/or the Commission and shall be located so as to be readily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed,
watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, are gastight and watertight.



   (b)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall
be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.



   (c)   All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be inspected on an
annual basis by the Howell City Department of Public Services Director (or
his or her designee) and an inspection fee of $50 shall be assessed upon each
annual inspection.



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93; Ord. 751.  Passed 1-12-04.)



1042.07  DAMAGE TO SYSTEM.



   (a)   No person shall purposely, knowingly, recklessly or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Municipal
sewerage system or treatment plant.



   (b)   The City may suspend the wastewater treatment service when
such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, which causes interference to the POTW or which causes the City
to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.



   (c)   The City may seek to terminate the wastewater treatment
service to any user who:



      (1)   Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his or her discharge;



      (2)   Fails to report significant changes in wastewater
constituents or characteristics;



      (3)   Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises by
representatives of the City for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violates the conditions of this chapter or any final
judicial order entered with respect thereto.



   (d)   Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution.  If
the person fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City
shall take such steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate severance
of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to any individual.  The City shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge.  A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing
the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence shall be submitted to the City within fifteen days of the
date of occurrence. 



   (e)   Any person who violates any subsections to this section which
causes damage in either the POTW system, causes interference with same,
causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit, or any other
type of action which endangers the POTW system or the wastewater treatment
plant in way, shape or form shall be liable to the City in damages for all
actual costs incurred by the City for the prevention of or damage to the POTW
system. The City shall place a lien upon the real property of the person
which was used in violating this Chapter upon failure to pay damages to the
City. The placing of this lien will be done in a manner as prescribed by the
Howell City Charter or the Codified Ordinances of the City of Howell.



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93; Ord. 751.  Passed 1-12-04.)



1042.08  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Council, other duly authorized employees of the City and agents of the
State Water Resources Commission bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in
accordance with this chapter or any other chapter of these Codified
Ordinances or law of the State corresponding to this chapter, at any time
during reasonable or usual business hours.  No person shall refuse or
obstruct such entry. 



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



1042.09  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE TO CORRECT.



   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, except Sections 1042.07 and 1042.08, shall be served by the City
Manager or his or her authorized representative with a written notice stating
the nature of such violation or noncompliance and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



1042.10  FALSIFICATION; TAMPERING WITH METERS.



   No person shall:



   (a)   Knowingly make any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter; or



   (b)   Falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter.



(Ord. 588.  Passed 11-15-93.)



1042.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Notwithstanding any other penalties prescribed in the Codified
Ordinances of the City of Howell, any violation of this Chapter which would
otherwise be a violation deemed a misdemeanor under State or Federal laws and
specifically under the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
being M.C.L.A. Sections 324.101 et seq, shall be deemed a misdemeanor for
purposes of this Chapter punishable as prescribed under Section 202.99 of the
Howell City Code.



   (b)   All other violations of this Chapter not deemed to be criminal
activity as described in 1043.99 herein, shall be a municipal civil
infraction. The violator shall be subject to the civil fines as set forth in
Section 202.99 herein.



   (c)   In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) hereof,
whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned to the City by reason of such violation or noncompliance, and
recovery therefor may be had in an appropriate action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (d)   Any continued violation or noncompliance, after due notice as
provided in Section 1043.14 shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be
abated by a suit in equity by the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction. This remedy shall be in addition to those heretofore provided
for.



(Ord. 751.  Passed 1-12-04.)



CHAPTER 1043
Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Regulations



EDITOR'S NOTE:  Resolution 96-03, passed May 13, 1996, authorized the
Michigan Industrial Pretreatment Program, as regulated by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality, to oversee the administration of the
City's wastewater treatment facility and the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter.  Copies of such resolution may be obtained, at cost, from the
City Clerk.



   This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 589, passed
November 15, 1993, and Ordinance 629, passed April 29, 1996, was repealed in
its entirety and re-enacted by Ordinance 656, passed September 15, 1997.



1043.01   Definitions and abbreviations.



1043.02   Responsibilities of users.



1043.03   Discharge of other wastes into sewers.



1043.04   Pretreatment.



1043.05   Control manholes; evaluations of water and waste.



1043.06   Exceptions for industrial uses; surcharges; added charges.



1043.07   Fees, charges and Reimbursement of City expenses.



1043.08   Adjustment of categorical pretreatment standards for polluted
intake water.



1043.09   Sampling and analysis of water and waste.



1043.10   Authority of POTW; enforcement.



1043.11   Damage to system.



1043.12   Bypasses.



1043.13   Right of entry.



1043.14   Violations; notice to correct.



1043.15   Retention of records.



1043.16   Upset as affirmative defense.



1043.17   Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.



1043.99   Penalty; liability for costs of damages; abatement of violations
as public nuisances.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Sewers and sewer systems generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 24;
M.C.L. Secs. 46.171 et seq., 67.34, 123.241 et seq., 323.151 et seq. 325.201
et seq.



   Municipal utilities - see CHTR. Ch. 16



   Sewers and sewer systems in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4b,
117.4e, 117.4f, 117.35



   Hazardous spills, releases or discharges - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 620



   Assessment policy re sewer improvements - see B.R. & T. 892.22(d), (e)



   Proximity of poplar and willow trees to sewers - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.04



   Sewers generally - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042



   Sewerage rates and management - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1044



   Costs for extensions to new developments - see S.U. & P.S. 1050.01



   Sewers in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1228.05, 1228.06



   Design of sewerage systems - see B. & H. 1440.07



1043.01  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (a)   Definitions.  As used in this chapter, unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise:



      (1)   "Act" or "the Act" means Sections 3101 to 3119 of Act
No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, being Sections 324.3101 to
324.3119 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and any rules promulgated therein by
the approval authority.



      (2)   "Approval authority" means the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality.



      (3)   "Approved program" or "approved pretreatment program" or
"publicly owned treatment works' pretreatment program" means a program
administered by a publicly owned treatment works which meets the criteria
established in R 323.2306 and which has been approved by the approval
authority in accordance with R 323.2308.



      (4)   "Authorized representative of nondomestic user" means
those persons authorized to certify reports and other documents specified in
this chapter:



         A.   A responsible corporate officer. As used in this
chapter, “responsible corporate officer” means an officer of a
corporation and means a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the
corporation or means the principal manager of one or more manufacturing,
production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures of more than twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000), in second quarter 1980 dollars, if authority to sign the
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.



         B.   A general partner or proprietor if the nondomestic
user submitting the reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship,
respectively.



         C.   A duly authorized representative if:



            1.   The authorization is made in writing by the
individual;



            2.   The authorization specifies either an
individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of
the facility from which the industrial discharge originates; and



            3.   The written authorization is submitted to the
Superintendent.



      If an authorization is no longer accurate due to changes of
individuals or positions, a new authorization must be submitted to the
Superintendent prior to or together with any reports required by this chapter
to be signed by an authorized representative, officer, partner, or proprietor.



      (5)   "Average daily flow" means a reasonable measure of the
average daily flow for a thirty-day period.



      (6)   "B.O.D." (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees Centigrade,
expressed in parts per million by weight.



      (7)   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste
streams from any portion of a nondomestic user's treatment facility needed
for compliance with pretreatment standards.



      (8)   "Categorical nondomestic user" means all nondomestic
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards.



      (9)   "Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical
standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accordance with
sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1317, which apply
to a specific category of nondomestic users and which appear in 40 C.F.R.
Chapter I, subchapter N (1990), parts 405-471.



      (10)   "Chemical oxygen demands" (C.O.D.) means a measure of
the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in
water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not necessarily correlate with
biochemical oxygen demand. It is also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed
and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively.



      (11)   "City Health Officer" means the local health officer
(City or County) having jurisdiction over public health in the City, or his
or her authorized representative.



      (12)   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of
Howell, Michigan, and such authorized representative as he or she may
designate.



      (13)   "Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended.



      (14)   Compatible pollutant" means a substance amenable to
treatment in the wastewater treatment plant, such as biochemical oxygen
demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional
pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment
works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such
pollutants, which may include chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon,
phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, and fats, oils and
greases of animal or vegetable origin.



      (15)   "Composite sample" means a collection of individual
samples which are obtained at regular intervals, collected on a
time-proportional or flow-proportional basis, over a specific time period and
which provide a representative sample of the average stream during the
sampling period.



      (16)   "Control Authority" means the publicly owned treatment
works if it has an approved program or means the approval authority until the
publicly owned treatment works program is approved.



      (17)   "Cooling water" means the water discharged from any
use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only
pollutant added is heat.



      (18)   "Department" means the Director of the Department of
Environmental Quality"



      (19)   "Discharge" means any direct or indirect discharge of
any waste, waste effluent, wastewater, pollutant, or any combination into any
of the waters of the State or upon the ground.



      (20)   "Domestic waste" means waste coming from domestic
household sources that meets the definition of compatible pollutants.



      (21)   "Environmental Protection Agency" (EPA) means the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Administrator thereof or another duly
authorized official.



      (22)   "Grab sample" means a sample taken from a wastestream
on a one-time basis over a period of time of not more than fifteen minutes
without regard to the flow in the wastestream.



      (23)   "Hazardous waste" means any substance discharged or
proposed to be discharged into the POTW which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.



      (24)   "Incompatible pollutant" means any pollutant which is
not a compatible pollutant.



      (25)   "Indirect discharge" means the discharge or the
introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW (including holding tank
waste discharged into the system).



      (26)   "Industrial waste" means the liquid, solid or semisolid
waste from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage.



      (27)   "Interference" means a discharge, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, to which both
of the following provisions apply:



         A.   The discharge inhibits or disrupts the publicly
owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use, or disposal; and



         B.   Pursuant to paragraph (a)(27)A. hereof, the
discharge is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the publicly owned
treatment works' permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder, or more stringent State or local regulations:



            1.   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act.



            2.   The Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901
et seq., including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resources
Conservation and Recovery Act, and including State regulations contained in
any State sludge management plan prepared.



            3.   The Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.



            4.   The Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C
2601 et seq.



            5.   The Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act, 33 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.



      (28)   "Laboratory determination" means the measurements,
tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance
with the methods outlined in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended October 8, 1991, or
EPA approved test techniques, which, in most cases, are outlined in the 17th
Edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water, a joint
publication of the American Public Health Association, the American
Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or in
accordance with any other method described by the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this chapter.



      (29)   "Local limit" means a specific prohibition or limit set
by a publicly owned treatment works on discharges by a nondomestic user.



      (30)   "National categorical pretreatment standard" or
"pretreatment standard" means any Federal regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA, which regulation applies to a
specific category of nondomestic users.



      (31)   "National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
Permit" or "NPDES permit" means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of
the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).



      (32)   "National prohibitive discharge standard" or
"prohibitive discharge standard" means any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. 403.5.



      (33)   "Natural outlet" means an outlet into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of water, either surface water or ground
water.



      (34)   "New source" means any building, structure, facility,
or installation from which there is or may be a discharge and for which
construction commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act will be applicable to
the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307(c), and if any of the following provisions apply:



         A.   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located.



         B.   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source.



         C.   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. The extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source and the extent of integration of the new facility with the existing
plant should be considered in determining whether the process is
substantially independent.



         D.   Any other modification which significantly changes
discharge or as specified in 40 C.F.R. 403.3 (k)(2).



         E.   Construction on site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (a)(34)C. or D. hereof, but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to the existing process or production
equipment.



         F.   Construction of a new source as defined under this
paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a
continuous on site construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly or installation
of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preservation work,
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time.



      (35)   "Nondomestic user" means an industry, commercial
establishment, or other entity that discharges wastewater to a publicly owned
treatment works other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage.



      (36)   "Pass-through" means a discharge which exits the POTW
into State waters in quantities or concentrations which alone, or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
a violation of any requirement of the Act.



      (37)   "Permit" means an authorization, license, or equivalent
control document and includes any of the following:



         A.   A nondomestic user permit, which is a control
document issued by the publicly owned treatment works that controls the
wastewater discharges from nondomestic users into the publicly owned
treatment works.



         B.   A national pollutant discharge elimination system
permit, which is a permit issued pursuant to Section 3112(1) of the Act to
control wastewater discharges to the surface waters.



         C.   A State permit, which is a permit issued pursuant
to Section 3112(1) of the Act to control wastewater discharges of publicly
owned treatment works to the groundwaters.



      (38)   "Person" means any individual, partnership,
copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or his or her
or its legal representatives, agents or assigns.



      (39)   "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.



      (40)   "Pollutant" means any of the following:



         A.   Substances regulated by categorical standards.



         B.   Substances discharged to publicly owned treatment
works that are required to be monitored, are limited in the publicly owned
treatment works' permit, or are to be identified in the publicly owned
treatment works' permit application.



         C.   Substances for which control measures on
nondomestic users are necessary to avoid restricting the publicly owned
treatment works' approved residuals management program.



         D.   Substances for which control measures on
nondomestic users are necessary to avoid operational problems at the publicly
owned treatment works.



         E.   Substances for which control measures on
nondomestic sources are necessary to avoid worker health and safety problems
in publicly owned treatment works.



      (41)   "Pollution" means the man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.



      (42)   "POTW" treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW
designed to provide treatment of Municipal sewage and industrial waste.



      (43)   "Pretreatment" or "treatment" means the reduction of
the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of
the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater before or instead of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, process changes, or other means except for the use of dilution,
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement.



      (44)   "Pretreatment program" means a nondomestic user waste
control program which is required in a publicly owned treatment works
wastewater discharge permit or order of the Department and which is developed
in accordance with R 323.2306 of the Act.



      (45)   "Pretreatment requirement" means any substantive or
procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment
standard, imposed on a nondomestic user.



      (46)   "Pretreatment standard" means any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated in accordance with Section 307(b) and
(c) of the Clean Water Act and the Act. This term includes prohibited
discharges and local limits as defined in R 323.2303 of the Act and
categorical standards.



      (47)   "Publicly Owned Treatment Works" (POTW) means a
treatment works that is owned by a municipality and includes any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. This term also
includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a
publicly owned treatment works. The term also means the municipality that has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to, and the discharges from, a
treatment works.



      (48)   "Sanitary sewage" means a combination of water-carried
wastes from toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities used for
household purposes; business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be
present.



      (49)   "Severe property damage" means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources,
which can be reasonably expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      (50)   "Sewage treatment plant" means an arrangement of
devices and structures used for treating sewage.



      (51)   "Sewage works" means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.



      (52)   "Sewer" means a pipe, tile, tube or conduit for
carrying sewage. Specifically:



         A.   "Combination sewer" or "combined sewer" means a
sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.



         B.   "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of
abutting property have equal rights and which is controlled by a public
authority.



         C.   "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage
and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



         D.   "Storm sewer" or "storm drain" means a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but which does not carry
sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



      (53)   "Significant noncompliance" means any of the following:



         A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined herein as those in which sixty-six percent or more of the
measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the
daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;



         B.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined
herein as those in which thirty-three percent or more of all of the
measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period
equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit
multiplied by the applicable TRC. (The TRC equals 1.4 for conventional
pollutants; for all other pollutants except pH, the TRC shall equal 1.2.)



         C.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent
limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the Superintendent
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference, or pass-through (including endangering the health of treatment
plant personnel or the general public);



         D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has
resulted in the treatment plant's exercise of its emergency authority under R
323.2306(a)(vi) of the Act to halt or prevent such a discharge;



         E.   Failure to meet, within ninety days after the
schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;



         F.   Failure to provide, within thirty days after the
due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;



         G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and



         H.   Any other violation or group of violations which
the Control Authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.



      (54)   "Significant nondomestic user" means either of the
following:



         A.   A nondomestic user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. 403 (1992) and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
subchapter N (1990).



         B.   A nondomestic user to which one of the following
provisions applies:



            1.   The user discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the publicly owned treatment
works, excluding sanitary, noncontract cooling, and boiler blowdown
wastewater.



            2.   The user contributes a process wastestream
that makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the publicly owned treatment works.



            3.   The user is designated as a significant
nondomestic user by the control authority on the basis that the user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the publicly owned treatment
works' operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



         C.   Upon a finding that a nondomestic user meeting the
criteria in paragraph (a)(54)B. hereof has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the publicly owned treatment works' operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority
may, at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from a nondomestic user or publicly owned treatment works, determine that a
nondomestic user is not a significant nondomestic user.



      (55)   "Slug discharge" means any discharge of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including an accidental spill or noncustomary batch
discharge.



      (56)   "Slug load" means any substance released in a discharge
at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a POTW.



      (57)   "Standard Industrial Classification" (SIC) means a
classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget, 1972.



      (58)   "Storm water" means any flow occurring during or
following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      (59)   "Superintendent" means the person designated by the
City to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works, who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or
her duly authorized representative.



      (60)   "Suspended solids" means solids that either float on
the surface of or are suspended in water, sewage or other liquids and which
are removable by laboratory filtering.



      (61)   "SWRC" means the State Water Resources Commission or
any of its affiliates, the State Public Health Department, the State
Department of Natural Resources or the State Highway Department.



      (62)   "Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to public health or the
environment, including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by
the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions
of Section 307(A) of the Act or other acts.



      (63)   "Trade secret" means the whole or any portion or phase
of any manufacturing proprietary process or method which is not patented,
which is secret, which is useful in compounding an article of trade having a
commercial value, and the secrecy of which the owner has taken reasonable
measure to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those
selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes. “Trade secret”
shall not be construed, for purposes of these rules, to include any
information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their
constituents discharged, or sought to be discharged, into the publicly owned
treatment works.



      (64)   "Upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is
an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the nondomestic
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.



      (65)   "User" means any person who contributes or causes or
permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW.



      (66)   "Wastewater" means water resulting from industrial and
commercial processes and municipal operations, including liquid or
water-carried process waste, cooling and condensing waters, and sanitary
sewage.



      (67)   "Watercourse" means a channel in which the flow of
water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.



      (68)   "Waters of the State" means all streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the State or any
portion thereof.



   (b)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the
designated meanings:



      (1)   BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand



      (2)   CFR - Code of Federal Regulations



      (3)   COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand



      (4)   EPA - Environmental Protection Agency



      (5)   L - Liter



      (6)   Mg - Milligrams



      (7)   Mg/l - Milligrams per liter



      (8)   NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System



      (9)   POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works



      (10)   RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act



      (11)   SIC - Standard Industrial Classification



      (12)   SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act



      (13)   TSS - Total Suspended Solids



      (14)   O&M - Operation and Maintenance



      (15)   CWA - Clean Water Act



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.02  RESPONSIBILITIES OF USERS.



   Any industry or structure discharging process flow to a sanitary sewer,
storm sewer or receiving stream shall file the material listed in this
section with the Superintendent.  In addition, the Superintendent may
require each person who applies for or receives sewer service, or who,
because of the nature of the enterprise, creates a potential environmental
problem, to file such material.



   (a)   Baseline Monitoring Reports and Other Required Information.



      (1)   Submission of information.  All nondomestic users
proposing to connect to or contribute to the POTW shall submit to the City a
baseline monitoring report that contains information on the user, processes
and wastewaters before connecting to or contributing to the POTW.  All
existing nondomestic users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall
submit this information within ninety days after the effective date of this
chapter.  All new sources and sources that become nondomestic users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall be
required to submit to the Superintendent a report which contains the
information described below.  New sources shall also be required to include
in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends
to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards.  New sources shall give
estimates of the information requested when actual data are not available. 
The information submitted must be sufficient for the City to determine the
impact of the user's discharge on the POTW and the need for pretreatment. 
Categorical users shall report any changes to information in the baseline
monitoring report to the POTW within sixty days. The user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, on a disclosure form prescribed
by the City, the following information:



         A.   The name, address and location (if different from
the address) of the facility, and the name of the operator and owners.



         B.   The SIC number according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.



         C.   A list of any environmental control permits held by
or for the facility.



         D.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics,
including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Section 1043.03, as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory.



      Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures and methods detailed in:



            1.   Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, American Public Health Association;



            2.   Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of
Water and Wastes, United States Environmental Protection Agency; and



            3.   Annual Book of Standards, Part 131, Water,
Atmospheric Analysis, 1975, American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).



         E.   The time and duration of the contribution.



         F.   Average daily wastewater flow rates, in gallons per
day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, to the POTW from each
of the following:



            1.   Regulated process streams;



            2.   Other streams as necessary to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula specified in rule 323.2311(6) of the Act. 
The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where
justified by costs or feasibility considerations.



         G.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by
their size, location and elevation, from industries identified as significant
industries or subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or those
required by the City.



         H.   Identification of the pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.  In addition, the user shall submit
the results of sampling and analysis, identifying the nature and
concentration (or mass), where required by the standard or the
Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process.  Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where
required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations.



         I.   A description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.



         J.   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any City, State or Federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment
is required by the nondomestic  user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.



         K.   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment.  The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to
this schedule:



            1.   The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
facilities required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards.



            2.   No increment referred to in the paragraph
(a)(1)K.1. hereof shall exceed nine months.



            3.   Not later than fourteen days following each
date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit
a progress report to the Superintendent, including, as a minimum, a statement
as to whether or not he or she complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which he or she expects to comply
with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay and the steps being
taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. 
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the Superintendent.



            4.   Existing sources which become nondomestic
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard shall be considered existing nondomestic users, except
where such sources meet the definition of a new source as provided in Section
1043.01(a)(34).  New sources shall install and have in operating condition,
and shall start up, all pollution control equipment required to meet
applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.  Within the
shortest feasible time, not to exceed ninety days, new sources must meet all
applicable pretreatment standards.



         L.   Each product produced by type, amount, process and
rate of production.



         M.   The type and amount of raw materials processed,
including the average and the maximum per day.



         N.   The number and type of employees, the hours of
operation of the plant and the proposed or actual hours of operation of the
pretreatment system.



         O.   Any other information deemed by the City to be
necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the POTW.



      (2)   Evaluation and acceptance of baseline monitoring
reports; issuance of industrial use permits.  The baseline monitoring report
shall be signed by a principal responsible corporate officer of the user and
a qualified engineer.  The City will evaluate the complete report and data
furnished and may require additional information.  Within ninety days after
full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City shall notify
the user of the acceptance thereof in the form of a nondomestic user permit
or equivalent individual control mechanism, which permits contain the
following conditions:



         A.   A statement of duration, which in no case shall be
more than five years;



         B.   A statement of non-transferability without a
minimum prior notification to the POTW and a copy of the permit to the new
owner or operator;



         C.   Effluent limits based on applicable general
pretreatment standards as provided in this chapter;



         D.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification
and record keeping requirements, including an identification of the
pollutants to be monitored, the sampling location, the sampling frequency and
the sample type, based on the applicable standards as contained in this
chapter;



         E.   A statement of the applicable civil and criminal
penalties for violations of this chapter and any compliance schedule provided
for in this chapter, which schedules shall not extend the compliance date
beyond applicable Federal deadlines.



   (b)   Discharge Modifications. Within ninety days of the
promulgation or revision of a national categorical pretreatment standard, all
affected users must submit to the City the information required by paragraphs
(a)(1)J. and K. hereof.



   (c)   Discharge Conditions. Wastewater discharges shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the City.  The City may:



      (1)   Set unit charges or a schedule of user charges and fees
for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW;



      (2)   Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics;



      (3)   Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



      (4)   Require the installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities;



      (5)   Establish specifications for monitoring programs, which
may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and a reporting schedule;



      (6)   Establish compliance schedules;



      (7)   Require submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;



      (8)   Require the maintenance, retention and furnishing of
plant records relating to wastewater discharged as specified by the City,
have access thereto and make copies thereof;



      (9)   Require notification of the City for any new
introduction of wastewater constituents into the wastewater treatment system;



      (10)   Require, at least once every two years, that each
significant nondomestic user provide a plan to control slug discharges.  The
results of such activities shall be available to the Superintendent upon
request.  If the treatment plant decides that a slug control plan is needed,
the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:



         A.   A description of discharge practices, including
nonroutine batch discharges;



         B.   A description of stored chemicals;



         C.   Procedures for immediately notifying the treatment
plant of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a
prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written
notification within five days; and



         D.   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact
from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage
areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant-site runoff, worker training, building of containment
structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.



      (11)   Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
City to ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (d)   Notification by Nondomestic Users of Hazardous Waste Disposal.



      (1)   A nondomestic user shall notify the treatment plant, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and State hazardous waste
authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the treatment plant of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under
40 CFR Part 261.  Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).  If the nondomestic user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the
treatment plant, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the nondomestic user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the waste; an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and
an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged during the following twelve months.  All notifications must take
place within 180 days of the effective date of this section.  Nondomestic
users who commence discharging after the effective date of this section shall
provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the
listed or characteristic hazardous waste.  Any notification under this
section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the above requirements
during a calendar month for discharges of no more than fifteen kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified
in 40 CFR 251.30(d) and 281.33(e).  Discharges of more than fifteen
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
require a one-time notification.



      (3)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of
the RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the nondomestic user must
notify the treatment plant, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety days of the effective date of such regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this chapter,
the nondomestic user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce
the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.



   (e)   Records and Reports Generally. Nondomestic users shall
maintain records and file reports of the final disposal of specific liquid
and solid wastes, sludges, oils, radioactive materials, solvents and other
wastes.



   (f)   Compliance Date Reports. Within ninety days following the date
for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by
pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily
flow for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such
pretreatment standards or requirements.  New sources subject to categorical
standards shall install and start up pretreatment technology prior to
discharge and achieve compliance within the shortest time feasible, said
compliance not to exceed ninety days after the commencement of a discharge,
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6(b).  The report shall state whether or not the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements.  This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the nondomestic user and certified to by a qualified
representative, as defined in Section 1043.01(a)(4).



   (g)   Periodic Compliance Reports.



      (1)   All categorical and significant noncategorical
nondomestic users or new sources discharging into the POTW shall submit to
the Superintendent, during the months of June and December, unless required
more frequently in a pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which
are limited by such pretreatment standards or this chapter.  In addition,
this report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the
reporting period, exceed the average daily flow reported in paragraph (c)(3)
hereof.  At the discretion of the Superintendent, and in consideration of
such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc.,
the Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the reports are
to be submitted. Nondomestic users not subject to categorical pretreatment
standards shall submit a report every six months, which report shall contain
information necessary to protect the POTW, on a case by case basis.



      (2)   The Superintendent may also impose mass limitations on
users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations
is appropriate.  In such cases, the report required by subsection (f) hereof
shall also indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment
standards in the effluent of the user.



   (h)   Certification of Reports.  The reports required by this
section shall include a certification statement and shall be signed by an
authorized representative.



   (i)   Potential for Discharge.  Any industry which does not
normally discharge to a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or receiving stream, but
which has the potential to do so from accidental spills or similar
circumstances, may be required by the Superintendent to file the listed
reports in this section.



   (j)   Notice of Potential Problems; Slug Loads. All categorical and
noncategorical nondomestic users shall notify the POTW immediately of all
discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, as defined by 40 CFR
403.5(b).



   (k)   Notification of Changed Discharges.  All nondomestic users
shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous wastes for which the nondomestic user has submitted
initial notification under subsection (d) hereof, and further including any
groundwater purged for remedial action programs and groundwater containing
pollutants that infiltrate into the sewer and POTW.



   (l)   Confidential Information.  Information and data on a user
obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits,
monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or to
any governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically
requests confidentiality and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the City that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of
the user.



      When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of
a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public, but shall be available, upon
written request, to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter,
the NPDES permit or the pretreatment programs, and shall be available for use
by the State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.  Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. Information accepted by the City as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the City
until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.03  DISCHARGE OF OTHER WASTES INTO SEWERS.



   (a)   General Discharge Prohibitions.  No nondomestic user or other
user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any
pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the POTW or that causes pass-through or interference.  The
control authority shall investigate instances of pass-through or interference
and take appropriate enforcement action and inform the responsible
nondomestic user of the impact.  These general prohibitions and the specific
prohibitions listed below apply to all such nondomestic users of the POTW,
whether or not the nondomestic user is subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, State or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.  A nondomestic user may not contribute the
following substances to any POTW:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their
nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW.  Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and pollutants which
create a fire or explosion hazard in the treatment plant, including, but not
limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140
degrees Fahrenheit or sixty degrees centigrade, using the test method
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction
to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage
with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent
hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
the refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding,
petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin
in amounts that will cause interference or pass through or polishing wastes;



      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 (unless the
POTW is specifically designed to accommodate the discharges and has been
approved by the approval authority) or wastewater having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or
personnel of the POTW;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, to create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
POTW or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment
standard;



      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or
pollutants which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or result in the
presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the treatment plant and/or
collection system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance
and repair;



      (6)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any
other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and re-use or to interfere with the reclamation
process;



      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards;



      (8)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, solvents,
inks, paints, stains, vegetable tanning solutions and other coloring agents;



      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will result in
the wastewater treatment plant influent exceeding 104 degrees Fahrenheit or
which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW, resulting in
interference, or any wastewater with a temperature of 150 degrees Fahrenheit
(sixty-six degrees centigrade) or greater;



      (10)   Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which
will cause interference to the POTW;



      (11)   Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes or
isotopes of such half- life or concentration as may exceed limits established
by the City Manager in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations. All users of radioactive materials shall register with the City
Manager.



      (12)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or
creates a public nuisance;



      (13)   Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to,
noncontact cooling water;



      (14)   Garbage that has not been properly shredded; and



      (15)   The contents of septic, vehicular or marine holding
tanks or similar facilities. Trucked or hauled pollutants may be discharged
into the POTW, provided that the treatment plant has facilities designated
for such discharge, with the same being under the supervision and control of
the Superintendent, as follows:



         A.   Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at
the option of the Superintendent at a designated receiving structure within
the treatment plant area and at such times that are established by the
Superintendent, provided that such waste does not violate the prohibited
discharge standards of this chapter or any other requirements established or
adopted by the City.  Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles
to use such facility shall be issued by the Superintendent.



         B.   The discharge of hauled industrial waste as
"industrial septage" requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge
permit from the City.  The Superintendent shall have authority to prohibit
the disposal of such waste if such disposal would interfere with the
operation of the treatment plant.  Waste haulers are subject to all other
sections of this chapter.



   (b)   Affirmative Defense.  A nondomestic user shall have an
affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of
the general prohibitions established in subsection (a) hereof and the
specific prohibitions in subsections (c), (d), (e) and (f) hereof if the user
can demonstrate both of the following:



      (1)   It did not know or have reason to know that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, would cause pass-through or interference.



      (2)   A local limit designated to prevent pass-through or
interference was developed in accordance with subsection (d) hereof for each
pollutant in the user’s discharge that caused pass-through or interference,
and the user was in compliance with each local limit directly before and
during the pass-through or interference, or if a local limit designed to
prevent pass-through or interference has not been developed in accordance
with subsection (d) hereof for the pollutant that caused the pass-through or
interference, the user’s discharge directly before and during the pass-
through or interference did not change substantially in nature or
constituents from the user’s prior discharge activity when the publicly
owned treatment works was regularly in compliance with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit requirements and, in the case of
interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.



   Nondomestic users shall not have an affirmative defense for the
discharge of pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW that may cause worker health or safety problems.



   (c)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Upon the
promulgation of national or State of Michigan categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard,
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in
that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this chapter and shall be considered a part of this chapter.  The
Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting
requirements.



   (d)   Specific Pollutant Limitations.  No person shall discharge
wastewater, a twenty-four hour composite sample (except for oil and grease,
for which a grab sample shall be taken) of which exceeds the following:



      (1)   .310 mg/l arsenic (As).



      (2)   .120 mg/l cadmium (Cd).



      (3)   .120 mg/l copper (Cu).



      (4)   .093 mg/l available cyanide (Cn).



      (5)   1.480 mg/l lead (Pb).



      (6)   Nondetectible limit for mercury (Hg). The detection
level shall not exceed .2 ug/l unless higher levels are appropriate due to
matrix interference. Compliance monitoring for mercury shall be in accordance
with approved EPA methodology.



      (7)   2.390 mg/l total nickel (Ni).



      (8)   .027 mg/l silver (Ag).



      (9)   2.170 mg/l total chromium (Cr).



      (10)   .940 mg/l zinc (ZN).



      (11)   28.0 mg/l total phenols.



      (12)   68.0 mg/l tetrahydrafuran.



      (13)   100 mg/l oil and grease.



      (14)   15 mg/l chlorine demand at thirty minutes contact time.



      (15)   60 mg/l ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N, as N).



      (16)   5.8 mg/l total phosphorous.



      (17)   12.8 mg/l formaldehyde.



   If the Superintendent determines that the maximum concentrations of any
other substances, either individually or in combination with other substances
(whether or not such substances are defined in this chapter), interfere with
or cause damage to the sewage works or receiving waters, said concentrations
of such substances or those substances listed in paragraphs (d)(1) to (16)
hereof, shall be reduced by the Superintendent or his or her authorized
representative.



   If the Superintendent determines that the maximum concentrations of any
other substances, either individually or in combination with other substances
(whether or not such substances are defined in this chapter), can be
increased without interference with or damage to the sewage works or
receiving waters, and that such increase does not result in plant exceeding
State or Federal limits, then the Superintendent may increase said
concentrations of such substances, to those substances listed in paragraph
(d)(1) to (16) hereof.



   The Superintendent shall base his or her determination of either
reducing or increasing the maximum concentrations on factors including, but
not limited to, quantity of flow, equipment capabilities, testing reliability
and other factors that may, from time to time, be available to the
Superintendent.



   In no event, however, shall the upper limits for BOD, suspended solids,
total phosphorous and total ammonia-nitrogen exceed those limits set in
Section 1443.06(b).



   (e)   State Requirements.  State requirements and limitations on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal
requirements and limitations or those set forth in this chapter.



   (f)   City's Right of Revision. The City reserves the right to
establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
wastewater disposal system.



   (g)   Dilution.  No user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards or in other
pollutant-specific limitations developed by the City or the State.



   (h)   Mercury Policy and Procedure.



      (1)   There shall be no detectable  amounts of mercury
discharged into the POTW.  Mercury sampling procedures, preservation,
handling, and  analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in
accordance with EPA Method 245.1 or 245.2.  The Level of Detection (LOD),
developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136 shall not
be greater than 0.2 ug/L for mercury, unless higher levels are appropriate
due to matrix interference.



      (2)   The evaluation of potential matrix interference(s) shall
include, at a minimum, the following:



         A.   A demonstration that the laboratory conducting the
analysis is capable of achieving the LOD of 0.2 ug/L in reagent water;



         B.   A demonstration that the LOD of 0.2 ug/L cannot be
achieved in the effluent; and



         C.   A demonstration that an attempt has been made to
resolve the matrix interference(s).



      (3)   In cases where true matrix interference(s) can be
demonstrated, a discharge- specific LOD will be developed in accordance with
the procedure in 40 CFR 136.  Discharge-specific LOD's will be 
incorporated into the wastewater discharge permit of the nondomestic user.



   (i)   Mercury Reduction Plans.



      (1)   To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to
the POTW is not exceeded, the Control Authority may require any nondomestic
user with a reasonable potential to discharge mercury to develop, submit for
approval and implement a Mercury Reduction Plan (MRP).  The MRP may be
required by permit if the Control Authority has determined that a reasonable
potential for mercury discharge exists.  MRP's may also be required in
notices of violations, orders, agreements or other documents or if the user
is designated as a mercury source.  An approved MRP will place the user in
compliance if the user is working on mercury reduction, however, the City
reserves the right to prohibit any detectible mercury discharge.  Approvable
MRP's  will contain the following elements or elements determined equivalent
by the Control Authority:



         A.   A commitment by the nondomestic user to reduce
discharges of mercury, utilizing the best available technologies, with a goal
of achieving compliance with the LOD limit for mercury;



         B.   Within 60 days of notification by the Control
Authority that a MRP is required, the nondomestic user shall supply an
initial identification of all potential sources of mercury which could be
discharged to the sanitary sewer system;



         C.   Specific strategies for mercury reduction with
reasonable time frames for implementation, capable of ensuring that mercury
discharges will be reduced;



         D.   A program for sampling and analysis of the
discharge for mercury utilizing approved EPA 245.1 or 245.2 methods and/or a
demonstration of specific, measurable and/or otherwise quantifiable mercury
reductions consistent with the goal of reducing mercury discharges below the
specified LOD.  Where such reductions can not be demonstrated through normal
effluent monitoring, the demonstration should incorporate the following:



            1.   Internal process monitoring, documenting the
results of mercury reduction strategies at sampling locations within the
facility;



            2.   Internal and/or effluent sampling utilizing
clean and/or ultra-clean sampling and analytical methods as referenced by
USEPA Federal Register. Note that the results of such monitoring will not be
used for compliance purposes unless performed in accordance with EPA Method
245.1 or 245.2 and collected at the appropriate compliance measurement
location.



            3.   Loading calculations wherein the nondomestic
user calculates the total mass of mercury reduced from the sanitary sewer
discharge through reagent substitutions, changes in disposal practices and/or
other approved MRP strategies implemented.



         E.   Submittal of a periodic status report summarizing
quantifiable mercury reductions performed to date, an evaluation of the
effectiveness of actions taken, and any new strategies or modifications to
the MRP proposed to improve mercury reduction efforts.



         F.   Any other conditions that the Control Authority
deems necessary to ensure that mercury reduction efforts are effective in
achieving the goals of this section.



      (2)   Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days of
the required due date shall  constitute significant noncompliance in
accordance with this section.



      (3)   A MRP may be evaluated for adequacy at any time by the
Control Authority. Failure to comply with the MRP requirement constitutes
noncompliance.  The Control Authority will follow its Enforcement Response
Plan (ERP) to ensure that corrective actions are taken.



      (4)   A nondomestic user may request a release from MRP
requirements if:



         A.   All samples of the discharge for a period of one
year are less than the specified LOD;



         B.   The nondomestic user has complied with the minimum
monitoring frequency; and



         C.   The Control Authority deems that MRP commitments
have been fulfilled sufficiently to ensure continued compliance with the
mercury limitation.



      (5)   Re-discovery of mercury in the nondomestic user
discharge may trigger the submission of a new MRP, or enforcement in
accordance with the ERP.



   (j)   MRPs for Dental Facilities.



      (1)   Dental facilities may implement the following MRP:



         A.   To accomplish the goals of the MRP, a dental
facility may elect to install and maintain per the manufacturer's
recommendations a mercury separator which is ISO 14000 certified, or a
similarly approvable system capable of removing an equivalent amount of
mercury.



         B.   The dental facility will submit semiannual reports
on December 30 and June 30 of each year, documenting mercury removal
accomplished over the preceding six months.  The report will include
analytical or other quantifiable demonstrations of mercury reduction
achieved.  It will also include all applicable analytical data.



         C.   The dental facility agrees to allow City personnel
to inspect the dental facility to ensure that requirements of the MRP are
being met.  Samples may also be collected.



      (2)   If the Control Authority determines that the dental
facility is not complying with  any MRP requirement, the MRP may be revoked.



   (k)   Accidental Discharges.  Where required, a user shall provide
protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this chapter.  Facilities to prevent the accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
owner's or user's own cost and expense.  Detailed plans showing facilities
and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
City for review and shall be approved by the City before construction of the
facility.  All required users shall complete such a plan within 180 days of
the effective date of this chapter.  If required by the City, a user who
commences contribution to the POTW after such effective date shall not be
permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge
procedures have been approved by the City.  Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the nondomestic user from
the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.  In the case of an accidental discharge, the
user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The
notification shall include the location of the discharge, the type of waste,
the concentration and volume of the discharge and corrective actions.



      (1)   Written notice. Within forty-eight hours following an
accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the City Manager a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.  Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any
other damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fine, civil penalty or other liability which may be imposed by
this chapter or other applicable law.



      (2)   Notice to employees.  A notice shall be permanently
posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place, advising
employees of whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.  Employers
shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer from such a dangerous
discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97; Ord. 829.  Passed 11-9-09; Ord. 835.  Passed
5-10- 10; Ord. 840.  Passed 10-25-10; Ord. 851.  Passed 3-12-12; Ord.
856.  Passed 7-9-12.)



1043.04  PRETREATMENT.



   (a)   Nondomestic users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment
as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations
specified by Federal pretreatment regulations and as required by the City. 
Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
City shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. 
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the City for review and shall be approved by the City
before construction of the facility.  The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
City under this chapter.  Any subsequent change in the pretreatment facility
or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the City
prior to the user's initiation of the change.



   The City shall annually publish, in a major local newspaper, a list of
the users which were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment
requirements or standards at least once during the twelve previous months. 
The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against
such users during the same twelve months.



   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, upon request.



   (b)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any
water or waste, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.05  CONTROL MANHOLES; EVALUATIONS OF WATER AND WASTE.



   (a)   The City shall require to be provided and operated, at the
user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. 
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises,
but the City may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.  There shall be ample room in or near such
sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis.  The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall
be maintained, at all times, in a safe and proper operating condition at the
expense of the user.  Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans
and specifications submitted to and approved by the City and all applicable
local construction standards and specifications.  Construction shall be
completed within ninety days following written notification by the City.



   (b)   The City shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether or not the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements
are being complied with.  Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater
is created or discharged shall allow the City or its representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, records examination and records copying or in the
performance of any of the duties of the City or its representative. The City,
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the EPA may set up on
the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.  Where a user
has security measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into his or her premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with his or her security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City, the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the EPA will be permitted to
enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.



   (c)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and waste, to which reference is made in Sections 1043.03 and 1043.04,
shall be laboratory determinations in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, as
amended October 8, 1991, or EPA approved test techniques, which techniques
are outlined in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
17th Edition, a joint publication of the American Public Health Association,
the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in
subsection (a) hereof. 



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.06  EXCEPTIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL USES; SURCHARGES; ADDED CHARGES.



   (a)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit
a special agreement or arrangement between the City and an industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted
by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial
concern.



   (b)   Where the strength of sewage from an industrial, commercial or
institutional establishment exceeds 250 parts per million, by weight, of BOD,
or 250 parts per million, by weight, of suspended solids, or has a chlorine
demand greater than 5 parts per million, by weight, an ammonia-nitrogen
content greater than 40 parts per million, by weight, or a total phosphorous
content greater that 4.5 parts per million, by weight, and where such wastes
are permitted to be discharged to the sewer system by the Superintendent, an
added charge, as provided for in subsection (c) hereof, shall be made against
such establishment according to the strength of such wastes, which wastes
shall in no event exceed 862 parts per million, by weight, of BOD, or 1,000
parts per million, by weight, of suspended solids, or have a chlorine demand
greater than 15 parts per million, by weight, an ammonia-nitrogen content
greater than 60 parts per million, by weight, a pH content less than 5.0 S.U.
or greater than 11.0 S.U., or a phosphorous content greater than 5.8 parts
per million, by weight.  No industrial, commercial or institutional waste
which exceeds the limits set forth in the preceding sentence shall be
discharged.  The strength of such wastes shall be determined by composite
samples taken over a sufficient period of time to ensure a representative
sample.  The cost of sampling and testing shall be borne by the
establishment, whether owner or lessee.



   (c)   In the event that the upper limits for BOD, suspended solids,
ammonia-nitrogen or phosphorous, as specified in subsection (b) hereof, are
exceeded, the City shall require that such sewage be treated by the
establishment responsible therefor before being emptied into the sewer, or
the right to empty such sewage shall be denied, if necessary to protect the
system or any part thereof.  Further, an additional charge in the form of a
surcharge shall be made over and above the regular rates for those loading in
excess of the specific pollutant limits set forth in subsection (b) hereof. 
The surcharge shall be calculated annually, based upon a percentage of the
annual costs of operation and maintenance, including administration,
attributable to treating a substance in excess of that of domestic sewage,
which costs shall be divided by the influent pounds per day of the BOD,
suspended solids, ammonia-nitrogen and phosphorous.  The surcharge shall be
set on an annual basis by Council resolution.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97; Ord. 829.  Passed 11-9-09; Ord. 835.  Passed
5-10-10.)



1043.07  FEES, CHARGES AND REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY EXPENSES.



   (a)   The Howell City Council shall set, by resolution, all
nondomestic user permit fees, SIU permit fees, CIU permit fees, SIU
inspection fees, and sampling fees, the same which shall relate back to this
Section of the Howell City Code and shall be on file with the City Clerk and
the Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant at all times and places
for inspection.



   (b)   A sewer user shall reimburse the City for any other expenses
not set forth herein incurred by the City as a result of making
investigations and negotiations regarding the following:



         (1)   A new industrial or commercial user;



         (2)   A change in the disposal material or technique by
an existing user; or



         (3)   A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (c)   Should any such expense, reasonably incurred, not be paid to
the City within sixty days, such amount may be made a part of a special
assessment roll which shall be prepared and confirmed in accordance with any
of the special assessment ordinances available to the City, including those
for the abatement and correction of nuisances, as defined in Section 652.01
of the General Offenses Code.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97; Ord. 750.  Passed 1-12-04.)



1043.08  ADJUSTMENT OF CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS FOR POLLUTED
INTAKE WATER.



   Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the  nondomestic user's intake water in accordance
with the following:



   (a)   Application.  Any nondomestic user wishing to obtain credit
for intake pollutants must make application to the Superintendent.  Upon
request of the nondomestic user, the applicable standard will be calculated
on a "net" basis (i.e. adjusted to reflect credit for  pollutants in the
intake water) if the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) hereof are met.



   (b)   Criteria.



      (1)   The nondomestic user must demonstrate that the processes
it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards
would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence
of pollutants in the intake waters.



      (2)   Credit for generic pollutants, such as BOD, total
suspended solids and oil and grease, shall not be granted unless the
nondomestic user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in
the user's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of the
generic measure in the intake water, or unless appropriate additional limits
are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.



      (3)   Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to
meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards, up to a maximum value
equal to the influent value.  Additional monitoring may be necessary to
determine eligibility for credits and compliance with standards adjusted
under this section.



      (4)   Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates
that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which
the POTW discharges. The Superintendent may waive this requirement if he or
she finds that no environmental degradation will result.



   (c)   Application of Standards on a Net Basis.  The applicable
categorical pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR, Chapter I, subchapter
N, specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net basis.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.09  SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS OF WATER AND WASTE.



   Upon the request of the Superintendent, the sewer user shall conduct
such sampling and analysis programs as are necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter.  A record of the results of such analysis or the actual
samples taken, along with a statement of how and when such samples were
taken, shall be submitted to the City upon request in accordance with a
schedule established by the Superintendent.  If sampling performed by a
sewer user indicates a violation of this chapter, the user shall notify the
Superintendent within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. 
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within thirty days after
becoming aware of the violation.



   The City shall randomly sample and analyze the effluent from
nondomestic users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify,
independent of information supplied by nondomestic users, compliance with
pretreatment standards.  Significant nondomestic users shall be inspected
and have their effluent sampled at least once per year. 



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.10  AUTHORITY OF POTW; ENFORCEMENT.



   The treatment plant shall operate pursuant to legal authority
enforceable in Federal, State or local courts, which authorizes or enables
the treatment plant to apply and enforce the requirements of Sections 307(b)
and (c) and 402(b)(8) of the Act and any regulations implementing those
sections.  At a minimum, this legal authority shall enable the treatment
plant to:



   (a)   Deny or condition new or increased contributions of
pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the treatment plant by
nondomestic users where such contributions do not meet applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements, or where such contributions would
cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit;



   (b)   Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements by nondomestic users;



   (c)   Control, through permit, order, or similar means, the
contribution to the treatment plant by each nondomestic user to ensure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements;



   (d)   Require the development of compliance schedules by each
nondomestic user and the submission of all notices and self-monitoring
reports from nondomestic users;



   (e)   Carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring
procedures necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by
nondomestic users, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements by nondomestic users;



   (f)   Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any nondomestic user with
any pretreatment standard and requirement..



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.11  DAMAGE TO SYSTEM.



   (a)   No person shall purposely, knowingly, recklessly or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the POTW or treatment
plant.



   (b)   The City may suspend wastewater treatment services when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, which causes interference to the POTW or which causes the City
to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.



   (c)   The City may terminate wastewater treatment services to any
user who:



      (1)   Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his or her discharge;



      (2)   Fails to report significant changes in wastewater
constituents or characteristics;



      (3)   Refuses reasonable access to such user's premises by
representatives of the City for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violates the provisions of this chapter or any final
judicial order entered with respect thereto.



   (d)   Any person notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment
services shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution.  If the
person fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall
take such steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to any individual.  The City shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence shall be submitted to the City within fifteen days of the
date of occurrence.



   (e)   Any person who violates any subsections to this section which
causes damage in either the POTW system, causes interference with same,
causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit, or any other
type of action which endangers the POTW system or the wastewater treatment
plant in way, shape or form shall be liable to the City in damages for all
actual costs incurred by the City for the prevention of or damage to the POTW
system. The City shall place a lien upon the real property of the person
which was used in violating this Chapter upon failure to pay damages to the
City. The placing of this lien will be done in a manner as prescribed by the
Howell City Charter or the Codified Ordinances of the City of Howell.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97; Ord. 750.  Passed 1-12-04.)



1043.12  BYPASSES.



   (a)   Bypasses are hereby prohibited, except under the following
conditions:



      (1)   A nondomestic user may allow any bypass to occur which
does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation;



      (2)   If a nondomestic user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, he or she shall submit prior notice to the POTW at least ten days
prior to the date of the bypass, if possible. The Superintendent may approve
an anticipated bypass after considering its adverse effects if he or she
determines that the provisions of subsection (c) hereof will apply.



   (b)   A nondomestic user shall submit oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
POTW within twenty-four hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. 
A written explanation with details of the bypass shall be submitted within
forty-eight hours of the bypass, and will include a description of the
bypass; its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times; if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and all steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the bypass.



   (c)   A bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take
enforcement action against a nondomestic user for a bypass unless all of the
following provisions apply:



      (1)    The bypass was unavoidable to prevent a loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;



      (2)   There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment down time.  This condition is
not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred
during normal periods of equipment down time or preventative maintenance;



      (3)   The nondomestic user submitted notices as required under
paragraph (a)(2) hereof.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.13  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Council, other duly authorized employees of the City and agents of the
State Water Resources Commission, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in
accordance with this chapter, at any time during reasonable or usual business
hours.  No person shall refuse or obstruct such entry. 



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.14  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE TO CORRECT.



   (a)   Whoever violates, fails to comply with, or is in significant
noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be served,
by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative, with a written
notice stating the nature of such violation or noncompliance and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.



   (b)   Any user subject to enforcement action under this chapter may
request a hearing before the City Manager within ten days of receipt of
notification of proposed enforcement action.  A hearing shall be held by the
City Manager concerning the violation, the reasons the action is to be taken
and the proposed enforcement action, and the user shall be directed to show
cause before the City Manager as to why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken.



   (c)   The City Manager may conduct a hearing and take evidence or
may designate an officer or employee to:



      (1)   Issue, in the name of the City Manager, notices of
hearings, requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;



      (2)   Take evidence; and



      (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearings,
including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to
the City Manager for action thereon.



   (d)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded pursuant to statute.  The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or to any party
to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.



   (e)   After the City Manager has reviewed the evidence, he or she
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have
been installed on existing treatment facilities, and unless such devices or
other related appurtenances are properly operated.  Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.



   (f)   The City Manager shall also establish appropriate surcharges
or fees to reimburse the City for the additional cost of operation and
maintenance of the POTW works due to violations of this chapter.



   (g)   Any action by the City Manager may be appealed to Council.



   (h)   If any person discharges sewage, industrial waste or other
waste into the City's wastewater disposal system contrary to any of the
provision of this chapter, Federal or State pretreatment requirements or any
order of the City, the City Attorney may commence an action for injunctive
relief for noncompliance by nondomestic users with pretreatment standards and
requirements.  Such action shall be in addition to the penalty provided in
Section 1043.99.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.15  RETENTION OF RECORDS.



   All of the following apply to recordkeeping requirements:



   (a)   A nondomestic user shall maintain records of all information
resulting from any monitoring activities required herein. The records shall
include all of the following information for all samples:



      (1)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and
the names of the person or persons taking the samples.



      (2)   The dates analyses were performed.



      (3)   Who performed the analyses.



      (4)   The analytical techniques and methods used.



      (5)   The results of the analyses.



   (b)   A nondomestic user shall be required to retain, for a minimum
of three years, any records of monitoring activities and results, whether or
not the monitoring activities are required herein, and shall make the records
available for inspection and copying by the approval authority and the E.P.A.
regional administrator. In the case of a nondomestic user, the period of
retention shall be extended during the course of any pending litigation
regarding the nondomestic user or when requested by the approval authority or
the E.P.A. regional administrator.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.16  UPSET AS AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   (a)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
provisions of subsection (b) hereof are met.



   (b)   A nondomestic user who wishes to establish the affirmative
defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs or other relevant evidence, that all of the following
provisions apply:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the nondomestic user can identify
the cause or causes of the upset.



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures.



      (3)   The nondomestic user has submitted the following
information to the publicly owned treatment works within twenty-four hours of
becoming aware of the upset:



         A.   A description of the indirect discharge and the
cause of noncompliance.



         B.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue.



         C.   Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent a recurrence of the noncompliance.



   If this information is provided orally, a written submission shall be
provided within five days of the user becoming aware of the upset.



   (c)   In any enforcement proceeding, the nondomestic user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (d)   In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion, agency
enforcement personnel should review any claims that noncompliance was caused
by an upset. A determination made in the course of the review does not
constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Nondomestic users
will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset
only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards.



   (e)   The nondomestic user shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided. This requirement applies in a situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost or fails. 



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.17  RULES OF THE MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY.



   Any and all rules set forth by the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality under the terms and conditions of the Act, as defined in this
chapter, shall be referred to and followed in all cases in which this chapter
does not address a particular issue. If any Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality rules come into conflict with this chapter, and the
rules allow for less stringent requirements, this chapter shall prevail. Any
and all amendments to the rules that may be made by the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality after the passage of this chapter shall be looked
upon as having amended the rules and regulations only, and this chapter,
only, in light of new rules and regulations promulgated by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97.)



1043.99  PENALTY; LIABILITY FOR COSTS OF DAMAGES; ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS AS
PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (a)   Notwithstanding the penalties prescribed in these Codified
Ordinances for civil or criminal violations, the City shall have the
authority to seek or assess civil or criminal penalties in an amount of at
least five hundred dollars ($500.00) a day for each violation by nondomestic
users of pretreatment standards and requirements, unless limited to a lesser
amount by Federal or State law.



   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) hereof,
whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned to the City by reason of such violation or noncompliance, and
recovery therefor may be had in an appropriate action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (c)   Any continued violation or noncompliance, after due notice as
provided in Section 1043.14, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be
abated by a suit in equity by the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction.  This remedy shall be in addition to those heretofore provided
for.



   (d)   Any continued violation or noncompliance, after due notice as
provided in Section 1043.14 shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be
abated by a suit in equity by the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction. This remedy shall be in addition to those heretofore provided
for.



(Ord. 656.  Passed 9-15-97; Ord. 750.  Passed 1-12-04.)



CHAPTER 1044
Water and Sewerage Rates and Management



1044.01   Short title.



1044.02   Definitions.



1044.03   Administration and enforcement.



1044.04   General provisions.



1044.05   Permits and connections; pipe specifications; repairs.



1044.06   Water meters.



1044.07   Water rates and tap-in charges.



1044.08   Sewer rates and tap-in charges.



1044.09   Liens, deposits and connections.



1044.10   Prohibited acts.



1044.11   Fiscal year; revision of rates; use of moneys.



1044.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   General finance; budget procedure - see CHTR. Ch. 11



   Municipal utility rates and charges - see CHTR. Secs. 16.2, 16.3



   Water - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040



   Sewers - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042



   Industrial wastewater pretreatment regulations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch.
1043



   Costs for extensions to new developments - see S.U. & P.S. 1050.01



1044.01.  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Howell
Water and Sewerage Rates and Management Chapter."



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1044.02.  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:



   (1)   Capital Connection Charge. "Capital Connection Charge " means
the fee paid to the City of Howell for a new private connection to the public
water or wastewater system within the City.



   (2)   Charge.



      A.   "Debt service charge" means a charge levied on customers
of the water or sewer system which are used to pay the principal, interest
and the administrative costs of retiring any debt incurred for construction
of the water or sewer system. The debt service charge shall be in addition to
the usage charge defined in paragraph (2)C. hereof.



      B.   "Sewer service charge" means the sum applicable to the
user charge, surcharges, industrial cost recovery and debt service charges.



      C.   "Usage charge" means a charge levied on users of a
treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works,
pursuant to Section 204(b) of the Clean Water Act (Public Law 92-500, as
amended) and includes the cost of replacement.



      (3)   Curb Box. "Curb box" means the City-installed water
shut-off in a service line nearest the tap into a City water line.



      (4)   Customer. "Customer" means a person making use of the
facilities provided for in this chapter.



      (5)   Department. "Department" means the Department of Public
Works.



      (6)   Director. "Director" means the Director of the
Department of Public Works.



      (7)   Facilities. "Facilities" means the water and sanitary
sewer lines of the City and all appurtenances thereof or incidental thereto.



      (8)   Footing Drain. "Footing drain" means a pipe or conduit
which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which
intentionally admits ground water.



      (9)   Infiltration. "Infiltration" means that portion of
ground water which is unintentionally admitted to a sewer.



      (10)   Laboratory Determination. "Laboratory determination"
means the measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes in accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition, at
the time of such measurement, test or analysis, of Standard Methods for
Examination of Water and Waste Water (a joint publication of the American
Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water
Pollution Control Federation) or in accordance with any other method
prescribed by rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.



      (11)   Meter Equivalent Unit. "Meter Equivalent Unit " means
the number of units that mirror the hydraulic ratio of a given meter size
compared to a baseline 1" meter.



      (12)   NPDES Permit. "NPDES permit" means a permit issued
pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System prescribed in
the Clean Water Act (Public Law 92-500, as amended).



      (13)   Operation and Maintenance. "Operation and maintenance"
means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other efforts required to
operate and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system
consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an
effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable State and
Federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement.



      (14)   Person.  "Person" means any individual, partnership,
co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity or other legal entity, or his, her or its
legal representatives, agents or assigns.



      (15)   PL 92-500. "PL 92-500" means the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act of 1972, being Public Law 92-500 of the 92nd Congress
and adopted on October 18, 1972.



      (16)   Replacement. "Replacement" means the replacement in
whole or in part of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or
treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance
with the NPDES permit and other applicable State and Federal regulations.



      (17)   Sanitary Sewer or Sanitary Sewer Line. "Sanitary sewer"
or "sanitary sewer line" means a sewer provided by the City for the purpose
of receiving any flowing sewage.



      (18)   Sewage. "Sewage" means any waste in liquid form and
includes solids which have been mixed with liquids so as to result in a
free-flowing consistency, but does not include surface drainage.



      (19)   Storm Sewer. "Storm sewer" means a sewer provided by
the City for the purpose of receiving surface water and/or storm water which
does not require treatment under rules and guidelines by the EPA.



      (20)   Sprinkling. "Sprinkling" means the watering,
sprinkling, soaking or running of water from the City water system upon
lawns, gardens, turfs, shrubs or other property in the City.



      (21)   User.  "User" means any person who contributes or
causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the wastewater
treatment plant or POTW treatment plant, as that term is defined in Chapter
1043 .



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95; Ord. 916.  Passed 8-13-18.)



1044.03  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (a)   Control. The Department of Public Works shall have complete
control over all water and sanitary sewer mains and service of the City and
is hereby charged with the installation, operation, use, maintenance and
protection of such facilities.



   (b)   Director's Duties. The Director of the Department of Public
Works is hereby charged with the complete operation of the Department and the
enforcement of this chapter. 



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1044.04.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (a)   Scope of Chapter. No water or sewer facilities of the City
shall be sold, leased or used in any manner, except as provided in this
chapter.



   (b)   Sewer Connection Required. Every person owning or using
property in the City, upon which sewage is created, is hereby required to
provide an adequate connection with a sanitary sewer line of the City,
whenever one is available, as required by Chapter 1042.



   (c)   Inspection. The Director of the Department of Public Works may
enter any premises and inspect any installation connecting to the water or
sewer facilities of the City and may examine any of the matter being dumped
into such an installation.



   (d)   Harmful Matter. If, in the opinion of the Director, any
harmful matter is found being dumped into the City sewer lines, causing
excessive depreciation or damage beyond that generally anticipated, he or she
shall report his or her findings to the City Manager, who may order the use
of such sewer line discontinued or may direct that an additional charge be
made for the use thereof, commensurate with the additional burden caused
thereby, which action may be reviewed by Council, whose decision shall be
final.



   (e)   Contract. This chapter constitutes a contract between the City
and any person making use of the City water and sewer facilities, and the
City reserves the right to amend this chapter at any time it deems necessary
or when so required by the law. Any such amendment shall automatically amend
or create a new contract between the City and a customer, and all amending
terms shall become binding upon their effective dates.



   (f.)   Breach of Contract. The violation of, or the failure to
comply with, any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a breach
of contract on the part of the customer, and the customer's use of the
facilities provided for in this chapter shall be terminated by the Department
of Public Works.



   (g)   Separate Ownership. In cases where a number of persons or
premises are supplied through one meter and one service, and one or more of
the buildings or premises are sold or transferred or otherwise pass under
separate ownership, the owners of the building or premises shall disconnect
such buildings or premises and provide direct, individual installations for
each separate owner.



   (h)   Temporary Service. Temporary use of water and sewer facilities
may be provided on approval of the Director under such terms as may be
directed by the Director, which terms shall, in all instances, be sufficient
to compensate the City for all expense incurred and water used.



   (i)   Liability. The City, in supplying the facilities provided for
in this chapter, shall use reasonable care but shall not be liable for any
damage caused by shut-off, breakage, stoppage, variation in pressure,
explosion or failure of any kind whatsoever in the operation of water and
sewer facilities.



   (j)   Change of Ownership or Occupancy. Whenever a customer ceases
to use the facilities provided for in this chapter through a sale of
property, a change of tenancy or otherwise, such customer shall notify the
City in writing of his or her termination of the use of such facilities.
Failure of a customer to give such notice to the City shall continue the
contract between the City and the customer, at the option of the City, and
the customer may be held liable for all of the services provided or furnished
the premises until such notice is properly given.



   (k)   Use of Facilities Terminated. Whenever the Department receives
notice of the termination of the use of the facilities provided for in this
chapter, it shall, forthwith, proceed to disconnect or shut off such
facilities as may have been provided and make a final reading of any meter
located upon the premises affected. However, if a new customer has obtained a
permit for continuing the use of such facilities, the Department shall only
make a final reading of a meter located upon the premises, and the use of
such facilities shall be continued under the new permit.



   (l)   Shut-Off for Violation. If a person violates or fails to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, the Department shall,
forthwith, terminate the use of the facilities provided to such person by
disconnecting or shutting off the same, in which event the use of such
facilities shall not again be permitted until all liability to the City is
fully satisfied and assurance is provided, as may be required by the City
Clerk, that no further violations will occur.



   (m)   Waste of Water. Every customer shall at all times exercise due
diligence to prevent the waste of water, and to this end the customer shall
be charged with the immediate stopping of all leaks and the proper operation
of all shut-off cocks included in his or her installations. At no time shall
he or she allow a shut-off cock to remain open and unattended without good
use being made thereof.



   (n)   Fire Hydrants. The Department shall compile and maintain a
complete record of all fire hydrants and shall install such additional
hydrants, or remove or change the location of such existing hydrants, as the
Manager may direct. The Department shall at all times be charged with the
replacement, repair and operation of such hydrants.



   (o)   Emergency Restrictions. If an emergency is created due to a
shortage of water, the City reserves the right to restrict the use of water
from its mains to whatever degree is deemed necessary in the opinion of the
Manager, in which event the Manager shall give notice of such restriction by
publication, loudspeaker, handbill or mail distribution. 



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1044.05.  PERMITS AND CONNECTIONS; PIPE SPECIFICATIONS; REPAIRS.



   (a)   Permit Required. No person shall make or change an
installation which may affect the City water or sewer facilities, or tap into
or use any such facility, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Building Inspector.



   (b)   Permit Application. Such a permit may be obtained by making
written application to the office of the Building Inspector on forms provided
by the City.



   (c)   Connecting Water Lines. Whenever a permit is issued under this
section for tapping into City water lines, the person obtaining the permit,
or his or her other successors or assigns, shall provide and maintain such
connecting lines as the City may require, from the curb box shut-off, which
shall be located near the customer's property line, to the place of use upon
his or her premises. Only type "K" copper pipe of a minimum size of one inch
shall be used between the City water line and the curb box installed at a
minimum depth of four feet, six inches below the surface of the ground.



   (d)   Connecting Sewer Lines. Whenever a permit is issued under this
section for tapping into City sewer lines, it shall be the duty and
obligation of the person obtaining such permit, or his or her successors or
assigns, to provide and maintain such connecting lines, as the City may
require, from the City sewer line to the place of use upon his or her
premises. Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Manager,
connecting sewer lines shall meet City's existing engineering specifications,
a copy of which is available in the City Manager's office.



    Sanitary sewer pipe joints shall meet the sewer pipe manufacturer's
specifications, as approved by the Department of Public Works.



    The size of the connecting line shall be not less than six inches in
diameter.



   (e)   Storm Sewers. Whenever any permit is issued to build or repair
a storm sewer, it shall be the duty and obligation of the person obtaining
such permit, or his or her successors or assigns, to provide and maintain
such connecting lines, as the City may require, from the City storm sewer
line to the place of use upon his or her premises. Unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Manager, storm sewer lines shall meet the
City's existing engineering specifications, a copy of which is available in
the City Manager's office.



   All pipe must be at a minimum depth of two feet to the top of the pipe.



   (f)   Damage and Repairs. Whenever any damage occurs to any sanitary
sewer line or storm sewer line between the sewer main and the place of use on
the owner's premises, the landowner shall be financially responsible for
repairing such damage. The City may contract to repair such damage if, in the
opinion of the Manager, the resources are available to do so. The City
Manager shall have the power to order the repairs done by the City if the
failure of the owner to make the repairs is continuing, and the City may
enter upon the owner's premises to do so, and unpaid charges therefor may be
added to the owner's tax bill in accordance with the City's usual procedure,
if the damage is, in the City Managers opinion, dangerous to public health or
safety. Charges for work done by the City pursuant to this subsection shall
be in such amounts as are from time to time established by Council. If any
owner elects to use plastic pipe, in accordance with this section, any damage
caused by freezing shall be the sole financial responsibility of such owner.
Further, if any such plastic pipe freezes and the City is involved with
thawing such pipe and damage to such pipe occurs because of the thawing
procedure, the owner shall hold the City harmless and indemnify it for any
consequential damages.



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95; Ord. 916.  Passed 8-13-18.)



1044.06  WATER METERS.



   (a)   Meters Provided. All water meters and related meter reading
equipment shall be provided by the City. One meter shall be provided for each
tap to the City water line, on payment of charges as provided in this
chapter, but all such meters shall remain the property of the Department of
Public Works and shall at all times be under its control. A meter charge will
be levied on a first time installation to cover the actual cost of the meter
and related meter reading equipment.  There is no charge for installation.



   (b)   Maintenance. The expense of maintaining meters shall be borne
by the Department except in cases where replacements, resealing, repairs and
adjustments of a meter are made necessary by the act, negligence or
carelessness of the customer. The expense to the Department caused thereby
shall be charged and collected from the customer in the same manner as other
charges provided for in this chapter.



   (c)   Location. A meter shall be set in an accessible location
approved by, and in a manner satisfactory to, the Director of the Department
of Public Works.  All new construction shall have a telephone jack located
near the water meter in an accessible location approved by the Director.



   (d)   Outside Meters. If the premises contain no basement or cellar,
or other approved location satisfactory to the Director, the meter must be
installed outside the premises in a meter pit, the location of which shall be
approved by the Director.



   (e)   Cost of Meter Pits. If it is necessary to set the meter in a
pit, such pit shall be built at the expense of the customer, as directed by,
and to the entire satisfaction of, the Director.



   (f)   Meters Sealed. All meters shall be sealed by the Department,
and no person except an authorized employee of the Department may break such
a seal. In the event a seal is broken in any other manner than by an
authorized representative of the Department, the cost of resealing shall be
charged to the customer.



   (g)   Responsibility for Meter. The customer on whose premises a
meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care and protection from
freezing or from injury or interference by any person.



   (h)   Injury or Imperfection. In case of injury to a meter, its
stoppage, imperfect operation or the breaking of a seal, the customer shall
give immediate notice thereof to the Department.



   (i)   Change in Location. Once a meter has been installed, its
location shall not be changed except by a permit from the Department, the
cost thereof to be borne by the customer.



   (j)   Reading. A meter required under this chapter shall be read by
the Department at intervals designated by the City Manager, and bills to
customers shall be rendered in accordance with such reading and with charges
as provided in this chapter by the City Clerk.



   (k)   Testing. A meter shall be carefully tested before it is
installed, and after its installation it shall be tested as frequently as the
Department deems advisable. The Department reserves the right to remove and
test a meter at any time and to substitute meters, either temporarily or
permanently, if deemed advisable by the Department.



   Should the customer, at any time, question the accuracy of a meter
serving his or her premises, the Department shall, upon the written request
of the customer, accompanied by a deposit of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each
meter in question, remove and test such meter. If the test shows that the
meter has been over-registering more than two percent, such deposit shall be
returned to the customer and an accurate meter shall be installed. Otherwise,
the deposit shall be retained by the City to cover the cost of testing.



   (l)   Bill Adjustments. If, upon the testing of a meter, it is found
that such meter is over- registering or under-registering by more than two
percent, an adjustment in billing shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter relating to billing in the event of meter
failures. 



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1044.07  WATER RATES AND TAP-IN CHARGES.



   (a)   Scope. The provisions of this section apply to all water rates
and charges made by the City for water services provided hereunder.



   (b)   Meter Failures. If any meter becomes faulty or fails to
register, the customer will be charged at the average consumption rate as
shown by the meter reading for the last four billings to such customer when
the meter was accurately registering, provided the customer has been using
water for such period; otherwise, a full-year's experience of usage on that
meter is used to compute the billing.



   (c)   Inaccessible Meters. In cases where the meter reader is unable
to gain access to read a meter, a billing shall be made on the basis of
consumption or the average of the last four billings to such customer and
adjusted upon the billing made for the next time a reading is obtained. If
more than two consecutive billings lapse without a reading, the City Clerk
shall notify the customer by first class mail as to the date and time when a
representative will be present to read the meter. Failure to make permanent
arrangements, satisfactory to the Department, to read such meter within sixty
days of said notification, shall result in the service being discontinued in
the same manner as provided for nonpayment of bills, and the aforesaid notice
to the customer shall recite such fact.



   (d)   Construction Water. Water used during construction shall be
properly metered with approved backflow preventer and billed to the customer
on a monthly basis. A permit and deposit will be required prior to the
connection to the water supply system.



   (e)   Tap-Ins. 



      (1)   Water line inspection fee (new construction and
replacements).  When a new building connecting water line is installed, the
property owner shall obtain a water and sewer application and right of way
permit from the Building Department or Department of Public Works.
Replacement of existing water lines will only require a right of way permit.
The fee for said right of way permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00),
and the fee shall be paid prior to the commencement of work.  If a
building’s sewer and water line are installed and ready for inspection at
the same time, no additional fee shall be charged.



      (2)   Charges. For any taps performed by the Department of
Public Works, such tap, including curb box, making the connection and running
the copper line from the main to the curb box, shall be based on the actual
cost of all labor, equipment and materials, including a twenty percent charge
for overhead, with an estimated amount determined by the Director, to be
deposited by the permit holder and placed in an escrow account prior to
construction, provided that:



         A.   The tap size shall be one inch only and shall be
for residential customers.



         B.   With the approval of the Director, the customer may
arrange to have a competent contractor make such excavation, installation of
tap to the curb stop, backfilling and temporary street repairs as are
necessary, provided such work is done in strict accordance with the City
regulations and policy and the public is adequately protected; and



         C.   Where the cutting and replacing of concrete or
blacktop street surfaces is required, an additional deposit shall be made
equal to the cost of making such permanent pavement repairs as are required.
The Director of the Department of Public Works will determine the deposit
amount.



      (3)   Payment of charges and deposits.  All capital
connection charges, meter costs,  and escrow deposits shall be paid before
any permit is issued or work started.



      (4)   Responsibilities for damage.  Any damage to sidewalks
or grass, shrubs, trees or similar improvements in the street right of way
shall be solely the responsibility of the customer and/or the permit holder.



   (f)   Water Capital Connection Charge.



      (1)   All users connecting to City owned or private owned
water mains furnished water by the City water supply system after the
effective date of this section shall pay a capital connection charge at the
rate of three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300) per 1" Meter Equivalent
unit. For water taps larger than 1", the following conversion factors from
the American Water Works Association (AWWA) for meter sizes shall apply.



 


Tap Size

 

AWWA Conversion

 

Water Connection Fee






1" or Less

 

1.00

 
    $3,300



1 ½

 

2.00

 
    $6,600



2

 

3.20

 
    $10,560



3

 

6.00

 
    $19,800



4

 

10.00

 
    $33,000



6

 

20.00

 
    $66,000



8

 

32.00

 
  $105,600




 



      (2)   The capital charge shall be paid in advance of a
building permit being issued or a connection being installed to an existing
building.



      (3)   Capital charges collected pursuant to this section shall
be segregated for accounting purposes into a water capital account. Funds in
such capital improvement account shall be expended solely for labor, material
and equipment for capital improvements to the system. Nothing in this section
shall be construed so as to prohibit the City from commingling the capital
improvement funds with other City funds for investment purposes. Any interest
earned upon the investment thereof shall be placed in the Water Fund of the
City.



      (4)   An additional capital connection charge will be levied
for any new water connection made to increase the size of the service line to
an existing building. The additional charge shall be an amount equal to the
difference in Water Connection Fee charges shown in Subsection (1) above for
the existing water connection size and the proposed water connection size.



      (5)   An additional Capital connection charge shall not be
applied for connections made for private fire service only. Should a private
fire service line be converted to a domestic water service, capital
connection charges shall apply based on the size of the connection.



   (g)   Rates.  For all treated water consumed, charges shall be made
according to the following schedule:



      (1)   Readiness-to-serve charge: Flat bi-monthly rate, based
on meter size, as follows:



 

Meter Size (in.)
 
Bi-Monthly Charge





5/8

 

$16.75




3/4

 

20.50




1

 

30.50




1-1/2

 

66.00




2

 

103.00




3

 

174.00




4

 

270.00




6

 

479.00





 



      (2)   Usage charge (to be adjusted annually by Council
pursuant to CPI as set forth herein): $4.77 per 1,000 gallons



   For users billed on a monthly basis, the debt service charge and the
usage charge shall be the same as shown above. The readiness-to-serve charge
shall be one-half of the amount shown above.



   For all raw or untreated water consumed, the charge shall be .89 per
1,000 gallons. Raw water users shall be approved by City Council. Any
increase in treated water rates shall increase the raw water rate by the same
percentage.



   The usage rate for raw/untreated and treated water shall be adjusted
after July 1 of each year based on the CPI for the past calendar year by
Council resolution.  "CPI" means the Consumer Price Index for all urban
consumers, Detroit-Ann Arbor, all items, issued by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics of the United States Department of Labor (1982-1984 = 100).  The
City Manager shall report to the City Council the actual amount of the
inflationary rate adjustment which is scheduled to be implemented each year
as part of the presentation of the annual budget pursuant to the City
Charter.  The CPI adjustment shall not exceed five percent annually.
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, City Council may
set the usage rate in an amount over and above five percent if in the opinion
of City Council such an increase is necessary for the optimum operation and
maintenance of the City's water system.



   (h)   Private Fire Service.



      (1)   Annual standby charge.  Whenever private fire service
is provided on public or private property, there shall be an annual standby
charge, in addition to the regular tap and usage charge, as follows:



         For a one-inch connection            $ 25.00



         For a one and one-half inch connection      25.00



         For a two-inch connection            25.00



         For a three-inch connection         50.00



         For a four-inch connection            80.00



         For a six-inch connection            160.00



         For an eight-inch connection         255.00



         For a ten-inch connection            410.00



         For a twelve-inch connection         655.00



         All charges shall be billed annually (January 1 to December
31).     



      Services installed after January 1 will be charged on a pro-rated
basis. This charge shall be the responsibility of the property owner.



      (2)   Periodic testing and inspection. All water-sprinkler and
extinguishing systems shall be maintained, periodically inspected and tested
on an annual basis in accordance with NFIPA 13 (National Fire Protection
Code). An annual report shall be filed with the Howell Fire Chief verifying
the annual testing of the system.



            If the property owner does not provide the annual
report on the testing of the system, the Fire Chief, after reasonable notice
to the property owner, may schedule a test of the system. All cost of
performing such test, including a twenty percent overhead charge, shall be
billed to the property owner. The charge for said testing shall be a lien on
the property and any such charges delinquent for six months or more shall be
entered upon the next tax roll against the premises to which such services
have been rendered, and such charges shall be collected and the lien shall be
enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed
upon such roll and the enforcement of the lien therefor.



      (3)   Standards. All private fire protection service shall be
made in accordance with specifications, rules and regulations prescribed by
the applicable plumbing codes and/or the Fire Department.



      (4)   Purpose of service. No private fire protection service
shall be used for any purpose other than the extinguishment of fires or be
connected in any manner with any tap that may be used for other than fire
purposes.



      (5)   Cross connections prohibited. Because of the danger of
pollution, no fire protection service shall have any connection with any
other source of supply unless check valves are installed and approved by the
City and the State Health Department as being adequate to prevent unsafe
water from running back into City mains.



      (6)   Tests. If a customer desires to test any private service
facility, he or she shall contact the Department of Public Works. The
Department shall furnish a representative to witness such test and no such
test shall be made without such representative being present.



      (7)   Meters. The Department may at any time instruct the
customer to install a weighted check valve in a private fire protection
service line, which valve and the installation thereof shall be approved by
the Department and shall be fitted with a bypass on which shall be set a
meter, the purpose of which shall be to indicate whether or not water is
being used through this connection and also to show any leakage in the
private lines.



      (8)   Seals. All valves or connections on private fire
protection lines shall be sealed by the Department. Whenever such a seal is
broken, the customer shall immediately notify the Department, and a
representative of the Department shall forthwith reseal any of such valves or
connections. The cost thereof shall be charged to the customer and added to
his or her next water bill.



   (i)   Outside Services and Miscellaneous Water Sales. For all
services provided in this section outside the City limits and for bulk water
sales, except as provided by contract, all charges shall be double the
amounts specified in this section.  However, fees for tap charges and
capital charges shall not be doubled.



   (j)   Temporary Shut-Off. In the event of temporary vacancy of any
premises, the water will be turned off at the curb box by the City and, if so
requested by the owner, the meter will be removed to prevent damage due to
freezing or other causes. The water will then be turned on  again upon
proper notice. The minimum charge for all billing periods in which such
vacancy occurs will be reduced in proportion to such vacancy, but no rebate
will be allowed for a period of less than thirty consecutive days in any
quarterly period. Where the premises are left unoccupied with the water not
turned off by the City, no credit will be allowed on the minimum charge nor
will any allowance be made for water registered by the meter which may leak
or waste through the plumbing fixtures. It shall be the owner's
responsibility to notify the City of each change of tenancy in property which
he or she rents or leases so that a temporary shut-off can be made and a
deposit collected before the water is turned on. For a request of a temporary
shut-off or turn on during normal work hours there will be no charge to the
customer. For a request of a temporary shut-off or turn on during
non-scheduled work hours, a cost to the customer to cover the overtime
incurred to perform the necessary work plus twenty percent overhead will be
charged. This charge shall be collected prior to the water being turned on
and shall be the responsibility of the person requesting that the water be
turned on.



   (k)   Service to City Facilities and Fire Hydrants. For the use of
water through fire hydrants and for the availability of such water and for
water service to the City and its several departments, the City shall pay an
amount from funds legally available for such purpose or from the proceeds of
taxes which the City shall levy within Charter limitations, such amount to be
determined by resolution of Council.



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95; Ord. 632.  Passed 5-13-96; Ord. 651.  Passed
6-9-97; Ord. 672.  Passed 5-26-98; Ord. 698.  Passed 11-22-99; Ord. 703. 
Passed 2-14-00; Res. 00-28.  Passed 6-19-00; Res. 01-11. Passed 6-4-01; Res.
02-14.  Passed 6-17-02; Res. 03-14.  Passed 6-16-03; Res. 04-10.  Passed
6-14-04; Res. 05-11.  Passed 6-13-05; Res. 06-27.  Passed 10-9-06; Res.
06-33.  Passed 11-20-06; Res. 07-14.  Passed 6-25-07; Res. 07-18.  Passed
7-23-07; Res. 08-09. Passed 5-19-08; Res. 10-05.  Passed 2-22-10; Res.
11-13.  Passed 6-27-11; Res. 13-07.  Passed 6-24-13; Res. 14-15.  Passed
6-23-14; Res. 15-13.  Passed 7-27-15; Res. 16-17.  Passed 7-25-16; Res.
17-14.  Passed 6-12-17; Ord. 916.  Passed 8-13-18.)



1044.08  SEWER RATES AND TAP-IN CHARGES.



   (a)   Scope. The provisions of this section apply to all sewage
disposal rates and charges made by the City for sewer services provided
hereunder.



   (b)   Rates for Water Meter Customers.



      (1)   Generally. Charges for sanitary sewer service shall be
levied upon those customers with a sewer connection to the sanitary sewer, as
follows:



         A.   Readiness-to-serve-charge: Flat bi-monthly rate,
based on meter size as follows:



 




Meter Size (in.)

 

Bi-Monthly Charge




5/8

 

$20.50




3/4

 

29.00




1

 

49.00




1-1/2

 

96.00




2

 

175.00




3

 

275.00




4

 

440.00




6

 

825.00





 



         B.   Usage charge (to be



              adjusted annually by



              Council pursuant to



              CPI as set forth herein):



            1.   Collection system      $1.19   per
1,000 gallons of water consumed.



            2.   Treatment plant       $3.22   per
1,000 gallons of water consumed.



         For users billed on a monthly basis, the usage charge shall
be the same as shown above.  The readiness-to-serve charge shall be one-half
of the amount shown above.



         The usage charge shall be adjusted after July 1 of each
year based on the CPI for the past calendar year by Council resolution. 
"CPI" means the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers, Detroit-Ann
Arbor, all items, issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United
States Department of Labor (1982-1984 = 100). The City Manager shall report
to the City Council the actual amount of the inflationary rate adjustment
which is scheduled to be implemented each year as part of the presentation of
the annual budget pursuant to the City Charter. The CPI adjustment shall not
exceed five percent annually.  Notwithstanding anything in this section to
the contrary, City Council may set the usage rate in an amount over and above
five percent if in the opinion of City Council such an increase is necessary
for the optimum operation and maintenance of the City's water system.



         C.   Summer sewer residential rate. Single-family
residential users shall have an adjustment made to their sewerage service
bill for the summer to account for water which is not disposed of into the
City's sanitary sewers.  The quantity of water used for the summer sewer
billing shall be the actual metered amount or the highest metered amount from
the winter billing period, whichever is less.  For purposes of this section
the summer sewer billing period shall be the customer's two bi-monthly
billings during the period of May through September, and the winter billing
period shall be the customer's two bi-monthly billings during the period of
November through March. Where it is evident that such adjustment does not
accurately reflect the actual amount of sewage being placed in the sanitary
sewerage system, the City Clerk may use an average usage or the usage during
any billing period which in his or her judgment, does reflect the actual
amount.



         D.   Summer sewer rates - metered commercial and
industrial. Any other user (commercial, industrial, etc.) who or which does a
large amount of lawn sprinkling on his, her or its premises, or in some other
manner uses a large amount of water which is not disposed of into the City's
sanitary sewers, may request that such usage be separately metered by the
City and no sewerage service charge shall be made for such usage. The
customer shall pay the City the actual cost of the meter and related meter
reading equipment, and the meter shall remain the property of the City. There
is no charge for installation. Residential customers may also request this
service.



      (2)   Surcharges.  If the character of the sewage of any
manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises is such
as to impose any unreasonable burden upon the sewers or the system or upon
the sewage treatment plant in excess of the maximum when it is prescribed by
resolution of Council, an additional charge shall be made and assessed over
and above the regular rates, said charge to be governed by Chapter 1043.



   (c)   Rates for Customers With Private Water Sources. If a customer
has a private water source and his or her sewage is dumped into City lines,
the City shall require that a meter be set in the private water line at the
cost to the customer, which meter shall be read and billed by the City to the
customer in the same manner as water meters on City lines.



   (d)   Tap-Ins.



      (1)   Sewer line inspection fee (new construction and
replacements). When a new building sewer line is installed, the property
owner shall obtain a water and sewer application and right of way permit from
the Building Department or Department of Public Works. Replacement of an
existing sewer line shall require a right of way permit. The fee for said
right of way permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and the fee shall
be paid prior to the commencement of work. If a building's sewer and water
line are installed and ready for inspection at the same time, then no
additional fee shall be charged.



      (2)   Charges. Residential taps performed by the Department of
Public Works shall be the actual cost of all labor, equipment and materials,
including a twenty percent charge for overhead with an estimated amount to be
deposited by the permit holder and placed in an escrow account. Upon specific
approval of the Director, the permit holder may engage a competent contractor
to tap into the City sewer. All such work shall be fully inspected by the
Director.



            All tap charges shall be estimated by the Director
and paid in advance of a permit being issued or the tap being permitted.



   (e)   Street Cut Deposit. Where cutting and replacing of concrete or
blacktop street surfaces is required, an additional deposit shall be made
equal to the cost of making such permanent pavement repairs as are required.
The Director of the Department of Public Works will determine the deposit
amount.



   (f)   Sewerage Capital Connection Charge.



      (1)   All users connecting to City owned or privately owned
sewers served by the City sewage disposal system after the effective date of
this section shall pay a capital connection charge based on the rate of three
thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300) per 1" Meter Equivalent unit. For
sewer taps larger than 1", the following conversion factors from the American
Water Works Association (AWWA) for meter sizes shall apply.



 


Tap Size

 

AWWA Conversion

 

Wastewater Connection Fee






1" or Less

 

1.00

 
    $3,300



1 ½

 

2.00

 
    $6,600



2

 

3.20

 
    $10,560



3

 

6.00

 
    $19,800



4

 

10.00

 
    $33,000



6

 

20.00

 
    $66,000



8

 

32.00

 
  $105,600




 



      (2)   The capital charge shall be paid in advance of a
building permit being issued or a connection being installed to an existing
building.



      (3)   Capital charges collected pursuant to this section shall
be segregated for accounting purposes into a sewer capital account and a
capital improvement account. Funds in such capital improvement account shall
be expended solely for labor, material and equipment for capital improvement
of the existing system. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to
prohibit the City from commingling the capital improvement funds with other
City funds for investment purposes. Any interest earned upon the investment
thereof shall be placed in the Sewer Fund of the City.



      (4)   An additional capital connection charge will be levied
for any new sewer connection made to increase the size of the service line to
an existing building. The additional charge shall be an amount equal to the
difference in Wastewater Connection Fee charges shown in Subsection (1) above
for the existing sewer connection size and the proposed sewer connection size.



   (g)   Outside Service. For all services provided in this section
outside the City limits, except as provided by contract, all charges shall be
double the amounts specified in this section.  However, fees for tap-in and
capital charges shall not be doubled. 



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95; Ord. 632.  Passed 5-13-96; Ord. 651.  Passed
6-9-97; Ord. 672.  Passed 5-26-98; Ord. 703.  Passed 2-14-00; Res. 00-28. 
Passed 6-19-00; Res. 01-11. Passed 6-4-01; Res. 02-14.  Passed 6-17-02; Res.
03-14.  Passed 6-16-03; Res. 04-10.  Passed 6-14-04; Res. 05-11.  Passed
6-13-05; Res. 06-27.  Passed 10-9-06; Res. 07-14.  Passed 6-25-07; Res.
08-09.  Passed 5-19-08; Res. 10-05.  Passed 2-22-10; Res. 11-13.  Passed
6-27-11; Res. 13-07.  Passed 6-24-13; Res. 14-15.  Passed 6-23-14; Res.
15-13.  Passed 7-27-15; Res. 16-17.  Passed 7-25-16; Res. 17-14.  Passed
6-12-17; Ord. 916.  Passed 8-13-18.)



1044.09  LIENS, DEPOSITS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (a)   Tax Lien. As security for the collection of water service and
sewage disposal supplied to any house or any other building or any premises,
lot or lots, or parcel or parcels of land, the City shall have a lien upon
the house or other buildings and upon the premises, lot or lots, or parcel or
parcels of land, upon which the house or other building is situated. This
lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution of the water
service and sewage disposal to the premises or property supplied. This lien
created herein shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as provided
for the collection of taxes assessed upon the tax roll pursuant to City
Charter, except that the same shall not be enforceable for more than three
years after it becomes effective.



   (b)   Lease Exception. Charges for water services and sewage
disposal services of any nature whatsoever, furnished to any premises as
described in the preceding paragraph, shall not be a lien thereon if all of
the following exist:



      (1)   A legally executed written lease between the owner of
the premises and the tenant containing a provision that the owner of the
premises shall not be liable for the paying of water services or sewage
disposal services accruing subsequent to the filing of an affidavit by the
owner with the City Clerk;



      (2)   An affidavit filed by the owner with the City Clerk
containing statements as to the date of the execution of the lease, that the
lease contains a provision holding the tenant liable for water services and
sewage disposal services on said premises, and the expiration date of the
lease; and



      (3)   In the case of multiple tenancies in one building, the
owner shall provide, at his or her cost, a separate meter, service line and
curb box to each apartment or leasehold within the building that is to be
servicing the tenants responsible for charges under this section.



   (g)   Deposit Required by Tenant. If notice of a tenant's liability
has been filed with the City Clerk, the Department shall render no further
service to such premises until a cash deposit in such sum as is fixed by the
City Clerk has been made as security for the payment of such charges.



   (h)   Deposit Required by Outsider. Whenever services are applied
for under this chapter for premises located outside the City, the City Clerk
shall forthwith advise Council of such application, and no such service shall
be furnished without the approval of Council, nor until a deposit in an
amount set by the City Clerk has been made with the City to secure all bills
and charges. However, no such deposit shall be required of the United States,
the State or any agency or political subdivision of either.



   (i)   Amount of Deposit.  In no case where a deposit is required
shall the amount set by the City Clerk be less than the estimated cost of all
services required plus two estimated period billings, which billings shall be
reviewed from time to time by the City Clerk and increased or decreased so as
to comply with this section, based upon actual billings. All moneys so
deposited shall be returned to the depositor when all services provided for
in this chapter have been paid for in full and further services are not
required.



   (j)   Shut-Off Requirement.



      (1)   In addition to the lien provided for in this section,
when any person fails or refuses to pay to the City any sum due for water or
sewer service, or charges in connection therewith, for a period of ten days
from the due date, the Department may shut off or discontinue any services
provided under this chapter and suit may be instituted by the City for the
collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction, and no
services shall again be rendered to the premises involved until the
indebtedness is paid in full, together with all costs in connection therewith.



      (2)   For all development accounts where shut-off becomes
necessary in order to secure payment of the delinquent account, a twenty
dollar ($20.00) service charge will be levied to cover the cost of turning
the service off and then back on to the premises.  If it is necessary to do
a service turn-on during non-scheduled work hours, then the service charge to
the customer will be the actual cost for overtime incurred by the Department
plus a twenty percent overhead charge.



   (g)   Billing. The City Manager shall provide for either monthly or
bi-monthly billing to customers, covering all charges as provided herein, and
shall establish a due date for payment thereof.



   (h)   Payment of Bills. All bills and charges provided for in this
chapter shall be payable to the City Treasurer on or before the due date
established. Failure of payment as required shall result in the account being
classified as delinquent and ten percent of the amount of the bills and
charges shall be added thereto.



(Ord. 623.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1044.10  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (a)   Use of Sewers. Chapters 1042 and 1043 shall govern the use of
all sanitary sewers, including the requirements for connecting thereto and
the liquid and solid wastes which can be disposed of therein.



   (b)   Permit Required. No person shall make any connection with City
water or sewer lines without first obtaining a permit as provided in this
chapter.



   (c)   Use Limited. The use of a water or sewage connection is hereby
limited to the property for which a permit has been issued, and the
connection thereto by any other property owner or his or her tenant shall
constitute a violation of this chapter by both the person having the direct
connection to the City water and/or sewer lines and also the person who makes
and/or uses the extended connection.



   (d)   Private Sales. No person shall supply water or sewer service
to any other person without the written permission of Council.



   (e)   Protection. No person shall molest, injure, deface or obstruct
the use of any water or sewer facility in the City.



   (f)   Emergency. No person shall violate any emergency order issued
by the Director or Manager under this chapter.  (Ord. 623.  Passed
10-30-95.)



1044.11  FISCAL YEAR; REVISION OF RATES; USE OF MONEYS.



   (a)   Fiscal Year for Water and Sewerage System. The water and
sewerage systems shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing
on July 1 and ending June 30.



   (b)   Revision of Rates; Audit. The rates set forth in this chapter
are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of any
indebtedness, to provide for the expenses of administration and operation, to
provide for the expenses of maintenance of such system as necessary to
preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to build up a
reasonable reserve for equipment replacement. Such rates shall be fixed and
revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts. An
annual audit shall be prepared. Based on such audit, rates for water and
sewage service shall be reviewed annually and revised as necessary to meet
system expenses and to ensure that all user classes pay their proportionate
share of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement costs.  (Ord.
623.  Passed 10-30-95.)



1044.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1046
Gas



EDITOR'S NOTE: Natural gas service is provided for the City and its
inhabitants by the Consumers Power Company of Jackson, Michigan.



   There are no sections in Chapter 1046. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Gas plants and systems in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4e,
117.4f



   Oil and gas generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 319.1 et seq., 486.251 et seq.



   Costs for extensions to new developments - see S.U. & P.S. 1050.01



CHAPTER 1048
Electricity



EDITOR'S NOTE: The City contracts periodically for electric service with the
Detroit Edison Company. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be
obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.



   There are no sections in Chapter 1048. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Electricity generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Secs. 24, 25; M.C.L.
Secs. 486.201 et seq.



   Electrical Code in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.3, 117.4b et
seq., 117.4f



   Wires and lines interfering with trees - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.02



   Costs for extensions to new developments - see S.U. & P.S. 1050.01



CHAPTER 1049
Street Lighting



1049.01   Definitions.



1049.02   Residential developments on public streets.



1049.03   Nonresidential developments on public streets.



1049.04   Variances in type and style of lights in nonresidential
developments.



1049.05   Installation in developments on private streets and in all other
developments.



1049.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Use of streets by utilities - see CHTR. Sec. 15.10



   Streets and excavations - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1020



   Electricity - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1048



   Street lights in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1228.08



1049.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Detroit Edison" means the Detroit Edison Company, the sole
provider of electrical service to the City.



   (b)   "Granville Style Pole and Fixture" means a street light named
and provided by the Detroit Edison Company.



   (c)   "Municipal Street Lighting Program" means a program of street
lighting, including, but not limited to, the installation, style and design
of the street light pole and fixture, and design standards not specifically
set forth in this chapter.



   (d)   "Nonresidential developments" means developments meeting the
zoning classification requirements for developments other than residential,
pursuant to the Zoning Code.



   (e)   "Private streets" means those streets which have not been
dedicated to the public by a developer or owner of land and are not
maintained in any fashion by the City.



   (f)   "Public streets" means a public thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property and is maintained by the City.



   (g)   "Residential developments" means developments meeting the
zoning classification requirements of the same as provided in the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 595.  Passed 12-13-93.)



1049.02  RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   (a)   Installation.  The developer of a residential development on
public streets shall coordinate with the Detroit Edison Company and the City
on all plans for the installation of street lighting during the site plan
process as set forth in the Zoning Code. All street lighting installed shall
be of the Granville Style Pole and Fixture and be installed pursuant to
Detroit Edison's Municipal Street Lighting Program.



   (b)   Design Standards.  All street lights in residential
developments on public streets shall be twelve- foot poles with fixtures
containing 100 watt, high pressure sodium lamps.  All street lights shall be
spaced in an alternating pattern with the space between each light pole to be
no less than 150 feet and no more than 225 feet.  The residential
development shall obtain a lighting level of .3 footcandle throughout the
entire development.



   (c)   Costs of Installation.  All costs of installation shall be
borne by the developer of the residential development.



   (d)   Costs of Operation, Maintenance and Replacement.  On and
after the acceptance of the streets and street lights in the residential
development by the City, the City shall be responsible for all costs
associated with said street lights, including, but not limited to, the cost
of operation, maintenance and replacement.



(Ord. 595.  Passed 12-13-93.)



1049.03  NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   (a)   Installation. The developer of a nonresidential development on
public streets shall coordinate with the Detroit Edison Company and the City
on all plans for the installation of street lighting during the site plan
process as set forth in the Zoning Code. All street lighting installed shall
be of the Granville Style Pole and Fixture and be installed pursuant to
Detroit Edison's Municipal Street Lighting Program.



   (b)   Design Standards; Determination and Approval of Spacing and
Layout by Planning Commission.  All street lights in nonresidential
developments on public streets shall be twelve-foot poles with fixtures
containing 100 watt, high-pressure sodium lamps.  The spacing between street
lights and the layout of said lights shall be determined and approved by the
Planning Commission after recommendations are received and reviewed from the
Detroit Edison Company and an engineer of the developer's choosing.  In no
event shall the spacing between each light pole be less than sixty feet or
more than 225 feet. The nonresidential development shall obtain a lighting
level of .3 to .4 footcandle throughout the entire development.



   (c)   Costs of Installation.  All costs of installation shall be
borne by the developer of the nonresidential development.



   (d)   Costs of Operation, Maintenance and Replacement. On and after
the acceptance of the streets and street lights in the nonresidential
development by the City, the City shall be responsible for all costs
associated with said street lights, including, but not limited to, the cost
of operation, maintenance and replacement. 



(Ord. 595.  Passed 12-13-93.)



1049.04  VARIANCES IN TYPE AND STYLE OF LIGHTS IN NONRESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS.



   Upon application to the Planning Commission, a developer of a
nonresidential development may request a variance from the Planning
Commission as to the type and style of light to be installed within the
development.  In its review of an application, the Planning Commission shall
take into account the zoning classification of the development, the use to
which the development will be devoted, the public health, safety and welfare
served by granting such a variance, and any and all other information which
the Planning Commission deems necessary to either grant or deny the
application. 



(Ord. 595.  Passed 12-13-93.)



1049.05  INSTALLATION IN DEVELOPMENTS ON PRIVATE STREETS AND IN ALL OTHER
DEVELOPMENTS.



   (a)   Street lighting shall be installed upon all private streets
and in all developments of any zoning classification, whether the same are
residential or nonresidential.



   (b)   Street lighting plans for all developments on private streets
shall be submitted during the site plan review process pursuant to the Zoning
Code and be approved by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 595.  Passed 12-13-93.)



1049.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 1050
Utilities Generally



1050.01   Costs for extensions to new developments.



1050.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Use of streets by utilities - see CHTR. Sec. 15.10



   Municipal utilities - see CHTR. Ch. 16



   Water - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040, Ch. 1044



   Sewers - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042, Ch. 1043, Ch. 1044



   Gas - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1046



   Electricity - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1048



   Street lighting - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1049



   Private utilities in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1228.07



   Utilities in MXD Districts - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



1050.01  COSTS FOR EXTENSIONS TO NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



   (a)   For new developments, the developer shall cover all costs for
the extension of utilities from where they currently exist to serve the needs
of the new development. In cases where the City desires to have the utilities
upsized to serve future development, the City will pay for the cost of the
upsizing.



   (b)   If a developer extends utility lines past already developed
property that needs the City utility service, the City may decide to
establish a special assessment district to cover the costs of this utility
extension. In such cases the City will cover thirty-four percent of the cost
to extend utility service to the already developed areas, and the property
owners will cover the remaining sixty-six percent based on the City's
existing special assessment policy.



   (c)   When extending utility lines, the developer need only extend
the lines far enough onto his or her property to serve his or her development
needs.  Generally, the City will require the developer to extend the lines
along a street or other City right of way as opposed to going diagonally
across the developer's property. In all cases, the City shall make the final
decision as to the location of the utility lines.



   (d)   For all new developments, the developer shall provide the City
with utility easements across the full length of the property. This will
allow for the reasonable extension of the lines past the developer's property
to serve future areas.



(Res. 91-35.  Passed 12-2-91.)



1050.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 1051
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight



1051.01   Purpose.



1051.02   Conflict.



1051.03   Definitions.



1051.04   Permit required.



1051.05   Issuance of permit.



1051.06   Construction/engineering permit.



1051.07   Conduit or utility poles.



1051.08   Route maps.



1051.09   Repair of damage.



1051.10   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee.



1051.11   Modification of existing fees.



1051.12   Savings clause.



1051.13   Use of funds



1051.14   Annual report.



1051.15   Cable television operators.



1051.16   Existing rights.



1051.17   Compliance.



1051.18   Reservation of police powers.



1051.19   Severability.



1051.20   Authorized city officials.



1051.99   Penalty.



1051.01  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this ordinance are to regulate access to and ongoing
use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, "Act") and other
applicable law, and to ensure that the City qualifies for distributions under
the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.02  CONFLICT.



   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed in such a manner as to
conflict with the Act or other applicable law.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.03  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms used in this Ordinance shall have the following meanings:



   (a)   "Act" means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as
amended from time to time.



   (b)   "Authority" means the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to
Section 3 of the Act.



   (c)   "City" means the City of Howell.



   (d)   "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Howell or
its designee. This Section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the City Council.



   (e)   "City Manager" means the City Manager or his or her designee.



   (f)   "MPSC" means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the
Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning
as the term "Commission" in the Act.



   (g)   "Permit" means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the
Act and this Ordinance to a telecommunications provider to use the public
rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities.



   (h)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership,
association, governmental entity or any other legal entity.



   (i)   "Public Right-of-Way" means the area on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public
right-of-way does not include a federal, state or private right-of-way.



   (j)   "Telecommunication Facilities or Facilities" means the
equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines,
wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication
services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not
include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or
houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to
provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section
322(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652,
48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio
service in 47 C.F.R. 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.



   (k)   "Telecommunications Provider, Provider and Telecommunications
Services" means those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, Act 179 of the Public Acts of 1991, being M.C.L.A.
Section 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an
affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial
mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. 20.3, or
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the
purpose of the Act and this Ordinance only, a provider also includes all of
the following:



      (1)   A cable television operator that provides a
telecommunications service.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who
owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.



      (3)   A person providing broadband internet transport access
service.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (a)   Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in
the City for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a
permit pursuant to this Ordinance.



   (b)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a
permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager and one copy
with the City Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall make additional
copies of the application and distribute a copy to the City Department of
Public Services Superintendent and the City Engineering Department.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the
Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the
provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5)
of the Act.



   (c)   Confidential Information. If a telecommunications provider
claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its
application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information,
which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, Act 442 of the Public
Acts of 1976, M.C.L.A. Sections 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of
the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the
face of each map.



   (d)   Application Fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.00.



   (e)   Additional Information. The City Manager may request an
applicant to submit such additional information which the City Manager deems
reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such
requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional
information established by the City Manager. If the City and the applicant
cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the
City, the City or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section
6(2) of the Act.



   (f)   Previously Issued Permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the
Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the City under Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Act 179 of the Public Acts of
1991, being M.C.L.A. Section 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by
the City to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of
Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall
satisfy the permit requirement of this Ordinance.



   (g)   Existing Providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act,
within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way
in the City as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization
or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Act 179
of the Public Acts of 1991, being M.C.L.A. Section 484.2251, shall submit to
the City an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of
this Ordinance. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications
provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to
pay the $500 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider
under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit
the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section
5(4) of the Act.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.05  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (a)   Approval or Denial. The authority to approve or deny an
application for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to
Section 15(3) of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an
application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section
1051.04 for access to a public right-of-way within the City. Pursuant to
Section 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City
Manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the
date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was
granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit.



   (b)   Form of Permit. If an application for permit is approved, the
City Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections
6(l), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.



   (c)   Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City
Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions
shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the
public right-of-way.



   (d)   Bond Requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and
without limitation on subsection (c) above, the City Manager may require that
a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the
permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to
ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition
during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.06  CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.



   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across or under the public rights-of-way in the City without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required by the City policy
for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for
such a construction or engineering permit.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.07  CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.



   Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this Ordinance does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.08  ROUTE MAPS.



   Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion ofconstruction of new
telecommunications facilities in the City, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
City. The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC
determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.09  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the City, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair
all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over,
below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the
public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.10  ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.



   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the City set
forth in Section 1051.04, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the City's public rights-of-way shall pay an
annual maintenance fee to the Authority.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.11  MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.



   In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the
City hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act,
which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of
Section 13(4) of the Act, the City also hereby approves modification of the
fees of providers with telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way
within the City's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees
required under Section 8 of the Act. The City shall provide each
telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this
Ordinance, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To
the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the
amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the
Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the City's policy
and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the City,
shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.12  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found
to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section
1051.11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.13  USE OF FUNDS.



   Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the City
from the Authority shall be used by the City solely for rights-of-way related
purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the
City from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or
the Local Street Fund maintained by the City under Act No. 51 of the Public
Acts of 1951.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.14  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an
annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the Authority.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.15  CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.



   Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the City shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy
an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues
from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.16  EXISTING RIGHTS.



   Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided
herein with respect to fees, this Ordinance shall not affect any existing
rights that a telecommunications provider or the City may have under a permit
issued by the City or under a contract between the City and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.17  COMPLIANCE.



   The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
Ordinance is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that
purpose. The City shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the
Act, including but not limited to the following:



   (a)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information
Act, Act 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. Sections 15.231 to
15.246, as provided in Section 1051.04(c);



   (b)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the
permit requirements hereof, in accordance with Section 1051.04(f).



   (c)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit
an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with Section 1051.04(g).



   (d)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within
forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an
application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way
within the City, in accordance with Section 1051.05(a).



   (e)   Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a
permit, in accordance with Section 1051.05(a);



   (f)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with Section 1051.05(a);



   (g)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, as provided in Section
1051.05(b);



   (h)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to
the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with Section 1051.05(c);



   (i)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which
exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication
provider's access and use, in accordance with Section 1051.05(d);



   (j)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional
fees for construction or engineering permits in accordance with Section
1051.06;



   (k)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the
City's right-of-way fees with a copy of this Ordinance, in accordance with
Section 1051.11;



   (l)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance
with Section 1051.14; and



   (m)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a
failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Section 1051.15.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.18  RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.



   Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this Ordinance shall not limit
the City's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access
to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the City's authority to
ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.19  SEVERABILITY.



   The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section, or clause of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this Ordinance.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.20  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized City official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the
municipal chapter violations bureau) for violation under this Ordinance as
provided by the City Code.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



1051.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to
the City in the event of a violation by a person of this Ordinance or a
permit.



(Ord. 739.  Passed 3-24-03.)



TITLE SIX - Other Public Services



CHAPTER 1060
Solid Waste Collection and Disposal



EDITOR'S NOTE: Resolution 83-25, passed December 12, 1983, approved the Solid
Waste Management Plan prepared for the County pursuant to Act 641 of 1978, as
well as the rules promulgated thereunder. Resolution 00-10, passed March 27,
2000, approved the Solid Waste Management Plan Update of Livingston County.
Copies of such Resolutions, and the Plan, as updated, may be obtained, at
cost, from the City Clerk.



   From time to time, Council establishes rates to be charged for garbage
and rubbish collection and disposal for residential units, commercial
containers and compactor containers. Because of the frequency of change,
these rates are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may
be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.



1060.01   Definitions.



1060.02   General provision for collection and disposal of solid waste.



1060.03   Containers in R-1, R-T and HL Districts actually used as
residential zones.



1060.04   Containers in R-M, O-1, CBD, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, P-1, TC and HL
Districts actually used as office zones.



1060.05   Building materials.



1060.06   Collection schedule and regulations.



1060.07   General prohibition against accumulation of solid waste.



1060.08   Unlawful transportation of solid waste.



1060.09   Rules and regulations.



1060.10   Enforcement.



1060.11   Surcharge for delinquency.



1060.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Garbage and refuse generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 46.171 et seq., 123.241
et seq., 123.361 et seq.



   Municipal authority - see M.C.L. Secs. 123.301 et seq.



   Filthy accumulations - see GEN. OFF. 622.03, 622.04



   Abandoned refrigerators - see GEN. OFF. 622.11



   Littering - see GEN. OFF. 652.05



   Purchase of recycled products by City - see ADM. 230.10



1060.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Bag" means a garbage bag or yard bag of suitable size and
material.



   (b)   "Commercial generator" means generators of waste within the
City Limits of Howell on land zoned other than R-1 (Single-Family
Residential), or R-T (Two-Family Residential), or HL (Historical Limited
Use), which is actually used as residential.



   (c)   "Commercial hauler" means anyone providing hauling services
within the City, whether or not they are properly licensed.



   (d)   "Computerized compactor" means a machine which has a
compartment within it for the temporary storage of compacted solid waste and
garbage and also has a compartment into which persons can place solid waste
and garbage for compaction. Access to this second compartment may only be
gained by use of a code number which unlocks the access compartment.



   (e)   "Curb cart" means a weatherproof receptacle with a lid and
wheels not exceeding 100 gallons or 100 pounds, designed for use with
automated cart dumping equipment on a commercial hauler's truck and capable
of holding residential garbage or residential waste.



   (f)   "Garbage" means all putrescible wastes and other water-carried
wastes, except wastes of the human body, and includes all vegetable and
animal wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or
consumption of foods. Containers that contained food or liquids for
consumption by humans or other beings shall also be classified as garbage.



   (g)   "Person" means an individual, a partnership, limited liability
company or a corporation.



   (h)   "Recycle cart" means a weatherproof receptacle with a lid and
wheels not exceeding 100 gallons or 100 pounds, designed for use with
automated cart dumping equipment on a commercial hauler's truck, capable of
holding all recyclable materials and designated for recyclable materials,
only. Yard clippings and yard waste shall be disposed of in a yard waste bag
and not in a recycle cart.



   (i)   "Recyclable materials" means source separated materials, site
separated materials, high grade paper, glass, metal, plastic, aluminum,
newspaper, corrugated paper, yard clippings, yard waste and other materials
that may be recycled or composted.



   (j)   "Refuse building materials" means wood, plaster, brick, block,
scrap, waste and unusable building materials resulting from the construction
or repair of any structure.



   (k)   "Residential waste" means those items normally disposed of by
residences or noncommercial dwellings, excluding bricks, blocks, tree stumps,
tires, furniture, appliances, construction or demolition materials, oils,
paint, solvents or any substance which is considered a hazardous or toxic
waste under regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (the
"EPA") or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources (the "DNR").



   (l)   "Solid waste" means garbage, refuse building materials,
residential waste, recyclable materials and all other things collected and
disposed of under the provisions of this chapter.



   (m)   "User fee" means that charge collected by the City from those
who produce solid waste to defray the cost of collecting and disposing of the
same.



   (n)   "Yard waste bag" means a bag designated and capable of holding
all types of yard clippings and yard waste.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.02  GENERAL PROVISION FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.



   In order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare
within the City, it is hereby declared that all solid waste shall be
collected and disposed of in accordance with this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to collect solid waste within this City unless that
person is licensed in the State of Michigan to collect and dispose of solid
waste and has obtained a permit for such collection and disposal.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.03  CONTAINERS IN R-1, R-T AND HL DISTRICTS ACTUALLY USED AS
RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (a)   The owner, proprietor or person in charge of every dwelling
house shall place or cause to be placed all garbage, rubbish and solid waste
accumulated on the premises in bags and placed within the provided curb cart.
The City shall thereupon charge and collect a user fee as determined from
time to time by City Council resolution.



   (b)   Garbage and residential waste is to be placed at the curb in
accordance with the City's rubbish collection policy.



   (c)   The owner, proprietor or person in charge of every dwelling
house shall be able to dispose of one bulky item per week as set out in the
City's rubbish collection policy.



   (d)   Brush, branches, leaves and lawn clippings shall be bagged or
otherwise placed at the curb for collection as set out in the City's rubbish
collection policy.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.04  CONTAINERS IN R-M, O-1, CBD, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, P-1, TC AND HL
DISTRICTS ACTUALLY USED AS OFFICE ZONES.



   (a)   The owner, proprietor or person in charge of properties
contained in the CBD District shall place all residential waste and garbage
in computerized or non-computerized compactors placed throughout the CBD
District by the City. Garbage, refuse building materials and residential
waste shall not be placed or commingled in containers designated for
recyclable materials.



   (b)   The owner, proprietor or person in charge of properties
contained in R-M, O-1, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, P-1, TC and HL Districts shall
provide space for the placement of containers for the storage of waste
awaiting collection. The type and style of container shall be supplied by the
City's contractor and approved by the City Manager based upon the maximum
anticipated amount of residential waste and garbage generated.



   (c)   If an alley is located at the rear or side of the developed
property of any zoning classification referenced above, curb carts and
recycle carts shall be placed in such alley or at such other location as may
be designated by the City Manager.



   (d)   Containers must be located so that they are in the least
visible location possible from public thoroughfares and neighboring
properties.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.05  BUILDING MATERIALS.



   The owner, contractor or other person responsible for construction work
shall remove from the premises, within seven calendar days after the
completion of such construction work, all surplus construction materials and
refuse building materials. Such materials shall be removed from the building
site and shall not be picked up by the City's normal garbage collector except
as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.06  COLLECTION SCHEDULE AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Manager shall provide a program for the collection and
disposal of all solid waste accumulated in the City. This program shall be
adopted by City Council resolution from time to time and is hereby
incorporated by reference for enforcement purposes.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.07  GENERAL PROHIBITION AGAINST ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE.



   (a)   No owner, occupant or other person in charge of a business
shall permit any solid waste or combustible material to accumulate in any
alley, street or other public place, or in any private place outside of an
approved building, more than twenty-four hours before the regular scheduled
time for collection in any week. See also Chapters 622 and 652 of the General
Offenses Code.



   (b)   If there is a violation of this chapter, the City Manager is
authorized to cause to be collected such materials at any time at the owner's
expense. At the discretion of the City Manager, this charge shall either be
incorporated into a special assessment roll to be processed in the manner
prescribed by the City Charter and these Codified Ordinances or shall be
entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and be
collected and the lien thereof be enforced in the same manner as general City
taxes against such premises are collected and liens enforced.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.08  UNLAWFUL TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE.



   (a)   No person shall transport, cart, carry or convey through or
over the streets, alleys or other public places of the City any garbage,
residential waste, unwashed refuse, unwashed food containers, animal
carcasses or other decaying organic matter, unless the same are transported
in a watertight vehicle with suitable covering.



   (b)   No commercial hauler shall conduct business within the City
limits unless licensed in the State of Michigan to collect and dispose of
solid waste and has obtained a permit for such collection from the City
Manager.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.09  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (a)   The City Manager shall make rules and regulations concerning
the collection and disposal of rubbish and garbage from the Central Business
District and/or industrial, commercial and institutional establishments as he
or she may deem proper.



   (b)   Such rules and regulations shall modify this chapter to
provide for the method and time of collection and disposing of the garbage,
residential waste and refuse of the special enterprises covered by the rules
and regulations.



   (c)   If the owner, manager or operator of an industrial, commercial
or institutional enterprise objects to any of the rules and regulations
herein provided for, he or she shall, within fifteen days after receipt
thereof, file notice of his or her objection with the City Clerk, who shall
place upon the next available City Council agenda the rules and regulations
in question for consideration, ratification, modification or dissolution.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   Officers of the Police Department, the Building Inspector and the Fire
Chief are hereby authorized to issue citations to any person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 515. Passed 11-6-89; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.11  SURCHARGE FOR DELINQUENCY.



   Failure to make payment for solid waste service on or before the due
date on the bill shall result in the account being classified as delinquent
and ten percent of the amount of the bill and charges shall be added thereto.



(Res. 90-43.  Passed 1-14-91; Ord. 906.  Passed 8-8-16.)



1060.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1062
Parks and Recreational Facilities



1062.01   Traffic control.



1062.02   Use of City Park by nonresidents.



1062.03   Violation of Commission's regulations.



1062.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Parks generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, Sec. 23



   Parks in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4e, 117.5



   Misapplication of funds - see M.C.L. Sec. 123.67



   Litter in parks - see M.C.L. Secs. 752.901 et seq.; GEN. OFF. 652.05(g)



   Park and Recreation Commission - see ADM. Ch. 272



   Prohibited vehicles in public parks - see TRAF. 440.03



1062.01  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   No person shall use a City recreational facility located upon Thompson
Lake, be it at the City Park, Bathing Beach or Boat Launching Livery, without
having upon his or her vehicle a current park permit issued by the City
Clerk. Further, Council may from time to time establish traffic control
regulations for vehicular traffic and parking of vehicles upon such premises.
No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of such regulations. Upon
the establishment of such regulations, and upon the City placing upon such
property signs indicating such restrictions in a manner and means so as to be
viewable by anyone using the facilities, the City police may remove motor
vehicles parked in prohibited zones or parked without the benefit of a park
permit. Such removal shall be in addition to the penalty provided in Section
1062.99.



(Ord. 264. Passed 5-20-69.)



1062.02  USE OF CITY PARK BY NONRESIDENTS.



   Permits for the use of Howell City Park may be issued by the City
Clerk, at his or her discretion, to residents of all noncontributing
municipalities in the County upon the payment of a fee established by Council.



(Ord. 289. Passed 10-18-71.)



1062.03  VIOLATION OF COMMISSION'S REGULATIONS.



   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the rules and
regulations established by the Park and Recreation Commission under the
authority of Section 272.07 of the Administration Code.



(Ord. 205.  Passed 12-11-61; Ord. 420.  Passed 4-5-82.)



1062.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99



CHAPTER 1064
Cemeteries



1064.01   Speed limits; driving restriction.



1064.02   Transfer of lots and columbarium niches.



1064.03   Grave, columbarium niche and service charges.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Cemetery Commission - see ADM. Ch. 266



   Prohibited vehicles in cemeteries - see TRAF. 440.03



1064.01  SPEED LIMITS; DRIVING RESTRICTION.



   No person shall drive his or her motor vehicle upon any street or
roadway of Lakeview Cemetery at a speed greater than fifteen miles an hour.
No person shall drive his or her motor vehicle upon the outer drive or
roadway in the Cemetery which circles around the shore of Thompson Lake,
except as follows: Motorists entering the Cemetery and wishing to drive
around the outer roadway shall proceed in a northerly direction from the
entrance to the shore of Thompson Lake and then in an easterly direction
around the Lake to the roadway leading westerly and southwesterly back to the
main entrance roadway.



(Ord. 523. Passed 3-26-90.)



1064.02  TRANSFER OF LOTS AND COLUMBARIUM NICHES.



   Lots and columbarium niches owned by a person in Lakeview Cemetery,
which is owned and operated by the City, may be sold, transferred or assigned
to the grantees, heirs and assigns of such owner by filing with the City
Clerk the proper deed of conveyance or other legal instrument covering such
sale, transfer or assignment. At the time such document is filed with the
City Clerk and transfer is made upon the records of the City, the new owner
shall pay a transfer fee to the City, the amount of which shall be determined
from time to time by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 523. Passed 3-26-90; Ord. 861. Passed 11-19-12.)



1064.03  GRAVE, COLUMBARIUM NICHE AND SERVICE CHARGES.



   Charges for graves, columbarium niches and services at the Lakeview
Cemetery shall be determined from time to time by City Council resolution and
are hereby set as follows:



 



Grave Sites & Columbarium Niche
 
Grave Site & Columbarium Fee
 
Perpetual Care Fee
 
Total Fee


Adult resident
 
$400.00
 
$400.00
 
$800.00


Adult nonresident
 
800.00
 
800.00
 
1,600.00


Infant resident
 
250.00
 
250.00    
 
500.00


Infant nonresident
 
450.00
 
450.00
 
900.00


Transfer fee-immediate family*
 
 
100.00
 
100.00


Transfer fee-other than immediate  family*
 
 
200.00
 
200.00


* Immediate family is the owner's grandparent, parent, brother, sister, child
or grandchild.




 



 

 
Fee Structure


Grave & Niche Openings
 
Mon.-Fri.
 
Saturday
 
Sunday and Holidays


Adults (graves)
 
$600.00
 
800.00
 
1,200.00


Infants (graves)
 
250.00
 
375.00
 
500.00


Ashes (niche)
 
200.00
 
300.00
 
400.00



 



 

Holidays
 
Holidays


New Year's Eve
 
New Year's Day


Martin Luther King Day
 
Presidents' Day


Good Friday
 
Memorial Day


4th of July
 
Labor Day


Thanksgiving Day
 
Friday after Thanksgiving Day


Christmas Eve
 
Christmas Day



 



Monument Foundations



   The fee for monument foundations shall be forty cents (40¢) per square
inch with a seventy dollars ($70.00) minimum charge.



Disinterments



   Two times the appropriate opening and closing fees.



Engraving Fee



   The fee for engraving columbarium niche plates shall be two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00).  This will include name, date of birth and date of
death.



(Ord. 624.  Passed 1-8-96; Ord. 721. Passed 11-5-01; Res. 07-22.  Passed
8-27-07; Ord. 861. Passed 11-19-12.)



CHAPTER 1066
Fire and Burglar Alarm Systems



1066.01   Definitions.



1066.02   False alarms; inspections; orders to correct.



1066.03   Application of chapter.



1066.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fires and fire protection generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 29.1 et seq.



   Arson - see M.C.L. Secs. 750. 71 et seq.



   Theft generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 750.356 et seq.



   Police Department - see ADM. Ch. 236



   False alarms; tampering with alarm boxes - see GEN. OFF. 658.02



   False fire alarms - see GEN. OFF. 662.01(b)(12)



1066.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Defective" does not apply to mechanical, electrical or
electronic problems that are beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the
system.



   (b)   "False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of
the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employee or agent.
"False alarm" does not include the alarm caused by severe weather or other
violent conditions beyond the control of the owner or lessee of an alarm
system or his or her employee or agent.



(Ord. 394. Passed 2-11-80.)



1066.02  FALSE ALARMS; INSPECTIONS; ORDERS TO CORRECT.



   (a)   An alarm system experiencing more than two false alarms within
a thirty-day period or four false alarms within the calendar year is deemed
defective.  Upon written notice to the owner or lessee of the alarm system
by the Chief of Police or the Howell City Fire Chief, the owner or lessee
shall have the system inspected by an alarm system contractor who shall,
within fifteen days, file a written report to the Chief of Police or the Fire
Chief of the results of his or her inspection, the probable cause of the
false alarms and his or her recommendation for eliminating false alarms.



   (b)   Upon receipt of the report, the Chief of Police or the Fire
Chief shall forward the same to the owner or lessee, ordering corrections,
based upon recommendations contained in the report.



   (c)   The owner or lessee shall have three working days from receipt
of the order to make such corrections.  Thereafter, to defray the cost of
responding to false alarms, the owner or lessee of an alarm system shall pay
to the City two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each false alarm received
and responded to by the Police Department or the Fire Department during the
calendar year in which the order to correct the system was issued.  The
amount due the City shall be paid forthwith upon demand by the City and if
not so paid, the City shall have the right, along with all of the other
rights it may have, to impose a lien on the real and personal property of the
owner or lessee and such lien shall be enforced in the same manner as are
delinquent taxes.



(Ord. 603.  Passed 9-19-94.)



1066.03  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter is intended to regulate remote sensing burglary alarms,
hold-up alarms, fire alarms and residential alarm systems.  Alarm systems
that signal the presence of hazards other than those stated herein are exempt
from this chapter.



(Ord. 394.  Passed 2-11-80.)



1066.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1068
City Library



EDITOR'S NOTE: Resolution 87-17, passed June 8, 1987, established a District
library with the Howell School District pursuant to Act 164 of the Public
Acts of Michigan, 1955, as amended.



   There are no sections in Chapter 1068. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Library - see CHTR. Ch. 17



   Library Board - see CHTR. Secs. 17.1 et seq.; ADM. Ch. 276



PART TWELVE - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE



   TITLE TWO - Planning



      Chap. 1210.  Planning Commission.



      Chap. 1212.  Master Plan.



      Chap. 1214.  Highway Plan.



      Chap. 1216.  Land Divisions.



      Chap. 1218.  Large Development Projects.



      Chap. 1219.  Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan.



   TITLE FOUR - Subdivision Regulations



      Chap. 1220.  General Provisions and Definitions.



      Chap. 1222.  Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.



      Chap. 1224.  Subdivision Procedures.



      Chap. 1226.  Design Standards.



      Chap. 1228.  Improvements.



   TITLE SIX- Zoning



      Chap. 1240.  Adoption of Zoning Code.



      Chap. 1250.  Historic District.



CHAPTER 1210
Planning Commission



1210.01   Establishment; membership; terms.



1210.02   Compensation.



1210.03   Rules, regulations, duties and authority.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Municipal planning commissions - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.31 et seq.



   Howell Historical Preservation Commission - see ADM. Ch. 280



   Administration of Subdivision Regulations - see P. & Z. 1222.01



   Planning Commission as Zoning Commission - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240
(Zoning Code)



   Approval of zoning uses by the Planning Commission - see P. & Z.
Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Planning Commission review of land divisions - see P. & Z. 1216.06



1210.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS.



   (a)   In accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (Act 33
of 2008), as amended, there is hereby established a Planning Commission
consisting of seven members. Up to five of the members shall be residents of
the City, and shall, insofar as possible, represent important segments and
major interests of the City, and shall not hold any elective office. The
remaining two members shall be the Mayor and a member of Council.  Planning
Commission members shall be qualified electors of the City, except that one
member may, when appropriate, be an individual who is not a qualified elector
of the City but is a qualified elector in another local unit of government.



   (b)   The Mayor shall appoint the five citizen members of the
Commission with the approval of Council. The terms of such members shall
commence on May 1 and shall be for three years, except that two members of
the first Planning Commission to be appointed under this chapter shall serve
for a term of one year, two for a term of two years and two for a term of
three years. The Council member shall be recommended by the Mayor with
approval by Council and shall serve for a period of one year.



   (c)   All members of the Commission shall hold office until their
successors are appointed or, in the case of the Mayor, until his or her
successor is elected. Members of the Commission may, after a public hearing,
be removed by the Mayor, with the approval of Council, for misfeasance,
malfeasance or nonfeasance in office. Vacancies occurring otherwise than
through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term as
provided in subsection (b) hereof for first appointments.



(Ord. 262. Passed 5-20-69; Ord. 845. Passed 7-11-11; Ord. 909.  Passed
8-22-16.)



1210.02  COMPENSATION.



   There shall be no compensation for a member of the Planning Commission,
except that reasonable expenses may be allowed in case of necessity.



(Ord. 262. Passed 5-20-69.)



1210.03  RULES, REGULATIONS, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.



   (a)   The rules, regulations, duties and authority of the Planning
Commission, as outlined by the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (Act 33 of
2008), as amended, shall apply in all cases.



   (b)   The duties of the Planning Commission shall include, but are
not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Make and approve a master plan as a guide for
development within the City subject to the procedural requirements of the
Michigan Planning Enabling Act (Act 33 of 2008).



      (2)   Adopt bylaws for the transaction of business.



      (3)   Keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations.



      (4)   Make an annual written report to the City Council
concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including
recommendations regarding actions by the City Council regarding planning and
development.



   (c)   The Planning Commission is exempt from preparing an annual
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP).  Preparation of the CIP is delegated to City
Staff subject to final approval by the City Council.



(Ord. 262. Passed 5-20-69; Ord. 845. Passed 7-11-11.)



CHAPTER 1212
Master Plan



EDITOR'S NOTE: Planning Commission, by a Resolution passed on December 11,
2002, adopted a Master Plan for the city pursuant to Action 285 of 1931, as
amended. Copies are available, at cost, from the City Clerk.



   There are no sections in Chapter 1212. This chapter has been
established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Highway Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1214



   Conformity of subdivisions with Master Plan - see P. & Z. 1226.01



   Subdivision Open Space Plan - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



CHAPTER 1214
Highway Plan



1214.01   Adoption.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Streets - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1020



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Comprehensive Land Use Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1212



1214.01  ADOPTION.



   The highway plan and right-of-way requirements proposed by the
Inter-County Highway Commission of Southeastern Michigan, as listed below,
are hereby adopted.




   Public Way   Right-of-Way Width (ft.)





   Michigan Ave. between M-59 and Mason Rd.    86





   Pinckney Rd. from Mason Rd. to the south City limits    120





   Byron Rd. from Grand River Ave. to M-59    86





   Mason Rd.    120





   Grand River from Byron Rd. to Catrell Dr.    100





   Grand River from Byron Rd. to the west City limits    120





   Grand River from Catrell Dr. to the east City limits    120





   M-59 (Highland Rd.) all within the Howell City limits    120




(Res. Unno. Passed 8-21-72.)



CHAPTER 1216
Land Divisions



EDITOR'S NOTE:  This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 513,
passed September 11, 1989, and previously titled Lot Divisions, was
re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 619, passed October 16, 1995, which
also changed the title to Land Divisions.



1216.01   Purpose.



1216.02   Scope.



1216.03   Rules of construction.



1216.04   Definitions.



1216.05   Applications.



1216.06   Preliminary approval.



1216.07   Standards for approval.



1216.08   Final approval.



1216.09   Appeals.



1216.10   Fees.



1216.11   Violations as nuisance; abatement.



1216.12   Inconsistent ordinances.



1216.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Subdivision Regulations - see P. & Z. Ch. 1220 et seq.



   Reduction of lots; land for common use; Subdivision Open Space Plan -
see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Averaged lot sizes - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



1216.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the division of
all land within the City of Howell in order to ensure that the minimum
standards of the Zoning Code are met and that the public health, safety and
welfare are protected.



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.02  SCOPE.



   (a)   This chapter shall apply to the division of all land located
within the City of Howell.



   (b)   Any division of land which has not been first approved by the
City under the terms of this chapter shall not be considered a valid division
of such property and shall not be placed on the City tax rolls as separate
and individual property.



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain rules of construction apply to
the text, as follows:



   (a)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and
the singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.



   (b)   The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary;
the word "may" or "should" is permissive.



   (c)   Any word or term not interpreted or defined by this chapter
shall carry the meaning of common or standard utilization. 



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.04  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:



   (a)   "Division" or "divide" means to separate any land into parts.



   (b)   "Land" means a lot, outlot or parcel of real property.



   (c)   "Lot" means that measured portion of a parcel or tract of land
which is described and fixed in a recorded plat.



   (d)   "Outlot" means a lot included within the boundary of a
recorded plat set aside for purposes other than a building site, park or
other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use.



   (e)   "Owner" means any person who holds the legal title or the
equitable title, the equitable title being evidenced by a duly executed land
contract signed by the holders of legal title, or by a duly executed purchase
agreement signed by the owners of legal title. If there are holders of both
legal and equitable title, "owner" shall be construed to mean all such
persons. Wherever the word "owner" appears in this chapter, all persons
holding any legal or equitable interest shall be deemed to be referred to,
and, in the event that signatures are required, all of such persons shall be
deemed to be required to sign.



   (f)   "Parcel" means a continuous area or acreage of land which can
be described.



   (g)   "Registered land surveyor" or "civil engineer" means a person
so licensed by the State. 



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.05  APPLICATIONS.



   (a)   An owner who desires a land division shall make written
application to the City.



   (b)   The application shall be in a form provided by the City and
shall contain at least the following information:



      (1)   The names of all owners of any legal or equitable
interest, and their signatures.



      (2)   The legal description of the parcel, which description
shall contain the acreage.



      (3)   A copy of the most recent paid tax bill pertaining to
the parcel, including proof that all delinquent taxes have been paid.



      (4)   A drawing of the land as it exists prior to the proposed
division, which may be incorporated in paragraph (b)(5) hereof.



      (5)   A drawing of the land as it will appear following the
proposed division, including the following information:



         A.   North arrow, date and scale.



         B.   Existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions.



         C.   Existing utilities and drainage courses within
fifty feet of the land to be split.



         D.   Location and dimensions of existing and proposed
easements, lot numbers, roadways and lot irons.



         E.   Existing structures on the land and all structures
within fifty feet of the proposed lot lines.



         F.   Zoning classification of the land to be divided and
all abutting land.



         G.   All required front, rear and side yard setbacks
resulting from the requested split.



      (6)   A copy of all existing and/or proposed restrictions or
covenants which apply to the land.



      (7)   The person to whom all correspondence concerning the
division is to be directed, with the specific designation of the person
acting as the agent for all other owners. 



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.06  PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.



   (a)   All land division applications shall be submitted to the
Building Official, who shall review the application for completeness and
compliance with the Zoning Code and all other applicable ordinances. The
Building Official shall schedule the land division application for review by
the Planning Commission on the next available agenda.



   (b)   In reviewing the application, City staff and/or the Planning
Commission may seek the advice of the City Attorney, the City Planner, any
administrative official or any other person whose knowledge or understanding
might assist in determining the merits and effects of the proposed division.



   (c)   The Planning Commission shall review the information submitted
in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 1216.07 and approve,
approve with conditions or deny the application. The Planning Commission
shall reflect in its minutes any reasons for approval with conditions or
denial to the applicant.



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.07  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.



   (a)   Zoning Compliance. No application for the division of land
shall be approved unless the minimum requirements of the Zoning Code are met.



   (b)   Access. No division shall be created unless accessibility is
provided by either a public road, a private road of record at the time of
enactment of this chapter or a private road constructed on a permanent,
unobstructed easement and approved by the City Council.



   (c)   Layout. The size, shape and orientation of the land division
shall be appropriate for the type of development and land use contemplated.
Access to remaining or abutting properties shall be considered. No division
shall be approved which would conflict with existing drainage courses,
easements or public rights of way.



   (d)   Utility Easements. No application for the division of land
shall be approved without adequate provisions made for utility easements.
Where such utility easements are needed, written evidence of their
availability shall be submitted prior to approval.



   (e)   Compliance With Subdivision Control Act. In no event shall
approval be granted where the divisions are contrary to, or in violation of,
the Michigan Subdivision Control Act, being Act 288 of the Public Acts of
1967, as amended.



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.08  FINAL APPROVAL.



   Prior to the entry of any approved division on the City records and the
assignment of a tax identification number by the City Assessor, the applicant
shall provide the Assessor with the following:



   (a)   Survey and Legal Description. The applicant shall provide the
address of the property or property in closest proximity to the subject
property, a survey and legal description of the land divisions as prepared by
a land surveyor or engineer registered in the State of Michigan and the
common name of the subdivision in which the property is located.



   (b)   Proof of Acceptance and/or Approval of Improvements Prior to
Final Approval. Where access to a land division is provided by a public road,
proof that said road has been constructed and accepted by the City shall be
provided prior to final approval. Where access is provided by a private road,
proof that said road has been constructed and approved by the City shall be
provided prior to final approval. Where other improvements, such as storm
drainage facilities and public sewer and water are required, proof that said
improvements have been constructed and approved by the City shall be provided
prior to final approval.



   (c)   Financial Guarantees. In lieu of completion of all
improvements prior to final approval, the City may permit a cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond acceptable to
the City to be deposited with the Clerk to cover the estimated cost of
improvements. The financial guarantee shall be provided prior to final
approval of the parcel division.



   The applicant shall provide a cost estimate of the improvements to be
covered by the guarantee and such estimate shall be verified as to amount by
the City. The form of the guarantee shall be approved by the City Attorney.



   If the applicant shall fail to provide any site improvements according
to the approved plans within the time period specified in the guarantee, the
City shall be entitled to enter upon the site and complete the improvements.
The City may defray the cost thereof from the deposited security or may
require performance by the bonding company.



   If a cash deposit or irrevocable bank letter of credit is used, rebate
to the applicant shall be made in a reasonable proportion of the work
completed to the entire project, as determined by the Clerk.



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.09  APPEALS.



   In the event an interested person is aggrieved by the decision made by
the Planning Commission, an appeal may be filed with the City Council, unless
the appeal is the result of lack of compliance with the Zoning Code. Appeals
resulting from lack of compliance with the Zoning Code shall be filed with
the Zoning Board of Appeals. All appeals must be filed within twenty-one days
of the date of a decision by the Planning Commission. 



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.10  FEES.



   Each application under this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in
the amount established by the City Council as set forth in the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 704.  Passed 4-10-00.)



1216.11  VIOLATIONS AS NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.



   Any violation of the terms of this chapter shall be and the same is
hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and such use may be abated,
restrained, enjoined and prohibited upon the commencement of an appropriate
action in the Circuit Court, in addition to the penalty provided in Section
202.99  of the Administration Code.



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.12  INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.



   Where a provision of any other ordinance is found to be inconsistent
with this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall apply.



(Ord. 619.  Passed 10-16-95.)



1216.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1218
Large Development Projects



1218.01   Deposit required for site plan review (Repealed).



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Subdivision Regulations - see P. & Z. Ch. 1220 et seq.



   Review of building permit applications - see B. & H. 1440.05



   Review of subdivision proposals - see B. & H. 1440.06



1218.01  DEPOSIT REQUIRED FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW. (REPEALED)



   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Section 1218.01 was repealed by Ordinance 704, passed
April 10, 2000.)



CHAPTER 1219
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan



1219.01   Findings.



1219.02   Public purpose.



1219.03   Best interest of the public.



1219.04   Approval and adoption of plan.



1219.05   Preparation of base year assessment roll.



1219.06   Preparation of annual tax increment assessment roll.



1219.07   Establishment of Project Fund; approval of depository.



1219.08   Payment of tax increments to authority.



1219.09   Use of moneys in the Project Fund.



1219.10   Annual report.



1219.11   Refund of surplus tax increments.



1219.12   Conflict and severability.



1219.13   Section headings.



1219.14   Publication and recordation.



1219.15   Effective date.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4g,
117.5, 117.14a, 117.35a



   Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 117.4d et seq.



   Downtown Development Authority - see M.C.L.A. Secs. 125.1651 et seq.;
ADM. Ch. 185



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Commercial and industrial developments - see P. & Z. 1226.12



   Tax Increment Finance Authority - see B.R. & T. Ch. 896



1219.01  FINDINGS.



   (a)   The Development Area Citizens Council has reviewed the
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan (hereinafter "the Plan")
for the Development Area in the Downtown District in the City, and, after
discussions with the Downtown Development Authority concerning its findings
and recommendations, has approved the Plan.



   (b)   The Development Plan included in the Plan meets the
requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of Act 197 of the Public Acts of
Michigan, 1975, and the tax increment financing plan meets the requirements
set forth in Section 14(2) of the Act.



   (c)   The proposed method of financing the development is feasible
and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing.



   (d)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of the Act.



   (e)   The land included within the Development Area to be acquired
is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act.



   (f)   The Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the Master
Plan of the City.



   (g)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and
utilities, are or will be adequate to serve the Development Area.



   (h)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities, to the extent required by the Plan, are reasonably necessary for
the project and for the City.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.02  PUBLIC PURPOSE.



   The City Council hereby determines that the Plan constitutes a public
purpose.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.03  BEST INTEREST OF THE PUBLIC.



   The City Council hereby determines that it is in the best interest of
the public to halt property value deterioration, to increase property tax
valuation, to eliminate the causes of the deterioration in property values,
and to promote growth in the Downtown District to proceed with the Plan.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.04  APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF PLAN.



   The Plan is hereby approved and adopted.  The duration of the Plan
shall be fifteen years from the date of this chapter or the date of issuance
of the last series of bonds pursuant to the Plan, whichever is later, except
as it may be extended by subsequent amendment of the Plan pursuant to the
Act.  A copy of the Plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on
file in the City Clerk's office.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.05  PREPARATION OF BASE YEAR ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (a)   Within sixty days of the publication of this chapter, the City
Assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll.  The base year
assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the Development Area
of the Downtown District on the effective date of this chapter, the initial
assessed value of each parcel of property within the Development Area, and
the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem
taxes on the property in the jurisdiction of the Downtown Development
Authority.



   (b)   The City Assessor shall transmit copies of the base year
assessment roll to the City Treasurer, County Treasurer, the Authority and
each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year
assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and the tax
increment financing plan contained in the Plan approved by this chapter.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.06  PREPARATION OF ANNUAL TAX INCREMENT ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   Each year, within fifteen days following the final equalization of
property in the Downtown District, the City Assessor shall prepare the tax
increment assessment roll.  The tax increment assessment roll shall show the
information required in the base year assessment roll and, in addition, the
amount by which the current assessed value as finally equalized for all
taxable property in the Downtown District exceeds the assessed value of the
property as shown on the base year assessment roll (the "captured assessed
value").  Copies of the annual tax increment assessment roll shall be
transmitted by the Assessor to the same persons as the base year assessment
roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with
this chapter and the Plan. 



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.07  ESTABLISHMENT OF PROJECT FUND; APPROVAL OF DEPOSITORY.



   The Treasurer of the Downtown Development Authority shall establish a
separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts in
a bank or banks approved by the Treasurer of the City, to be designated the
Downtown Development Authority Project Fund.  All moneys received by the
Authority pursuant to the Plan shall be deposited into the Project Fund. 
All moneys in the Project Fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in
accordance with the Plan.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.08  PAYMENT OF TAX INCREMENTS TO AUTHORITY.



   The City Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes
are collected on the property in the Downtown District, pay to the Treasurer
of the Downtown Development Authority, for deposit into the Project Fund,
that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that
the captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value.  The
payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the City Treasurer and
the County Treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing
jurisdictions.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.09  USE OF MONEYS IN THE PROJECT FUND.



   The moneys credited to the Project Fund and on hand therein from time
to time shall be used annually in the following manner and the following
order of priority:



   (a)   First, to pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all
outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the Plan an amount equal to
the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by
maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less
any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund.



   (b)   Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of
principal of and interest on bonds issued pursuant to the Plan to the extent
required by any resolution authorizing bonds.



   (c)   Third, to pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs
of the Authority and the City pertaining to the Downtown District, including
planning and promotion, to the extent provided in the annual budget of the
Authority.



   (d)   Fourth, to repay amounts advanced by the City for project
costs, including costs of preliminary plans, and fees for other professional
services.



   (e)   Fifth, to pay the cost of completing the remaining public
improvements as set forth in the Development Plan to the extent that such
costs are not financed from other sources.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.10  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Within ninety days after the end of each fiscal year, the Authority
shall submit to the City Council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a
report on the status of the Project Fund.  The report shall include the
amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of
expenditures from the account, the amount of principal and interest on any
outstanding indebtedness, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial
assessed value of the Downtown District, the captured assessed value of the
Downtown District and the amount of captured assessed value retained by the
Authority, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the
prior year, and any additional information requested by the City Council or
deemed appropriate by the Authority.  The secretary of the Authority shall
cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.11  REFUND OF SURPLUS TAX INCREMENTS.



   Any surplus money in the Project Fund at the end of a year, as shown by
the annual report of the Downtown Development Authority, shall be paid by the
Authority to the City Treasurer or the County Treasurer, as shown by the
annual report of the Authority, as the case may be, and rebated by each to
the appropriate taxing jurisdiction.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.12  CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY.



   All ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter are to the extent of such conflict hereby
repealed, and each section of this chapter and each subdivision of any
section thereof is hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or
holding of any section or subdivision thereof to be invalid or void shall not
be deemed or held to affect the validity of any other section or subdivision
of this chapter.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.13  SECTION HEADINGS.



   The section headings in this chapter are furnished for convenience of
reference only and shall not be considered to be a part of this chapter.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.14  PUBLICATION AND RECORDATION.



   This chapter shall be published in full promptly after its adoption in
the Livingston County Press, a newspaper of general circulation in the City,
qualified under State law to publish legal notices, and shall be recorded in
the Ordinance Book of the City, which recording shall be authenticated by the
signature of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



1219.15  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter is hereby determined by the City Council to be immediately
necessary for the preservation of the peace, health and safety of the
Downtown Development Authority and shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and publication as required by law.



(Ord. 543.  Passed 5-6-91.)



TITLE FOUR - Subdivision Regulations



CHAPTER 1220
General Provisions and Definitions



1220.01   Title.



1220.02   Purpose.



1220.03   Legal basis.



1220.04   Scope.



1220.05   Amendments.



1220.06   Severability.



1220.07   Definitions.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L. Sec.
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.51 et seq.



   Utility extensions to new developments - see S.U. & P.S. 1050.01



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Subdivision Open Space Plan - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Review of subdivision proposals - see B. & H. 1440.06



1220.01  TITLE.



   These Subdivision Regulations shall be known and may be cited as the
"City of Howell Subdivision Ordinance" or just the "Subdivision Regulations."



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1220.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these Subdivision Regulations is to regulate and control
the subdivision of land in the City in order to promote the safety, public
health and general welfare of the community. The Subdivision Regulations are
specifically designed to:



   (a)   Provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of
the community, consistent with adopted growth and development policies of the
City;



   (b)   Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street
systems with proper relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions,
public facilities and pertinent elements of the adopted Master Plan for the
City;



   (c)   Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and
livability and lots of such layout and size as to be in harmony with existing
and proposed development patterns of the area;



   (d)   Ensure adequate provisions for water, drainage and sanitary
sewer facilities and other health requirements; and



   (e)   Plan for and ensure the provision of adequate recreational
areas, school sites and other public facilities.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1220.03  LEGAL BASIS.



   These Subdivision Regulations are enacted pursuant to the statutory
authority granted by Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, Act 285
of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, and Act 222 of the Public Acts of
1943, as amended.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1220.04  SCOPE.



   These Subdivision Regulations do not apply to a lot forming a part of a
subdivision created and recorded prior to June 9, 1982, except for further
dividing of existing lots. These Subdivision Regulations are not intended to
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations; with private
restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private
agreements; or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the
City is a party. Where these Subdivision Regulations impose a greater
restriction upon land than is imposed or required by an existing provision of
any other ordinance, these Subdivision Regulations shall control.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1220.05  AMENDMENTS.



   Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or repeal the
provisions of these Subdivision Regulations. A proposed amendment, supplement
or repeal may be originated by Council or the Planning Commission or by
petition. All proposals not originating with the Commission shall be referred
to it for a report thereon before any action is taken on the proposal by
Council.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1220.06  SEVERABILITY.



   These Subdivision Regulations and the various parts, sentences and
clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section,
clause or provision of these Subdivision Regulations be declared by the
courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of these
Subdivision Regulations as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part
so declared to be invalid.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1220.07  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in these Subdivision Regulations, unless otherwise specifically
stated:



   (1)   "Alley" means a public or private right of way shown on a plat
which provides secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land.



   (2)   "As-built plans" means revised construction plans in
accordance with all approved field changes.



   (3)   "Block" means an area of land within a subdivision that is
entirely bounded by streets, highways or other ways except alleys, exterior
boundaries of the subdivision, streams or rivers, railroad rights of way or
combinations thereof.



   (4)   "Building line" or "setback line" means a line parallel to a
street right-of-way line, a shore of a lake, or edge of a stream or river
bank, established on a parcel of land or on a lot for the purpose of
prohibiting construction of a building between such line and a right of way,
other public area, shore of a lake or edge of a stream or river bank.



   (5)   "Caption" means the name by which a plat is legally and
commonly known.



   (6)   "City Manager" means the City Manager of Howell or his or her
designate.



   (7)   "Commercial development" means a planned commercial center
providing building areas, parking areas, service areas, screen planting and
widening, turning movement and safety lane roadway improvements.



   (8)   "Comprehensive Development Plan" or "Master Plan" means a
unified document of text, charts, graphics or maps, or any combination
thereof, designed to portray general long-range proposals for the arrangement
of land uses, which document is intended primarily to guide government policy
toward achieving orderly and coordinated development of the entire community,
including a unit or part of, or amendment to, such Plan.



   (9)   "Construction standards" or "specifications" means the
detailed engineering requirements for the design, construction and
installations of improvements, which may be obtained from the office of the
City Manager.



   (10)   "County Drain Commissioner" means the Livingston County Drain
Commissioner.



   (11)   "County Health Department" means the Livingston County Health
Department.



   (12)   "County Plat Board" means the Livingston County Plat Board.



   (13)   "County Road Commission" means the Livingston County Road
Commission.



   (14)   "Crosswalkway" ("pedestrian walkway") means a right of way,
dedicated to public use, which crosses a block to facilitate pedestrian
access to adjacent streets and properties.



   (15)   "Dedication" means the intentional appropriation of land by
the owners to public use.



   (16)   "Filing date" means the date of the Planning Commission
meeting at which the Commission receives the application for approval of a
proposed plat from the City Clerk.



   (17)   "Floodplain" means that area of land adjoining the channel of
a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other similar body of water which will
be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for that region.



   (18)   "Government survey" means land surveyed, subdivided and
monumented by the United States public land survey.



   (19)   "Greenbelts or buffer parks" means a strip or parcel of land,
privately restricted or publicly dedicated as open space located between
incompatible uses for the purpose of protecting and enhancing the residential
environment.



   (20)   "Improvements" means any structure incident to servicing or
furnishing facilities for a subdivision, such as grading, street surfacing,
curb and gutter, driveway approaches, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and
lines, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, lagoons, slips,
waterways, lakes, bays, canals and other appropriate items, with appurtenant
construction.



   (21)   "Industrial development" means a planned industrial area
designed specifically for industrial use and providing screened buffers,
wider streets and turning movement and safety lane roadway improvements,
where necessary.



   (22)   "Lot" means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land,
which is described and fixed in a recorded plat.



      A.   "Lot area" means the total area within the lot lines of
the lot.



      B.   "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the
front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot
lines.



      C.   "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the
side lot lines measured at the set-back line and at right angles to the lot
depth. In case of lots on the inside of the curve of a street, the lot width
shall be the distance between side lot lines measured at the rear line of the
dwelling or thirty feet behind the front building line parallel to the street
or street chord. However, no lot on a cul-de-sac street or on the inside
curve of a street shall have a frontage, measured on the chord of the curves,
of less than forty feet.



      D.   "Lot coverage" means the part or percent of the lot
occupied by buildings or structures including accessory buildings or
structures.



   (23)   "Outlot", when included within the boundary of a recorded
plat, means a lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park or
other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use.



   (24)   "Parcel" or "tract" means a continuous area or acreage of
land which can be described as provided for in the Subdivision Control Act.



   (25)   "Planning Commission" means the Planning Commission of the
City as established under Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended.



   (26)   "Planned unit development" means a land area which has both
individual building sites and common property, such as a park, and which is
designated and developed under one owner or organized group as a separate
neighborhood or community unit.



   (27)   "Plat" means a map or chart of a subdivision of land.



      A.   "Prepreliminary plat" means an informal plan or sketch
drawn to scale and in pencil, if desired, showing the existing features of a
site and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed subdivision.



      B.   "Preliminary plat" means a map showing the salient
features of a proposed subdivision of land submitted to an approving
authority for purposes of preliminary consideration.



      C.   "Final plat" means a map of a subdivision of land made up
on final form ready for approval and recording.



   (28)   "Proprietor" means any person or government agency, or a
combination thereof, which may hold any ownership interest in land, whether
recorded or not. The proprietor is also commonly referred to as the
subdivider, developer or owner. 



   (29)   "Public open space" means land dedicated or reserved for use
by the general public. It includes parks, parkways, recreation areas, school
sites, community or public building sites, streets and highways and public
parking spaces.



   (30)   "Public sewer" means the sewerage system, as defined in Act
98 of the Public Acts of 1913, as amended, being Sections 325.201 to 325.214
of the Compiled Laws of 1948, as amended.



   (31)   "Public utility" means all persons or municipal or other
public authorities providing gas, gas pipeline, cable television,
electricity, water, steam, telephone, telegraph, storm sewer, sanitary sewer,
transportation or other services of a similar nature.



   (32)   "Public water" means the water works system, as defined in
Act 320 of the Public Acts of 1927, as amended, being Sections 123.241 et
seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws of 1948, as amended.



   (33)   "Replat" means the process of changing, or the map or plat
which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof.
The legal dividing of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without
changing the exterior boundaries of the outlot is not a replat.



   (34)   "Right of way" means land reserved, used or to be used for a
street, alley, walkway or other public purpose.



   (35)   "Sidewalk" means a public way or right of way dedicated to
public use, provided for pedestrian traffic and located adjacent to streets
and properties.



   (36)   "Sight distance" means the minimum extent of unobstructed
vision on a horizontal plane along a street from a point four feet above the
centerline of a street.



   (37)   "Sketch plan" means a pre-preliminary plat.



   (38)   "Street" means a right of way which provides for vehicular
and pedestrian access to abutting properties.



      A.   "Freeway" means those streets designed for high speed,
high volume through traffic, with completely controlled access, no grade
crossings and no private driveway connections.



      B.   "Expressway" means those streets designed for high speed,
high volume traffic, with full or partially controlled access, some grade
crossings but no driveway connections.



      C.   "Parkway" means a street designed for noncommercial,
pleasure oriented traffic moving at moderate speeds, between and through
scenic areas and parks.



      D.   "Arterial street" means those streets of considerable
continuity which are used or may be used primarily for fast or heavy traffic,
commonly referred to as major streets.



      E.   "Collector street" means those streets used to carry
traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including principal entrance
streets to large residential developments, commonly referred to as local
streets.



      F.   "Cul-de-sac" means a minor or local street of short
length having one end terminated by a vehicular turn-around.



      G.   "Boulevard street" means those streets of two one-way
pavements of two or more lanes each, separated by a grassed island. 



      H.   "Marginal access street" means a minor or local street
which is parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and which provides access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.



      I.   "Minor or local street" means a street which is intended
primarily for access to abutting properties.



      J.   "Street width" means the shortest distance between the
lines delineating the right of way of streets.



   (39)   "Structure" means any object constructed, erected or placed
with a fixed location on the surface of the ground or affixed to something
having a fixed location on the surface of the ground.



   (40)   "Subdivider," "proprietor" or "developer" means a person or
combination of persons which may hold any recorded or unrecorded ownership
interest in land. The proprietor is also commonly referred to as the owner.



   (41)   "Subdivision Control Act" means Act 288 of the Public Acts of
1967, as amended.



   (42)   "Subdivision" or "subdivide" means the partitioning or
dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or
her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or
assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of
building development, where the act of division creates:



      A.   Five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres
or less in area;



      B.   Five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres
or less in area by successive divisions within a period of ten years; or



      C.   Two, three or four parcels of land involving the
dedication of a new street.



   (43)   "Subdivision Regulations" means Ordinance 421, passed June 1,
1982, as amended, codified herein as Title Four of Part Twelve - the Planning
and Zoning Code.



   (44)   "Surveyor" means either a land surveyor who is registered in
this State as a registered land surveyor, or a civil engineer who is
registered in the State as a registered professional engineer.



   (45)   "Topographical map" means a map showing existing physical
characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit
determination of proposed grades and drainage.



   (46)   "Water Resources Commission" means the Water Resources
Commission of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



CHAPTER 1222
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty



1222.01   Administration by Council and Planning Commission.



1222.02   Fees.



1222.03   Plat approval by Council and compliance with regulations
required.



1222.04   Variances.



1222.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L. Sec.
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.51 et seq.



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Subdivision Open Space Plan - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Review of subdivision proposals - see B. & H. 1440.06



1222.01  ADMINISTRATION BY COUNCIL AND PLANNING COMMISSION.



   These Subdivision Regulations shall be administered by Council in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Act and by the Planning Commission in
accordance with Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, and Act 222
of the Public Acts of 1943, as amended. 



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1222.02  FEES.



   Any and all fees or costs required under this section shall be paid as
required by the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 704.  Passed 4-10-00.)



1222.03  PLAT APPROVAL BY COUNCIL AND COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   No subdivision plat required by these Subdivision Regulations or the
Subdivision Control Act shall be admitted to the public land records of the
County or received or recorded by the County Register of Deeds, until such
subdivision plat has received final approval by Council.  No public board,
agency, commission, official or other authority shall proceed with the
construction of, or authorize the construction of, any of the public
improvements required by these Subdivision Regulations unless such public
improvement has already been accepted, opened or otherwise received the legal
status of a public improvement prior to the adoption of these Subdivision
Regulations and unless such public improvement is in compliance with the
requirements of these Subdivision Regulations. 



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1222.04  VARIANCES.



   (a)   Generally.  The Planning Commission may recommend to Council
a variance from these Subdivision Regulations on a finding that undue
hardship may result from strict compliance with a specific provision or
requirement of these Subdivision Regulations or that the application of such
provision or requirement is impractical.  The Commission shall only
recommend variances that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public
interest.  In making its findings, as required in this section, the
Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and
the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or
work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.  No variance shall be
recommended unless the Commission finds, after a public hearing, the
following:



      (1)   That there are such special circumstances or conditions
affecting the property that the strict application of these Subdivision
Regulations would clearly be impractical or unreasonable.  In such a case,
the proprietor shall first state his or her reasons in writing as to the
specific provision or requirement involved and submit them to the Commission.



      (2)   That the granting of the specified variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area
in which the property in question is situated;



      (3)   That such variance will not violate the provisions of
the State Subdivision Control Act, Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as
amended;



      (4)   That such variance will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of these Subdivision Regulations and the
Master Plan.



   The Commission shall include its findings and the specific reasons
therefor in its report of recommendations to Council and shall also record
its reasons and actions in its minutes.



   (b)   Topographical/Physical Limitation Variances. Where, in the
case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict
compliance with these Subdivision Regulations would result in extraordinary
hardship to the proprietor because of unusual topography, other physical
conditions or such other conditions which are not self-inflicted or that
these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives
of these Subdivision Regulations, the Planning Commission may recommend to
Council that a variance, modification or waiver of these Subdivision
Regulations be granted.



   (c)   Planned Unit Development Variances.  The developer may
request a variance from specified portions of these Subdivision Regulations
in the case of a planned unit development.  If in the judgment of the
Planning Commission such a plan provides adequate public space and includes
provisions for efficient circulation, light and air and other needs, it shall
make findings, as required in this subsection.  The Commission shall take
into account the nature of the proposed use of land and existing use of land
in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed
subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic
conditions in the vicinity. The Commission shall report to Council regarding
whether or not:



      (1)   The proposed project will constitute a desirable and
stable community development; and



      (2)   The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent
areas.



   (d)   Variances from Required Public Improvements or Utilities. 
The Planning Commission may recommend to Council that waivers be granted for
the installation of a public sanitary sewer system, a public water system or
both, when in its best judgment such an installation is impractical. 
However, the average width of a lot in the proposed subdivision, as measured
at the street frontage line or the building set-back line, shall be more than
150 feet, and the average area of a parcel or lot resulting from the
subdivision of land exceeds one acre.  The Commission may also recommend
that waivers be granted for the installation of gas mains and/or service
connections, stubs, communications or electrical conduits, when in its best
judgment such an installation is impractical.



   (e)   Applications.



      (1)   Required improvement and topographical variances.  An
application for a required improvement or topographical variance shall be
submitted in writing by the proprietor when the preliminary plat is filed for
the consideration of the Planning Commission.  The petition for variance
shall state fully the grounds for the application and all the facts relied
upon by the proprietor.



      (2)   Planned unit development variances.  An application for
a planned unit development variance shall be made in writing by the
proprietor at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the
consideration of the Commission, stating fully and clearly all facts relied
upon by the proprietor, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other
additional data which may aid the Commission in the analysis of the proposed
project.  The plans for such development shall include such covenants,
restrictions, subdivision plats or other legal provisions necessary to
guarantee the full achievement of the plan.



   (f)   Public Hearings.  Prior to making a recommendation to Council
on an application for a variance from these Subdivision Regulations, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing
shall be provided in the manner specified in Section 1224.02(b)(3). (Ord.
421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1222.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of these Subdivision Regulations shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both, for each
offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.



   (b)   The proprietor, land owner, tenant, subdivider, builder,
public official or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or
maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
suffer the penalties provided in this section.



   (c)   Nothing contained in these Subdivision Regulations shall
prevent Council or any other public official or private citizen from taking
such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent a violation of or
noncompliance with these Subdivision Regulations or of the Subdivision
Control Act.



   (d)   The City may bring an action to restrain or prevent a
violation of or noncompliance with these Subdivision Regulations or such Act
in the Circuit Court in the County where the land is located, the defendant
resides or the defendant has his or her principal place of business.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



CHAPTER 1224
Subdivision Procedures



1224.01   Preapplication and pre-preliminary plats.



1224.02   Submission of preliminary plat.



1224.03   Contents of preliminary plat.



1224.04   Submission of final plat.



1224.05   Form of final plat; required information.



1224.06   Improvements; performance contracts.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L. Sec.
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.51 et seq.



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Fees - see P. & Z. 1222.02



   Subdivision Open Space Plan - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Review of subdivision proposals - see B. & H. 1440.06



1224.01  PREAPPLICATION AND PRE-PRELIMINARY PLATS.



   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the preapplication stage is to provide
the proprietor with guidelines concerning the development policies of the
City and to acquaint him or her with the platting procedures and requirements
of Council, thereby saving the proprietor time and money and improving the
quality of development in the City. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require a preapplication contact. A proprietor may elect to
begin the subdivision process by submitting a preliminary plat in accordance
with Section 1224.02.



   (b)   Procedure. The following process shall be followed in
obtaining tentative approval of a pre-preliminary plat or sketch plan:



      (1)   Proprietor's submittal. The proprietor shall submit two
copies of the pre-preliminary plat, surveyor's letter and proof of ownership
to the City Clerk at least fourteen days prior to a regular meeting of the
Planning Commission.



      (2)   Clerk's transmittal. The Clerk shall promptly transmit
the two copies of the pre-preliminary plat, surveyor's letter and proof of
ownership to the Commission.



      (3)   Planning Commission review and recommendation. The
Commission or a committee of the Commission shall review the plan with the
proprietor or his or her agent. The Commission may require that copies of the
pre-preliminary plat be submitted to other affected public agencies for
review. The Commission shall inform the proprietor or his or her agent of the
development policies of the City and make appropriate comments and
suggestions concerning the proposed development scheme.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1224.02  SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (a)   Purpose. This section is intended to implement Sections 112
through 119 of the Subdivision Control Act.



   (b)   Procedure. The proprietor shall submit copies of the
preliminary plat to authorities as provided in Sections 111 through 119 of
such Act.



      (1)   Proprietor's submittal. The proprietor shall submit a
written application and ten copies of the preliminary plat and other data to
the City Clerk, at least one of such copies to be paper or Mylar reproducible.



      (2)   Clerk's transmittal. The Clerk shall promptly transmit
nine copies of the preliminary plat to the Planning Commission and the
reproducible copy to the City Manager.



      (3)   Public hearing. The Commission shall hold a public
hearing regarding the issue of the approval of the preliminary plat, subject
to the following:



         A.   The Clerk shall give notice of the public hearing
by publishing the notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the City at least fifteen days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall
state the date, time and place of the public hearing, the substance of the
proposed preliminary plat and the location where additional information may
be obtained.



         B.   The Clerk shall provide a notice of the hearing
containing the same information as the published notice to each public
utility and railroad affected by the proposed preliminary plat at least
fifteen days prior to the hearing date. Such notice shall be given by
certified United States mail.



         C.   The Clerk shall provide a notice of the hearing
containing the same information as the published notice to each owner of
property within 300 feet of the subject parcel or tract, as found in the
records of the City Assessor, at least fifteen days prior to the hearing
date. Such notice shall be given by certified United States mail.



         D.   The parcel or tract covered by the proposed
preliminary plat shall be posted by the subdivider for at least fifteen days
prior to the public hearing, which posting shall include the same information
as the published notice.



      (4)   Planning Commission action. The Commission shall
approve, modify or reject the preliminary plat within sixty days of the
filing date, but after the public hearing. The proprietor may waive the
deadline by consenting to an extension in writing. An extension granted to
the Commission by the proprietor shall not reduce the time allowed for
Council's consideration of the preliminary plat.



      (5)   Tentative approval.



         A.   Council, within ninety days of the date of filing,
but not before the Planning Commission action provided for in paragraph (4)
hereof, shall reject or grant tentative approval of the preliminary plat.
Council shall return to the proprietor a copy of the preliminary plat with
tentative approval duly noted, or a written notice of rejection and
requirements for tentative approval.



         B.   Tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall
confer upon the proprietor, for a period of one year from the date of action,
approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout.



         C.   Tentative approval may be extended by Council by
resolution if applied for in writing by the proprietor.



      (6)   Final approval.



         A.   After tentative approval of the preliminary plat by
Council, the proprietor shall:



            1.   Submit copies of the preliminary plat to all
authorities as required by Sections 112 through 119 of the Subdivision
Control Act;



            2.   Submit a list of all such authorities to the
City Clerk, certifying that the list shows all authorities as required by
Sections 112 through 119 of such Act; and



            3.   Submit all approved copies from such
authorities to the Clerk.



         B.   The City Manager shall promptly review the
submitted preliminary plat to verify that all conditions and requirements
imposed upon the plat at the time of tentative approval are complied with,
and shall report the results of such review to Council.



         C.   Council, after receipt of the necessary approved
copies of the preliminary plat and the Manager's report, shall consider and
review the preliminary plat at its next meeting or within twenty days of the
date of submission of all necessary data by the proprietor. Council shall
approve the preliminary plat if the proprietor has met all specified
conditions. The Clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor in writing of
Council's approval or rejection with reasons for rejection specified in the
notice.



         D.   The Clerk shall note all proceedings in the minutes
of the meeting, which minutes shall be open for inspection.



         E.   Council's approval of a preliminary plat shall be
valid for two years from the date of such approval and shall confer upon the
proprietor for such period the conditional right that the general terms and
conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed.



         F.   Council may extend the two-year period by
resolution if applied for in writing by the proprietor.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1224.03  CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   The preliminary plat shall be on a scale of 200 feet to one inch, or
larger, and on a standard size sheet of paper or cloth, twenty-four inches by
thirty-six inches. The following information shall be shown on the
preliminary plat or may be submitted with it:



   (a)   General Data.



      (1)   The name of the proposed subdivision and a legal
description of the site;



      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner,
subdivider, surveyor or engineer preparing the plat;



      (3)   The location of the subdivision, giving the numbers of
section, township and range and the name of the city, county and state and
showing adjoining roads, physical features or township or section lines to
which reference may be made; 



      (4)   The location of existing facilities and structures such
as buildings, sewerage systems, high tension towers, utility easements of
record or in use, excavations, bridges and culverts;



      (5)   Existing and proposed contours at intervals not to
exceed two feet, to be indicated on the drawing. When extensive cuffing or
filling of land is anticipated that will affect building sites and sewage and
disposal facilities, the areas involved shall be indicated. The source, if
known, and the type of fill material to be used, when filling is anticipated,
shall be specified.



      (6)   Streets, street names and right-of-way and roadway
widths;



      (7)   Lot lines and the total number of lots by block;



      (8)   A legend indicating the total acreage contained in the
plat; the absolute and percentage breakdown of the total acreage into lots,
road allowances, parks and other uses; the date; the north arrow and the
scale;



      (9)   Other right-of-way easements, showing location, width
and purpose as available; and



      (10)   The location and results of all soil borings performed
on the site for the purpose of showing soil types and ground water elevations.



   (b)   Additional Maps and Specifications.



      (1)   A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if
the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development;



      (2)   A location map of the surrounding area within one-half
mile of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision in all directions, showing
the proposed plat in relation to schools, shopping centers and major
community facilities and the names of abutting subdivisions;



      (3)   A map showing the land use and existing zoning of the
proposed subdivision and the adjacent tracts;



      (4)   The location of floodplain areas, rivers, streams,
creeks, lakes, county drains, lagoons, slips, waterways, bays, canals and
artificial impoundments, either existing or proposed within or adjacent to
the area to be platted; and



      (5)   Preliminary engineering plans and specifications for
streets, water, sanitary and storm sewers, sidewalks and other required
public improvements required in Chapter 1228. Such engineering plans shall
contain enough information and detail to enable the Planning Commission to
make a preliminary determination as to conformity of the proposed
improvements with applicable City regulations and standards.



   (c)   Supporting Written Information.



      (1)   A legal opinion showing the legal and equitable owners
(including mortgagees, contract purchasers and fee owners) of the land to be
platted, plus all grants, reservations, deed restrictions and easements of
record which may condition the use of property;



      (2)   A statement of the intended use of the proposed plat,
such as residential single-family, two-family, condominium and multiple
housing, commercial, industrial, recreational or agricultural. Such statement
shall also set forth proposed sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry, other nonpublic uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings, parks, playgrounds, schools or other public uses.



      (3)   A statement as to whether the high groundwater is less
than or greater than six feet from either the existing or proposed finished
ground surface. In those cases where the groundwater is less than six feet,
the groundwater level shall be specified. A statement as to how and when the
high groundwater level was established shall be included.



      (4)   A report of soil limitations based on a site inspection
carried out by a soil specialist qualified in the area of soil classification
and mapping, such report to include soils information as may be obtained from
a modern soil map which meets the standards of the National Cooperative Soil
Survey. The source of information shall be specified.



      (5)   A statement of the types of water and sewerage systems
to be provided, including drawings and specifications of appropriate existing
and proposed storm and sanitary sewer systems, water mains and systems and
their respective plans and profiles; and



      (6)   Copies of any proposed protective covenant or deed
restriction.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1224.04  SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT.



   (a)   Purpose. This section is intended to implement the preliminary
plat as approved by Council.



   (b)   Procedure. The final plat shall conform substantially to the
approved preliminary plat and shall conform to the provisions of the
Subdivision Control Act and these Subdivision Regulations. The final plat
procedure is as follows:



      (1)   Proprietor's application. After having received the
final plat approval of the County Drain Commissioner, the County Road
Commission and the County Health Department, if necessary, the proprietor
shall file a written application for approval of the final plat with the City
Clerk at least twenty days prior to a regular Council meeting. With the
application, the proprietor shall submit five true copies of the final plat,
one copy of the final plat on Mylar, one copy of the final engineering plans
shown on Mylar and two copies of landscaping plans, if any, for street trees,
street islands and boulevards.



      (2)   Review and approval.



         A.   The Clerk shall promptly notify Council of the
application for final plat approval.



         B.   The City Manager shall review or cause to be
reviewed the plat and accompanying engineering plans to determine their
conformity to engineering specifications and improvement plans proposed in
the preliminary plat.



         C.   Council shall review the final plat at its next
regular meeting or within twenty days of the filing of the application for
final approval. Based upon its review and that of the Manager, Council shall
determine the plat's conformance or nonconformance to the provisions of the
Subdivision Control Act, these Subdivision Regulations and the preliminary
plat as it was approved. If the final plat is in conformity with the
preliminary plat as approved, and meets the legal requirements of these
Subdivision Regulations and such Act, Council shall approve the final plat.
If approved, the Clerk shall sign all copies of the final plat for Council.
The subdivider shall then follow the procedures set forth in Sections 168
through 172 of such Act.  If rejected, the Clerk shall notify the proprietor
in writing of its action and reasons for disapproval and shall return the
plat to the proprietor.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1224.05  FORM OF FINAL PLAT; REQUIRED INFORMATION.



   (a)   Form. A final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the
Subdivision Control Act and applicable rules, regulations and guidelines
established pursuant to such Act.



   (b)   Final Engineering Plans. Final engineering plans, profiles,
cross sections and specifications for improvements required to be installed
by these Subdivision Regulations, including landscaping plans, shall meet the
specifications established by the City Engineer and/or the specifications of
the respective approving authorities as required by law. Such final
engineering plans shall accompany the final plat. When construction has been
completed at the time of filing of the final plat, one complete copy of
as-built engineering plans on reproducible paper or Mylar of each required
public improvement shall be filed with the City Clerk with the final plat
application.



   (c)   Proof of Ownership. The proprietor shall submit proof of
ownership of the land included in the final plat in the form of an abstract
of title, certified to the date of the proprietor's certificate, or a policy
of title insurance currently in force.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1224.06  IMPROVEMENTS; PERFORMANCE CONTRACTS.



   (a)   Improvements and Facilities Required. Council may require all
improvements and facilities to be completed before it approves the final
plat. If the improvements and facilities are not required to be completed by
Council before plat approval, the final plat shall be accompanied by a
contract between the proprietor and Council for completion of all required
improvements and facilities, and such contract shall be recorded and referred
to on the plat.



   (b)   Financial Security Arrangement. In lieu of actual installation
of public improvements, as required by Council, the proprietor may elect to
provide a financial guarantee of performance in one, or a combination, of the
following arrangements to ensure the conditions which will lead to the
completion of all required public improvements deemed necessary:



      (1)   A performance bond with adequate surety to cover the
costs of the contemplated improvements as estimated by the City or its agent
shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such bond shall specify the time period
in which the improvements are to be completed and shall be with a bonding
company authorized to do business in the State and acceptable to the City.



      (2)   A cash deposit, or deposit by certified check,
sufficient to cover the cost of the contemplated improvements as estimated by
the City or its agent shall be deposited with the Clerk. The escrow deposit
shall be for the estimated time period necessary to complete the required
improvements.



      (3)   An irrevocable letter of credit, issued by a bank
authorized to do business in the State, in an amount to cover the cost of the
contemplated improvements as estimated, is required.



   Council shall rebate or release to the proprietor, as the work
progresses, amounts equal to the ratio of the completed and accepted work to
the entire project.



   (c)   Improvements Prior to Final Plat Approval. The proprietor may
elect to install or cause to be installed, prior to the approval of the final
plat, all or a part of the required public improvements. In such case the
proprietor shall, at the time of final plat approval, provide financial
security for any remaining public improvement obligations.



   (d)   Inspections. Any improvement to the property by the proprietor
shall be inspected by the Municipality for conformity to Municipal standards,
and such inspections may be charged against the proprietor. These charges
shall be paid in full prior to final plat approval.



   (e)   Failure to Complete Improvements. If the proprietor fails to
complete the required public improvement work within such time as is required
by the conditions or guarantees outlined in this section, Council may proceed
to have such work completed and reimburse itself for the cost thereof, by
appropriating the cash deposit, certified check or surety bond or by drawing
upon the letter of credit, or take the necessary steps to require performance
by the bonding company as included in the written agreement with Council and
the proprietor.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



CHAPTER 1226
Design Standards



1226.01   Conformity to Master Plan.



1226.02   Uninhabitable areas.



1226.03   Natural features.



1226.04   Streets.



1226.05   Walkways.



1226.06   Easements.



1226.07   Blocks.



1226.08   Lots.



1226.09   Planting and reserve strips.



1226.10   Public land.



1226.11   Large scale developments.



1226.12   Commercial and industrial developments.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L. Sec.
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M. C. L. Secs. 125.51 et seq.



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Comprehensive Land Use Plan - see P. & Z. Ch. 1212



   Subdivision Open Space Plan - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Review of subdivision proposals - see B. & H. 1440.06



1226.01  CONFORMITY TO MASTER PLAN.



   A proposed subdivision and its ultimate use shall be in conformity with
the Master Plan, as adopted by the Planning Commission and Council.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.02  UNINHABITABLE AREAS.



   Land which the Planning Commission has determined to be unsuitable for
subdivision development, due to flooding, poor drainage, soil conditions or
other features which are likely to be harmful to the health, safety and
welfare of future residents, shall not be subdivided unless satisfactory
methods of protection are formulated by the proprietor and approved by the
Commission. In the absence of appropriate protection measures, such land
shall be set aside for parks and other open space uses.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.03  NATURAL FEATURES.



   Existing natural features, such as trees, woodlots, watercourses,
historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community,
shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision, insofar as possible. No
structure shall be located in a floodplain except in accordance with the
Zoning Code and the rules of the Water Resources Commission of the Department
of Natural Resources. Alteration of a floodplain shall only be allowed based
upon a plan approved by the City and the Water Resources Commission, and only
as long as the floodplain's original discharge capacity is preserved and the
revised stream flow does not affect the riparian rights of other owners.
Restrictive deed covenants shall be filed and recorded with the final plat,
provided that the floodplain area will be left essentially in its natural
state.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.04  STREETS.



   (a)   Generally. The standards set forth in this section are the
minimum standards for streets, roads and intersections. The arrangements,
character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to
the Master Plan as adopted by the Planning Commission and to the standards of
the Southeast Michigan Inter-County Highway Commission, and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographic
conditions and public convenience and safety and in their appropriate
relation to proposed uses of the land to be served. All streets shall be
dedicated to public use.



   (b)   Rights of Way.



      (1)   Width. Public rights of way shall not be less than set
forth in the following table:



         Type of Right of Way            Width (ft.)



         Parkway or boulevard            120



         Arterial street               120



         Collector street             90



         Minor street, including a cul-de-sac       66



      (2)   Inadequate rights of way. Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing street of inadequate right-of-way width, additional
width for the existing street may be required to achieve conformity with the
minimum standards.



      (3)   Additional right-of-way width in dense areas. Additional
right-of-way width may be required to ensure adequate access, circulation and
parking in high density residential, commercial or industrial areas of
subdivisions.



   (c)   Location and Arrangement.



      (1)   Local or minor streets. Local or minor streets shall be
so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic.



      (2)   Street continuation and extension. The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining
areas into new subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission.



      (3)   Stub streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided,
the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall be extended to the
boundary line of the tract to make provision for the future projection of
streets into adjacent areas.



      (4)   Relation to topography. Streets shall be arranged in
proper relation to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets
and reasonable gradients.



      (5)   Alleys. Alleys are not permitted.



      (6)   Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an arterial street, the City may require:



         A.   Marginal access streets approximately parallel to
and on each side of the right of way; and



         B.   Such other treatment as it deems necessary for the
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.



      (7)   Cul-de-sacs. A cul-de-sac shall be not more than 500
feet in length. Special consideration shall be given to a longer cul-de-sac
under certain topographic conditions or other unusual situations. A
cul-de-sac shall terminate with an adequate turn-around with a minimum
external diameter of 150 feet.



      (8)   Half streets. Half streets are prohibited, except where
unusual circumstances make it essential to the reasonable development of the
tract in conformity with these Subdivision Regulations and where satisfactory
assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street is provided.
Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be dedicated within such tract.



      (9)   Private streets. Private streets and roads are
prohibited.



   (d)   Gradients and Alignment.



      (1)   Gradients. Street grades shall not exceed five percent
on either local streets or collector streets, except under unusual
topographical conditions.



      (2)   Alignment.



         A.   Horizontal alignment. When street lines deflect
from each other by more than ten degrees in alignment, the centerlines shall
be connected by a curve with a minimum radius of 500 feet for arterial
streets, 300 feet for collector streets and 150 feet for local or minor
streets. Between reverse curves, on minor streets, there shall be a minimum
tangent distance of 100 feet, and on collector and arterial streets, 200
feet. This requirement may be less under unusual topographical conditions.



         B.   Sight distance. Minimum centerline sight distance
shall be 200 feet for minor streets and 300 feet for collector streets,
unless unusual topographical conditions dictate otherwise. Sight distance
shall be measured at the eye height of three and three-fourths feet to an
object height of six inches.



   (e)   Street Names. A street name may not duplicate that of an
existing street in the County except where a new street is a continuation of
an existing street. Street names that may be spelled differently but sound
the same shall also be avoided. Street names may be rejected by either the
County Road Commission or the City.



   (f
   (f)   Intersections.



      (1)   Angle. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new
streets at an angle of less than seventy-five degrees is not acceptable. An
oblique street shall be curved approaching an intersection and shall be
approximately at right angles for at least fifty feet therefrom.



      (2)   Sight Triangles. Minimum clear sight distance at a minor
street intersection shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of
another vehicle when each is 125 feet from the center of the intersection.
This requirement is increased to 180 feet for collector streets and 260 feet
for arterial streets.



      (3)   Number of streets. Not more than two streets shall cross
at any one intersection.



      (4)   "T" intersections. Except on arterial streets and
certain collector streets, "T" intersections shall be used where practical.



      (5)   Centerline offsets. Slight jogs at intersections shall
be avoided. Where such jogs are unavoidable, parallel street centerlines
shall be offset by a distance of 150 feet or more.



      (6)   Vertical alignment. A nearly flat grade is desirable
within intersections. The flat section shall be carried back sixty feet each
way from the intersection measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.05  WALKWAYS.



   (a)   Crosswalks. Right of way for pedestrian crosswalks in the
middle of long blocks is required where necessary to obtain convenient
pedestrian circulation to schools, parks or shopping areas. The right of way
shall be at least twenty feet wide, extend entirely through the block and not
be included in a lot area.



   (b)   Sidewalks. Sufficient right of way shall be provided so that
sidewalks may be installed on both sides of all streets.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.06  EASEMENTS.



   (a)   Location. Easements shall be provided along front lot lines
and also along side lot lines and rear lot lines when necessary for
utilities. The total width thereof shall be not less than ten feet along the
side or rear of each lot, for a total of twenty feet with adjoining lots, or
ten feet adjacent to a street. Where these requirements are greater than the
building set-back requirements of the Zoning Code, the widths set forth in
this subsection shall become the set-back requirements.



   (b)   Drainageways. The proprietor shall provide drainageway
easements as required by the rules of the County Drain Commissioner and/or
the City.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.07  BLOCKS.



   (a)   Arrangement. A block shall be so designed as to provide two
tiers of lots, except where lots back onto an arterial street, natural
feature or subdivision boundary.



   (b)   Length. A block shall be not less than 500 feet long unless
they abut an existing plat where the blocks are less than 500 feet long.



   The maximum length allowed for a residential block is 1,320 feet, from
center of street to center of street.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.08  LOTS.



   (a)   Conformity to Zoning Code. Lot width, depth and area shall be
not less than the particular district requirements of the Zoning Code, except
where outlots are provided for an indicated and permitted purpose.



   (b)   Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles
to straight streets and radial to curved streets.



   (c)   Width in Relation to Length. Narrow deep lots shall be
avoided. The depth of a lot generally shall not exceed two and one-half times
the width, as measured at the building line.



   (d)   Corner Lots. A corner lot shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets or orientation to both
streets. A lot abutting a pedestrian midblock crosswalk shall be treated as a
corner lot.



   (e)   Back-Up Lots. A lot shall back into such features as freeways,
arterial streets, shopping centers or industrial properties, except where
there is a marginal access street provided. Such a lot shall contain a
landscaped easement along the rear at least twenty feet wide, in addition to
the utility easement to restrict access to the arterial street, to minimize
noise and to protect outdoor living areas. A lot extending through a block
and having frontage on two local streets is prohibited.



   (f)   Frontage. A lot shall front on a publicly dedicated street,
but variances from this requirement may be permitted in an approved planned
unit development.



   (g)   Division. The division of a lot in a recorded plat is
prohibited, unless it is approved following application to Council. The
application shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall state the reasons
for the proposed division. No lot in a recorded plat shall be divided into
more than four parts, and the resulting lots shall be not less in area than
permitted by the Zoning Code. No building permit shall be issued, or building
construction commenced, until the division has been approved by Council and
the suitability of the land for building sites has been approved by the
County or District Health Department. The division of a lot resulting in an
area smaller than prescribed in this section may be permitted, but only for
the purpose of adding to the existing building site. The application shall so
state and shall be in affidavit form.



   (h)   Division of Unplatted Parcel. The division of an unplatted
parcel of land into two, three or four lots involving the dedication of a new
street shall comply with these Subdivision Regulations.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.09  PLANTING AND RESERVE STRIPS.



   (a)   Planting Strips. Planting strips may be required to be placed
next to incompatible features such as highways, railroads and commercial or
industrial uses, to screen the view from residential properties. Such strips
shall be a minimum of twenty feet wide and shall not be a part of the normal
roadway right of way or utility easement.



   (b)   Reserve Strips. A privately held reserve strip controlling
access to a street is prohibited.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.10  PUBLIC LAND.



   (a)   Where a proposed park, playground or other public use shown on
the Master Plan is located in whole or in part within a subdivision, a
suitable area for this purpose may be dedicated to the public.



   (b)   If within ten years of the plat recording, the City has not
accepted the dedicated land, the dedication may be rebutted by competent
evidence, before the Circuit Court in which the land is located, by
establishing either of the following:



      (1)   That the dedication, before the effective date of the
Subdivision Control Act and before acceptance by the City, was withdrawn by
the proprietor; or



      (2)   That the notice of withdrawal of the dedication is
recorded by the proprietor with the County Register of Deeds Office and that
a copy of the notice was forwarded to the State Treasurer within ten years
after the date the plat was first recorded and before acceptance of the
dedicated land by the City.



   (c)   Ten years after the date the plat is first recorded, land
dedicated to use of the public in or upon the plat shall be presumed to have
been accepted on behalf of the public by the City.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.11  LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS.



   (a)   This chapter may be modified in accordance with Section
1222.04 in the case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a complete
community or neighborhood consistent with the Master Plan and with a building
and development program which provides and dedicates adequate public open
space and improvements for the circulation, recreation, education, light, air
and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated. The entire
approved plan shall be platted pursuant to these Subdivision Regulations.



   (b)   Such a subdivision shall generally be consistent with the
Master Plan, contain 500 living units or more, contain or be bounded by major
streets or natural physical barriers as necessary and contain reserved areas
of sufficient size to serve its population. For schools and playgrounds, the
subdivision shall conform to Section 1226.10. Dedication of parks and other
public facilities shall be by means of platting.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1226.12  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS.



   This chapter may be modified in accordance with Section 1222.04 in the
case of a subdivision specifically for commercial or industrial development,
such as a shopping district, wholesaling area or planned industrial district.
In all cases, however, adequate provision shall be made for off-street
parking and loading areas as well as for traffic circulation.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



CHAPTER 1228
Improvements



1228.01   Construction plans.



1228.02   Monuments.



1228.03   Trafficways.



1228.04   Water.



1228.05   Sanitary sewers.



1228.06   Storm sewers; grading.



1228.07   Private utilities.



1228.08   Street lights.



1228.09   Land balancing.



1228.10   Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas.



1228.11   Optional public improvements.



1228.12   Ensured completion of public improvements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L. Sec.
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C. L. Secs. 125.51 et seq.



   Planning Commission - see P. & Z. Ch. 1210



   Improvements; performance contracts - see P. & Z. 1224.06



   Subdivision Open Space Plan - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Review of subdivision proposals - see B. & H. 1440.06



1228.01  CONSTRUCTION PLANS.



   The proprietor of a proposed subdivision shall have prepared, by a
registered engineer, a complete set of construction plans, including
profiles, cross sections, specifications and other supporting data, for the
public streets, utilities and other facilities required in this chapter. All
construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and all
such plans and specifications shall be submitted as provided in these
Regulations.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.02  MONUMENTS.



   (a)   Location. Permanent monuments shall be located in the ground
at all angles in the boundaries of a plat; at the intersection lines of
streets, at the intersection of the lines of streets with the boundaries of
the plat and at the intersections of alleys with the boundaries of the plat;
at all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of compound curvature,
points of reverse curvature and angle points in the side lines of streets and
alleys; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line.



   (b)   Material. All monuments shall be made of solid iron or steel
bars, at least one-half inch in diameter and thirty-six inches long, and
completely encased in concrete.



   (c)   Corner Lots. All lot corners shall be marked in the field by
iron or steel bars, or iron pipe, at least one-half inch in diameter and
eighteen inches long.



(Ord. 421.  Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.03  TRAFFICWAYS.



   (a)   Streets.



      (1)   Construction. All subdivisions shall have full street
improvements, including adequate subgrade preparation, hard surfacing and
curbs and gutters, in conformity with the construction standards of the City.



      (2)   Surfaces. The finished roadway surface shall be in
conformity with such construction standards.



      (3)   Surface width. Minimum widths shall be as follows:



            Type of Street         Width (ft.)



            Parkway          48



            Arterial          44



            Collector          36



            Minor             30



      (4)   Curbs and gutters. Concrete curbs and gutters of types
approved by the City shall be provided for all streets within each
subdivision and along all streets that border on the subdivision.



      (5)   Islands. Where the proprietor proposes street islands in
the street pattern, the proprietor shall have suitable plans made for
landscaping these areas. All such landscape plans shall be approved, as to
height, size and type of plant material, by the City Manager before
construction.



      (6)   Street and traffic signs. The subdivider shall provide
and erect street name signs of the same type and design in general use in the
City. The subdivider shall consult with the Chief of Police who shall inform
the subdivider as to the type and placement of traffic control signs and
devices. All such signs and devices shall comply with the uniform traffic
control device regulations of the State.



      (7)   Trees. Street trees are required in each subdivision of
a type, size and location as specified by the Planning Commission and/or
Council.



   (b)   Sidewalks and Crosswalks. A concrete sidewalk shall be
installed by the proprietor along each side of a street in the subdivision
and along the side of a street that borders on the subdivision, in accordance
with the specifications of the City. A crosswalk, where required, shall have
a five-foot paving width centered within the required right of way and shall
be constructed pursuant to Act 8 of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended,
regarding construction for use by the handicapped.



   (c)   Driveways. A driveway shall be in conformity with the
construction standards of the City.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.04  WATER.



   (a)   Service. The subdivider shall install water mains, and service
connections from the mains to the property lines, making the City water
system available to each lot in the subdivision. The installation of mains
and connections shall conform to plans and specifications which have been
submitted to and approved by the City Manager and shall conform to the
requirements of Act 98 of the Public Acts of 1913, as amended.



   Fire hydrants shall be installed at each street intersection where the
centerline-to-centerline distance of the rights of way is 300 feet or more,
including ninety-degree bends in streets, and not more than 600 feet from
each other or from any lot in the subdivision. Fire hydrant standards shall
be subject to the approval of the Manager as to design and size.



   (b)   Construction Permits. A construction permit is required from
the State prior to the start of the project, which permit shall be applied
for by the City upon submission of the plans by the proprietor.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.05  SANITARY SEWERS.



   (a)   Service. Each lot in the subdivision shall be served by a
connection to a sanitary sewer. Before a lift station is allowed, the City
shall make a determination of the cost of maintaining the lift station. The
City may require the subdivider to relocate an existing lift station, install
additional sewer lines beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, enlarge an
existing lift station or perform a combination of such actions.



   (b)   Construction. Sewer systems shall comply with the requirements
of Act 98 of the Public Acts of 1913, as amended. A construction permit is
required from the State before the start of the project, which permit shall
be applied for by the City upon submission of the plans by the proprietor.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.06  STORM SEWERS; GRADING.



   (a)   A storm drainage system, including necessary storm sewers,
drain inlets, manholes, culverts and other necessary appurtenances, is
required and shall be constructed in conformity with the requirements of the
City.



   (b)   A lot shall be finished graded so that all storm water shall
drain therefrom in conformity with the construction standards of the City.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.07  PRIVATE UTILITIES.



   All private utilities shall be placed underground within private
easements or within public ways or other public and quasipublic utility
rights of way. All facilities placed in public ways or other public and
quasipublic utility rights of way shall be approved by the City Manager prior
to installation.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.08  STREET LIGHTS.



   The proprietor shall install street lights in conformity with the
standards set forth in Chapter 1049 of the Streets, Utilities and Public
Services Code.



(Ord. 594.  Passed 12-13-93.)



1228.09  LAND BALANCING.



   The subdivider shall balance the land in conformity with the
construction standards of the City.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.10  PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION AREAS.



   (a)   Standards. The Planning Commission shall require that land be
reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes in locations
designated on the Master Plan or otherwise where such reservations would be
appropriate. Each such reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension,
topography and general character and shall have adequate road access, for the
particular purposes envisioned by the Commission. The area shall be shown and
marked on the plat, "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes."



   When recreation areas are required, the Commission shall determine the
number of acres to be reserved from the following table, which has been
prepared on the basis of providing three acres of recreation area for every
100 dwelling units or pursuant to the Zoning Code. The Planning Commission
may refer such proposed reservations to the Park and Recreation Commission
for recommendation. The developer shall dedicate all such recreation areas to
the City as a condition of final subdivision plat approval.



RECREATION REQUIREMENTS



 




Size of Single-Family Lot in Subdivision (sq. ft.)

 

Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision to be Reserved for Recreation Purposes




80,000 or more

 

1.5




50,000

 

2.5




40,000

 

3.0




35,000

 

3.5




25,000

 

5.0




15,000

 

8.0




10,000

 

12.0




8,400

 

15.0





 



   (b)   Multifamily and High Density Residential. The Planning
Commission shall determine the acreage for each reservation based on the
number of dwelling units per acre to occupy the sites as permitted by the
table set forth in subsection (a) hereof and/or the Zoning Code.



   (c)   Size. In general, land reserved for recreation purposes shall
have an area of at least two acres. When the percentages from the table set
forth in subsection (a) hereof would create less than two acres, the
Commission may require that the recreation area be located at a suitable
place on the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at
such time as the adjacent land is subdivided. In no case



shall an area of less than one acre be reserved for recreation purposes if it
will be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to
increase its area. Where recreation land in a subdivision is not reserved, or
the land reserved is less than the percentage set forth in subsection (a)
hereof, subsection (e) here of shall apply.



   (d)   Sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a
character and location suitable for use as a playground or playfield (or for
other recreation purposes), shall be relatively level and dry and shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Planning
Commission. These improvements shall be included in the performance bond. A
recreation site shall have a total frontage of one or more streets of at
least 200 feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be less than 200
feet. All land to be reserved for dedication to the local government for park
purposes shall have the prior approval of Council and shall be shown marked
on the plat, "Dedicated for Park and/or Recreation Purposes."



   (e)   Deposit in Lieu of Land Reservation. Where, with respect to a
particular subdivision, the reservation of land required pursuant to this
section does not equal the percentage of total land required to be reserved
in subsection (a) hereof, the Planning Commission shall require, prior to
final approval of the subdivision plat, that the applicant deposit with
Council a cash payment in lieu of land reservation. Such deposit shall be
placed in a neighborhood parks and recreation improvement fund to be
established by Council. Such deposit shall be used by the City for
improvement of a neighborhood park, playground or recreation area, including
the acquisition of property. Such deposit must be used for facilities that
will actually be available to and benefit the persons in the subdivision and
be located in the general neighborhood of the subdivision.



   The Commission shall determine the amount to be deposited, based on the
following formula: one hundred dollars ($100.00), multiplied by the number of
times the total area of the subdivision is divisible by the maximum number of
minimum sized lots of the zoning district in which the subdivision is
located, less a credit for the amount of land actually dedicated for
recreation purposes, if any, as the land dedicated bears in proportions to
the land required for dedication in subsection (a) hereof, but not including
any land reserved through density zoning.



   (f)   Land Utilizing Average Density. A subdivision plat in which
the principle of average density of flexible zoning has been utilized shall
not be exempt from this section, except as to such portion of land which is
actually dedicated to the City for park and recreation purposes. If no
further area, other than the area to be reserved through averaging, is
required by the Planning Commission, the full fee shall be paid as required
in subsection (e) hereof. If further land is required for reservation, apart
from that reserved by averaging, credit shall be given as provided in
subsection (e) hereof.



   (g)   Interpretation. The provisions of this section are minimum
standards. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a
developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in addition to
the requirements of this section.



(Ord. 421. Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.11  OPTIONAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (a)   Landscaping.  Landscape plantings, louvered fences for
screening or other suitable landscape treatment may be made by the proprietor
within required greenbelts, buffer parks or other open spaces where he or she
wishes to protect his or her development from the detrimental effects of
adjacent expressways, major streets, railroads or other land uses. Landscape
plans shall be indicated on the proprietor's improvement plans and shall be
approved by the Planning Commission.



   (b)   Greenbelts. It is desirable for the protection of residential
properties to have greenbelts or landscaped screen plantings located between
a residential development and adjacent major arterial streets and railroad
rights of way. When a proprietor wishes to protect his or her development in
this respect or where the Planning Commission deems it necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare, a proposed subdivision plat shall show the
location of such greenbelts.



(Ord. 421.  Passed 6-1-82.)



1228.12  ENSURED COMPLETION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   To ensure completion of all required and optional public improvements,
Council shall make arrangements for financial guarantees with the proprietor
prior to final plat approval, as provided in Section 1224.06.



(Ord. 421.  Passed 6-1-82.)



TITLE SIX- Zoning



CHAPTER 1240
Adoption of Zoning Code



1240.01   Adoption by reference.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Sec. 117.41



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.581 



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.582



   Regulation of congested areas - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.583



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of 
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L. Sec. 125.583a



   MDOT permit required for activities on state trunk line highway - see
B.R. & T. Secs. 872.14, 873.08



1240.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The City Zoning Ordinance, Articles 1 through 14 with Appendices, is
hereby adopted. The full text of the City Zoning Ordinance is attached to
Ordinance No. 722, passed November 19, 2001, and is hereby incorporated as
Appendix A to this Chapter 1240.



(Ord. 722. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 728.  Passed 6-3-02; Ord. 729.  Passed
7-29-02; Ord. 738.  Passed 2-24-03; Ord. 744.  Passed 9-22-03; Ord. 756. 
Passed 5-17-04; Ord. 757.  Passed 6-28-04; Ord. 766.  Passed 2-28-05; Ord.
767.  Passed 3-14-05; Ord. 768.  Passed 5-9-05; Ord. 770.  Passed
6-13-05;  Ord. 771.  Passed 8-22-05; Ord. 772.  Passed 8-22-05; Ord.
778.  Passed 1-23-06. Ord. 779.  Passed 3-13-06; Ord. 780.  Passed
3-13-06; Ord. 781.  Passed 3-13-06; Ord. 785. Passed 9-11-06; Ord. 787. 
Passed 10-9-06; Ord. 788.  Passed 10-9-06; Ord. 789.  Passed 10-9-06; Ord.
798.  Passed 4-23-07; Ord. 800.  Passed 4-9-07; Ord. 801.  Passed 4-9-07;
Ord. 802.  Passed 8-27-07; Ord. 803.  Passed 8-27-07; Ord. 810.  Passed
5-19-08; Ord. 817.  Passed 1-12-09; Ord. 823.  Passed 7-27-09; Ord. 826. 
Passed 9-28-09; Ord. 827.  Passed 10-26-09; Ord. 830.  Passed 11-23-09;
Ord. 831.  Passed 2-8-10; Ord. 836.  Passed 5-24-10; Ord. 838.  Passed
8-23-10; Ord. 849.  Passed 11-7-11; Ord. 859.  Passed 9-10-12; Ord. 860. 
Passed 10-22-12; Ord. 862.  Passed 2-11-13; Ord. 882.  Passed 10-28-13;
Ord. 884.  Passed 3-24-14; Ord. 888.  Passed 8-11-14; Ord. 898.  Passed
10-26-15; Ord. 904.  Passed 7-25-16; Ord. 910.  Passed 11-21-16.; Ord.
910.  Passed 11-21-16; Ord. 913.  Passed 4-9-18.)



APPENDIX A



TABLE OF CONTENTS



HOWELL ZONING ORDINANCE



ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE AND CONSTRUCTION, VALIDITY & SEVERABILITY, CONFLICT,
AND VESTED RIGHT



Section 1.01   Title   1 - 1



Section 1.02   Purpose   1 - 1



Section 1.03   Scope and Construction of Regulations   1 - 2



Section 1.04   Validity and Severability Clause   1 - 2



Section 1.05   Conflict with Other Laws, Regulations and Agreements   1
- 2



Section 1.06   Vested Right   1 - 2



ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS AND RULES APPLYING TO TEXT



Section 2.01   Rules Applying to Text   2 - 1



Section 2.02   Definitions   2 - 1



ARTICLE 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



Section 3.01   Zoning Administration   3 - 1



Section 3.02   Duties   3 - 1



Section 3.03   Special Land Uses   3 - 1



Section 3.04   Site Plan Review   3 - 3



Section 3.05   Site Condominium and Condominium Project Regulations   3
- 9



Section 3.06   Use of Consultants   3 - 10



Section 3.07   Building Permits   3 - 11



Section 3.08   Temporary Buildings and/or Use Permits   3 - 12



Section 3.09   Performance Guarantee   3 - 13



Section 3.10   Fees   3 - 14



Section 3.11   Violations and Penalties   3 - 14



Section 3.13   Public Notice   3 - 15



Section 3.14   Registration to Receive Notice by Mail   3 - 16



ARTICLE 4
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS



Section 4.01   District Designations   4 - 1



Section 4.02   Zoning District Map   4 - 1



Section 4.03   Zoning Vacated and Annexed Areas   4 - 2



Section 4.04   Application of District Regulations   4 - 2



Section 4.05   District Regulation Exceptions   4 - 2



Section 4.06   Purposes and Uses within Zoning Districts   4 - 3



Section 4.06(a) R-1, One-Family Residential   4 - 3



Section 4.06(b) R-2, One-Family Residential   4 - 4



Section 4.06(c) R-T, Two-Family Residential   4 - 4



Section 4.06(d) R-M, Multiple Family Residential   4 - 5



Section 4.06(e) MHP, Mobile Home Park   4 - 6



Section 4.06(f) O-1, Office District      4 - 6



Section 4.06(g) CBD, Central Business District   4 - 7



Section 4.06(h) B-1, Local Business District   4 - 9



Section 4.06(i) B-2, General Business District   4 - 10



Section 4.06(j) MXD, Mixed Use District      4 - 11



Section 4.06(k) I-1, Light Industrial District   4 - 13



Section 4.06(l) I-2, Heavy Industrial District   4 - 15



Section 4.06(m) P-1, Vehicular Parking District   4 - 16



Section 4.06(n) HL, Historic Limited District   4 - 17



Section 4.06(o) HL-2, Historic Limited Residential District   4 - 18



Section 4.07   Schedule of Area, Height, Width and Setback
Regulations   4 - 18(a)



Footnotes to Section 4.07   4 - 18(a)



ARTICLE 4A FORM BASED DISTRICTS



Section 4A.01   General Intent, Purpose, and Use   4A - 1



Section 4A.02   Applicability and Organization   4A - 2



Section 4A.03   Standards Applicable to All Form-Based Districts   4A -
3



Section 4A.04   South Michigan Avenue District   4A - 21



ARTICLE 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section 5.01   Intent   5 - 1



Section 5.02   Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses   5 - 1



Section 5.03   Minimum Floor Area of Dwelling Units   5 - 4



Section 5.04   Buildings to be Moved   5 - 4



Section 5.05   Demolition of Buildings   5 - 4



Section 5.06   Visibility at Intersections   5 - 5



Section 5.07   Temporary Buildings and/or Uses   5 - 5



Section 5.08   One-Family Dwellings and Pre-Manufactured Housing    5 -
6



Section 5.09   Home Occupations   5 - 6



Section 5.10   Landscaping, Greenbelts and Buffers, and Screening   5 -
7



Section 5.11   Fences and Walls   5 - 15



Section 5.12   Essential Services   5 - 15



Section 5.13   Outdoor Storage of Commercial/Industrial Equipment and
Vehicles   5-15



Section 5.14   Residential Occupancy   5 - 16



Section 5.15   Garage Sales   5 - 17



Section 5.16   Residential Units in Mixed Use Buildings      5 - 17



ARTICLE 6
SPECIFIC USE PROVISIONS



Section 6.01   Intent   6 - 1



Section 6.02   Child and Adult Day Care Facilities   6 - 1



Section 6.03   Housing for Elderly and Nursing Homes/Convalescent
Centers   6 - 2



Section 6.04   Child and Adult Foster Care Facilities   6 - 5



Section 6.05   Self-Storage Facilities   6 - 6



Section 6.06   Outdoor Sales of Automobiles or Vehicles   6 - 7



Section 6.07   Public, Parochial and Private Schools   6 - 8(a)



Section 6.08   Municipal Office Buildings   6 - 9



Section 6.09   Churches and Other Incidental Facilities   6 - 9



Section 6.10   Utilities and Public Services Buildings and Uses   6 - 10



Section 6.11   Golf Courses, Country Clubs, Recreation Centers, and Swim
Clubs   6 - 10



Section 6.12   Public and Private Colleges, Universities and Other Such
Institutions of Higher Learning   6 - 10



Section 6.13   Cemeteries   6 - 11



Section 6.14   Bed and Breakfast Accommodations   6 - 11



Section 6.15   General Hospitals   6 - 12



Section 6.16   Motels and Hotels   6 - 13



Section 6.17   Automobile Filling Stations, Automobile Repair Garages,
Automobile Service Stations, Automobile Washes and Automobile
Dealerships   6 - 13



Section 6.18   Outdoor Display of Products or Material Intended for Retail
Sale or Rental   6 - 15



Section 6.19   Seasonal and Transient Display of Products or Materials
Intended for Sale   6 - 16



Section 6.20   Sidewalk Café Service   6 - 17



Section 6.21   Wireless Communication Facilities   6 - 18



Section 6.22   Mixed Use District Development Regulations   6 - 23



Section 6.23   Historic Overlay District Regulations   6 - 32



Section 6.24   Mobile Home Park Requirements   6 - 36



Section 6.25   Sexually Oriented Businesses   6 - 37



Section 6.26   Private Clubs, Lodges & Reception Halls   6 - 43



Section 6.27   Transitional Housing Facility   6 - 44



Section 6.28   Kennels   6 - 45



ARTICLE 7
SIGNS



Section 7.01   Intent   7 - 1



Section 7.02   General Conditions   7 - 1



Section 7.03   Permitted Freestanding Signs   7 - 4



Section 7.04   Permitted Wall Signs   7 - 6



Section 7.05   Permitted Projecting Signs   7 - 8



Section 7.06   Interior Window Signs   7 - 9



Section 7.07   Permitted Portable Signs   7 - 9



Section 7.08   Permitted Temporary Signs and Promotional Banners   7 -
10



Section 7.09   Miscellaneous Signs   7 - 11



Section 7.10   Administration   7 - 12



ARTICLE 8
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS



Section 8.01   Intent   8 - 1



Section 8.02   Airborne Emissions, Noxious Fumes and Odors   8 - 1



Section 8.03   Noise and Vibration   8 - 2



Section 8.04   Electrical Disturbance, Electromagnetic, Radio Frequency
Interference   8 - 3



Section 8.05   Glare and Exterior Lighting   8 - 3



Section 8.06   Use, Storage and Handling of Hazardous Substance; Storage
and Disposal of Solid, Liquid, and Sanitary Waste   8 - 4



Section 8.07   Fire Hazard   8 - 6



Section 8.08   Safety   8 - 6



Section 8.09   Open Storage Enclosures   8 - 6



ARTICLE 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT



Section 9.01   Intent   9 - 1



Section 9.02   Regulations   9 - 1



Section 9.03   Procedure for Review   9 - 2



Section 9.04   Project Design Standards   9 - 3



Section 9.05   Conditions   9 - 5



Section 9.06   Phasing and Commencement of Construction   9 - 5



Section 9.07   Performance Guarantee   9 - 6



Section 9.08   Effect of Approval   9 - 6



Section 9.09   Modification of an Approval Final Plan   9 - 6



ARTICLE 10
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



Section 10.01   Intent   10 - 1



Section 10.02   General Provisions   10 - 1



Section 10.03   Off-Street Parking Requirements   10 - 3



Section 10.04   Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements   10 - 4



Section 10.05   Handicapped Parking Requirements   10 - 12



Section 10.06   Off-Street Parking Lot Design and Construction   10 - 12



Section 10.07   Off-Street Loading Requirements   10 - 15



Section 10.08   Off-Street Stacking Space for Drive-Through
Facilities   10 - 16



Section 10.09   Storage and Parking of Recreational Equipment   10 - 17



ARTICLE 11
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS



Section 11.01   Intent   11 - 1



Section 11.02   Nonconforming Lots   11 - 1



Section 11.03   Nonconforming Uses of Land   11 - 1



Section 11.04   Nonconforming Structures   11 - 2



Section 11.05   Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land   11 - 3



Section 11.06   Repairs and Maintenance   11 - 4



Section 11.07   Uses Allowed As Special Land Uses, Not Nonconforming
Uses   11 - 4



Section 11.08   Change of Tenancy or Ownership   11 - 4



ARTICLE 12
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS



Section 12.01   Authority   12 - 1



Section 12.02   Membership   12 - 1



Section 12.03   Meetings   12 - 1



Section 12.04   Powers and Duties   12 - 2



Section 12.05   Procedure for Appeal   12 - 4



ARTICLE 13
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES TO THE EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCE



Section 13.01   Procedure   13 - 1



ARTICLE 14
REPEAL OF EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCE



Section 14.01   Repeal   14 - 1



APPENDIX



Figure 1   Basement Definition



Figure 2   Measuring Building Height



Figure 3   Grade



Figure 4   Parking Lot Landscaping - Perimeter Parking Lot



Figure 5   Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses



Figure 6   Greenbelt Buffer



Figure 7   Lot Types



Figure 8   Lot Lines, Width, Depth



Figure 9   Parking (54° - 90°)



Figure 10   Parking (30° - 53°)



Figure 11   Parallel Parking



Figure 12   Off-Street Stacking Spaces and Lanes for Drive-Through
Facilities



Figure 13   Setbacks



Figure 14   Story Definition



Figure 15   Visibility at Intersection



Figure 16   Parking Lot Landscaping - Interior Parking Areas



Figure 17   Site Landscaping



Figure 18   Trash Container Screening



"The City of Howell"



Ordinance No. 722



THE CITY OF HOWELL ORDAINS:



ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE AND CONSTRUCTION, VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY



• Section 1.01  Title.



   This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Howell
Zoning Ordinance" or just the "Zoning Ordinance." 



• Section 1.02  Purpose.



   The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote, protect, regulate,
restrict and provide for the use of land and buildings within the City of
Howell; to meet the needs of the residents for places of residence,
recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land; to insure that
uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and
relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion
of population and transportation systems and other public facilities; to
facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems,
sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation, and other public
service and facility needs; and to promote public health, safety, and welfare.



   The City is divided into various districts that are considered best
suited to carry out the intent of this section.  For each of the districts,
regulations are imposed designating the uses for which buildings or
structures shall or shall not be erected or altered, and designating the
trades, industries, and the land uses or activities that shall be permitted
or excluded or subjected to special regulations. 



   It is also the purpose of this Ordinance to provide for the
establishment of a Board of Appeals and its powers and duties; to provide for
the administration and enforcement hereof and for penalties for its
violation; and to provide for the repeal of any and all ordinances
inconsistent herewith.



• Section 1.03  Scope and Construction of Regulations.



   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, altered or maintained, and no new use or change of any building,
structure or land, or part thereof, shall be made or maintained, except in
conformity with this Zoning Ordinance.



• Section 1.04  Validity and Severability Clause.



   Sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to be separable, and
should any section, paragraph or provision of this Zoning Ordinance be
declared by a court to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not
affect the validity of this Zoning Ordinance as a whole or any part hereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



• Section 1.05  Conflict with Other Laws, Regulations, and Agreements.



   It is not intended by this Zoning Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul
or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or
ordinance, other than the Zoning Code previously adopted by the City, as
amended, or with any rule, regulation or permit adopted or issued pursuant to
the law relating to the use of buildings or premises.  However, wherever
this Zoning Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations,
restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of
any other law or ordinance, this Zoning Ordinance shall govern.  Whenever
the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent
requirements than are imposed or required by this Zoning Ordinance the
provisions of such other law or ordinance shall govern.



• Section 1.06  Vested Right.



   Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted or construed to
give rise to any permanent vested right in the continuation of any particular
use, district, zoning classification or permissible activity therein.  Any
such use, district, zoning classification or activity is hereby declared to
be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be
necessary to the preservation or protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.



ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS AND RULES APPLYING TO TEXT



• Section 2.01  Rules Applying to Text.



   The following rules shall apply to the text and language of this
Ordinance:



   (a)   The particular shall control the general.



   (b)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this Ordinance and any caption, the text shall control.



   (c)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. 
The word "may" is permissive.



   (d)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future,
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (e)   The word "used" or "occupied" as implied to any land or
building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied."



   (f)   Any word or term not defined in this Ordinance shall be used
with a meaning of common understanding.



• Section 2.02  Definitions.



Accessory Building – A detached or attached subordinate building located on
the same lot as an existing building, the use of which is clearly incidental
or secondary to that of the mainbuilding such as a private garage or
implement shed.



Accessory Structures – A structure, such as a deck, which is incidental to
that of the mainbuilding that is located on the same lot as the mainbuilding.



Accessory Use – A use subordinate to the principaluses of a lot and used
for purposes clearly incidental to those of the principaluse.



Alcoholic Commercial Establishment – Any hotel, motel, tavern, restaurant,
park, nightclub, cocktail lounge, burlesque house, bar, cabaret, taproom,
club of other similar establishment licensed by the State of Michigan Liquor
Control Commission, or where alcoholic beverages, including beer, are
dispensed and/or consumed.  This definition shall exclude a theater or
auditorium.



Alley – A dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to
abutting property, which is not intended for general traffic circulation. 



Alterations – Any change, addition or modification in construction or type
of occupancy or any change in the structural members of a building, such as
walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which
may be referred to in this Zoning Ordinance as "altered" or "reconstructed."



Apartments – The dwellingunits in a multiplefamilydwelling are defined as
follows:



   (a)   Efficiency Apartment.  A dwellingunit consisting of not more
than one (1) room in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary
facilities.



   (b)   One-bedroom Unit.  A dwellingunit consisting of not more than
two (2) rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary
facilities.



   (c)   Two-bedroom Unit.  A dwellingunit consisting of not more than
three (3) rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary
facilities.



   (d)   Three or More Bedroom Unit.  A dwellingunit consisting of not
more than four (4) rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary
sanitary facilities.



Attached – A building otherwise complete in itself, which depends, for
structural support on complete enclosure, upon a division wall or walls
shared in common with adjacent building or buildings.



Automobile – Unless specifically indicated otherwise, “automobile”
shall mean any motorized vehicle intended to be driven on roads or trails,
such as cars, pickup trucks, vans and motorcycles, and other vehicles defined
as motor vehicles by the Motor Vehicle Code.



Automobile Collision Services – A use such as frame or fender straightening
and repair, painting and undercoating of automobiles, and similar vehicle
repair activities.



Automobile Filling Station – A place used for the retail sale and
dispensing of fuel or lubricants together with the fixed equipment from which
the fuel is dispensed directly into motor vehicles.  Automobile filling
stations may also incorporate a convenience store and/or a single bay car
wash operation as an accessory use.



Automobile Fueling Station – A facility limited to retail sales of vehicle
fuel, motor oil, lubricants, and travel aides, and may include convenience
food and beverages, but shall not include a restaurant and/or drive-through
facility.  Automobile fueling stations are limited to locations incidental
to a principal retail use in a shopping center.



Automobile Dealership – A building or premises used primarily for the sale
of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles.



Automobile Repair Garage – An enclosed building where the following
services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding and
reconditioning of automobiles.



Automobile Service Station – A place where gasoline or other vehicle engine
fuel, kerosene, motor oil, lubricants and grease are sold directly to the
public on the premises for the purposes of operating motor vehicles,
including the sale of minor accessories for motor vehicles (such as tires,
batteries, brakes, shock absorbers and window glass) and the servicing and
minor repair of motor vehicles.



Automobile Wash – A building or portion thereof where automobiles are
washed. Such facilities shall include the following:



   (a)   Automatic Car Wash.  Any facility, including its structures,
accessory uses and paved areas, used wholly or partly to wash, clean and dry
the exterior of passenger automobiles, vans, pick-ups or panel trucks using
conveyors to move the vehicle, or equipment that moves over or around the
vehicle, or other automated equipment intended to mechanically wash such
vehicles.



   (b)   Self-Service Car Wash. Any facility, including its structures,
accessory uses and paved areas used wholly or partly to wash, clean and dry
the exterior of passenger automobiles, vans, pick-ups or panel trucks using
hand-held equipment.



Basement – That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade
but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor
is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the
ceiling.  A basement shall not be counted as a story.  See Figure 1 in the
Appendix.



Bed and Breakfast – A one-family residential structure that meets the
following criteria:



   (a)   Has eight (8) or fewer sleeping rooms, including sleeping
rooms occupied by the innkeeper, one (1) or more of which are available for
rent to transient tenants.



   (b)   Serves breakfast to its transient tenants.



Block – The property abutting one (1) side of a street and lying between
the two (2) nearest intersecting streets; between the nearest such street and
any railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or
between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of
development.



Brewpub – A facility that meets all requirements of a standard restaurant,
produces no more than 18,000 barrels of beer per calendar year on-site, and
is licensed as a brewpub by the State of Michigan.



Build-to-Line–A line running parallel to the road right-of-way which
denotes the maximum setback for all structures.



Building – A structure, either temporary or permanent, used for the shelter
or accommodation of persons, animals, goods or equipment, having a roof
supported by columns or walls and including any tents or awnings which are
situated on private property when so used.



Building Frontage – That portion of a building that faces a public
right-of-way.



Building Code – The code that is in effect within the City of Howell.



Building Height – The vertical distance measured from the finishedgrade at
the front of the building to the higher of the highest point of a flat roof,
or the mean level between the eaves and the ridge of a pitched roof.  See
Figure 2 in the Appendix.



Building Inspector – The authorized representative designated by the
Building Official to enforce the Building Code.



Building Line – A line formed by the face of the building. For the purposes
of this Zoning Ordinance, a minimum buildingline is the same as a front
setback line. 



Building Official – The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the BuildingCode, or a duly authorized
representative.



Church – A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious
worship, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized
to sustain public worship.



Clinic – A structure, housing under one (1) roof, facilities for the
medical and dental care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and
injured persons, and those who are in need of medical, dental or surgical
attention, who are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the
premises.



Club – An organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like, not
operated for profit.



Collector Street – A street intended to serve as a major means of access to
major thoroughfares, such street having considerable continuity within the
framework of the City Thoroughfare Plan.



Columbarium – A structure designed for the purpose of storing the ashes of
human remains that have been cremated.



Commercial Equipment –Any machinery, parts, accessories, construction
equipment or other equipment used primarily in the course of conducting a
trade or business.



Commercial Vehicle –A vehicle of the bus, truck, van or trailer-type, which
is designed, constructed or used for the transportation of passengers for
compensation, the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise, the drawing or
towing of other vehicles or construction equipment, or for other commercial
purposes. The term includes, but not to the exclusion of any other types not
specifically mentioned herein, truck-trailers, step-vans, dump trucks,
tow-trucks, pickup trucks and sedan or panel trucks in excess of three (3)
ton pay load capacity primarily for commercial purposes, and pole trailers.



Condominium – Condominiums shall include the following elements:



   (a)   Condominium Act.  Refers to Act 59 of the Public Acts of
1978, as amended.



   (b)   Condominium Documents.  The master deed, recorded pursuant to
the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the Master Deed
or bylaws that affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the
condominium.



   (c)   Condominium Lot.  The condominium unit includes the
condominium unit and the contiguous limited common element surrounding the
condominium unit, and shall be the counterpart of "lot" as used in connection
with a project developed under the Subdivision Control Act, Act 288 of the
Public Acts of 1967, as amended. 



   (d)   Condominium Unit.  The portion of a condominium project
designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the
master deed. 



   (e)   General Common Element.  The common elements other than the
limited common elements reserved in the master deed for use by all of the
co-owners. 



   (f)   Limited Common Element.  A portion of the common elements
reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the
co-owners. 



   (g)   Master Deed.  The condominium document recording the
condominium project, to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by
reference with the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision
plan for the project, and all other information required by Section 8 of the
Condominium Act.



   (h)   Site Condominium.  A condominium development in which each
co-owner owns exclusive rights to a volume of space within which a structure
or structures may be constructed, herein defined as a condominiumunit.  Such
developments are also described in the master deed.



Congregate Care Housing – A dwelling providing shelter and services for
four (4) or more elderly persons (age 60 or older) within which are provided
living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services and room
cleaning.  Such facilities may also provide other services, such as
transportation for routine social and medical appointments and counseling.



Construction – The placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner.  However, where demolition or removal of
an existing building has been substantially begun and preparatory to
rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction, provided that the work is diligently carried on until
completion of the building involved and that not more than twelve (12) months
have elapsed since the permit was issued for such construction.



Construction Equipment– A bulldozer, front-end loader, backhoe, power
shovel, cement mixer, trenchers, and any other equipment designed or used for
commercial construction purposes, including parts and accessories thereto, or
trailers designed for the transportation of such equipment.



Country Inn – A business generally located in a residential structure which
offers overnight lodging and meals where the owner is actively involved in
daily operations, often living on site. These establishments may serve up to
three (3) full service meals a day in a dining room(s) which can serve up to
twice as many people as the Inn's rated overnight capacity. Dining shall only
be for the patrons of the Inn and their guests. The cost of any meal shall be
included in the room charges.



Crematorium – A building fitted with the proper appliances for the purposes
of the cremation of human remains and includes everything incidental or
ancillary thereto.



Day-Care Facility, Adult – Means the following:



   (a)   Day-Care Center, Adult. A facility, other than a private
residence, receiving one (1) or more adults, eighteen (18) years of age or
older, for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day.  It
includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally
disabled or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing
basis.  An adult day-carecenter does not include alcohol or substance abuse
rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or
assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities that do not meet
the definition of adult day-carecenter.



   (b)   Group Day-Care Home, Adult.  A private home in which more
than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) adults, eighteen (18) years of age
or older, receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a
day.  It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill,
developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision
on an ongoing basis.  An adultday-carehome does not include alcohol or
substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons
released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities
that do not meet the definition of adult day care-center.  The owner of an
adult day-care home business must also be the occupant of the private home.



   (c)   Family Day-Care Home, Adult.  A private home in which six (6)
or less adults, eighteen (18) years of age or older, receive care for periods
of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day.  It includes facilities for
adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically
handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis.  An adult day-care
home does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers,
residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional
facility, or any other facilities that do not meet the definition of adult
day-care center.  The owner of an adult day-care home business must also be
the occupant of the private home.



Day-Care Facility, Child – Means the following:



   (a)   Day-Care Center, Child. A facility, other than a private
residence, receiving one (1) or more preschool or school age children for
care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, and where the
parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child.  The term
"day- carecenter" includes a facility that provides care for not less than
two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per
day.  The facility is generally described as a childcare center,
day-carecenter, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool,
play group or drop-in center.  The term "day-carecenter" does not include
any of the following:



      (1)   A Sunday school, a vacation bible school or a religious
instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where
children are in attendance for not greater than three (3) hours per day for
an indefinite period, or not greater than eight (8) hours per day for a
period not to exceed four (4) weeks during a twelve (12) month period.



      (2)   A facility operated by a religious organization where
children are cared for not greater than three (3) hours while persons
responsible for the children are attending religious services.



   (b)   Group Day-Care Home, Child. A private home in which more than
six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and
supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended
by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of
the family by blood, marriage or adoption.  The term "groupday-carehome"
includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than
four (4) weeks during a calendar year.  The owner of the
childgroupday-carehome business must also be the owner and resident of the
private home.



   (c)   Family Day-Care Home, Child. A private home in which one (1)
but less than seven (7) minor children are received for care and supervision
for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent
or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family
by blood, marriage or adoption. The term "family day-care home" includes a
home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks
during a calendar year.  Childfamilyday-carehomes shall be specifically
exempt from regulations by this Ordinance but are otherwise subject to
applicable State law.  The owner of the child family day-care home business
must also be the owner and resident of the private home.



Deck – A structure without a roof having a foundation to hold it erect, and
attached to or abutting one (1) or more walls of a building or constructed
separately from a building, with or without direct access to the ground, the
floor of which is above finishedgrade, and intended for use as an outdoor
living area.



Demolition – The destruction, all or in part, of a building or structure.



Detached – A self contained and enclosed building which does not depend on
shared or common walls with adjacent building or buildings.



District – A portion of the incorporated area of the City within which
certain regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply
under this Zoning Ordinance.



Domestic Unit – A collective number of individuals living together in one
dwelling unit whose relationship is of a regular and permanent nature and
having a distinct domestic character or a demonstrable and recognizable bond
where each party is responsible for the basic material needs of the other and
all are living and cooking as a single housekeeping unit.  As herein
defined, a domestic unit shall be given the same rights and privileges and
shall have the same duties as a family, as defined herein for the purposes of
construing and interpreting this chapter.  Anyone seeking the rights and
privileges afforded a member of a domestic unit by this ordinance shall have
the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence of each of the elements
of a domestic unit.



Drive-In – A business establishment so developed that its retail or service
character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for
motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle, regardless
of whether self-service is involved, rather than within a building or
structure.



Driveway – An access roadway between a public street and a parking space,
structure or lot.



Dwelling – Any house, room, apartment, boarding house/rooming house, which
is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, eating and sanitation.  Hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, country
inns, and resorts shall not be defined as a dwelling.



Dwelling Unit – A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



Dwelling, Multiple Family – A building, or a portion thereof, designed
exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families, living independently
of each other.



Dwelling, One-Family Detached – A detached one-familydwelling is a building
designed exclusively for, and occupied exclusively by, one (1) family.



Dwelling, One-Family Attached – A building divided vertically by a common
wall extending from the foundation to the roof into two (2) or more
attacheddwellingunits, each having a separate entrance.



Dwelling, Two-Family – A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two
(2) families, living independently of each other.



Erected – Includes "built," "constructed," "altered," "reconstructed,"
"moved upon" or any physical operation on the premises that is required for
construction.  Excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a
part of erection.



Essential Services – The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance
by public utilities or Municipal departments of underground, surface or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution
systems or collection, communication, supply or disposal systems.  Such
systems include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and
similar accessories in connection therewith, but not buildings which are
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or
Municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare.



Excavation – A breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.



Family – One or two individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption,
with their direct lineal descendants or adopted children (and including the
domestic employees thereof), occupying a dwelling unit in accordance with the
standards of section 5.14.  Anyone seeking the rights and privileges
afforded a member of a family by this Code shall have the burden of proof by
clear and convincing evidence of their family relationship.



Farm – All of the contiguous neighboring or associated land operated as a
single unit on which farming as defined by the Michigan Right-to-Farm-Act is
carried on directly by the owner-operator, manager, or tenant-farmer, by his
own labor or with the assistance of members of his household or hired
employees.  Land to be considered a farm hereunder shall include a
continuous parcel of not less than ten (10) acres in area.  Farms may be
considered as including establishments operated as greenhouses, sod farms,
nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, livestock/poultry farms, and
apiaries; but establishments keeping fur-bearing animals, game, or operating
fish hatcheries, confined animal feedlots, stone quarries, or gravel or sand
pits shall not be considered farms hereunder unless combined with farm
operation on the same continuous tract of land.



Fence – A vertical structure intended to prevent entrance, to confine, or
to mark a boundary.



Filling – The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground,
except that which is done in connection with common household gardening and
ground care. 



Floor Area – For the purpose of computing, the minimum allowable floorarea
in a residential dwellingunit, which is the sum of the horizontal areas of
each story of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls.  The floorarea measurement is exclusive of areas of basements,
unfinished attics, non-habitable attached accessory buildings,garages,
breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 



Floor Area, Usable – For the purpose of computing parking, the usable floor
area includes that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of
merchandise or services or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. 
Such floorarea which is used or intended to be used principally for the
storage or processing of merchandise, or for utilities, shall be excluded
from this computation of usablefloorarea.  Measurement of floorarea shall be
the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building,
measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls.  For the purpose of
computing parking for those uses not enclosed within a building, the area
used for the sale or display of merchandise and/or the area used to serve
patrons or clients shall be measured to determine necessary parking spaces.



Foster Care Facilities, Adult – A governmental or non-governmental
establishment that provides foster care to adults.  It include facilities
and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally
disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision or an ongoing
basis but who do not require continuous nursing care.  An adult foster care
facility does not include nursinghomes, homes for the aged, hospitals,
alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, residential centers for
persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other
facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care
facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, MCL 400.701, et.
seq.; M.S.A. 16.610 (61), et. seq., as amended.  The types of licensed Adult
Foster Care Facilities include the following:



   (a)   Foster Care Small Group Home, Adult.  A facility with the
approved capacity to receive twelve (12) or fewer adults who are provided
supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for
twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2)
or more consecutive weeks for compensation.



   (b)   Foster Care Large Group Home, Adult.  A facility with the
approved capacity to receive at least thirteen (13), but not more than twenty
(20) adults, to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in
addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or
more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.



   (c)   Foster Care Family Home, Adult.  A private residence with the
approved capacity to receive six (6) or fewer adults to be provided with
foster care for five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more
consecutive weeks.  The adult foster care family home licensee must be a
member of the household and an occupant of the residence.



   (d)   Foster Care Congregate Facility, Adult.  An adult foster care
facility with the approved capacity to receive more than twenty (20) adults
to be provided with foster care.



Foster Family Facilities, Child – Means the following:



   (a)   Foster Family Home.  A private home in which one (1) but not
more than four (4) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of
the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household
pursuant to the adoption code, Chapter X of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of
1939, being Sections 710.21 to 710.70 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, are
given care and supervision for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or
more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a
parent or legal guardian.



   (b)   Foster Family Group Home.  A private home in which more than
four (4) but fewer than seven (7) minor children, who are not related to an
adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in
the household pursuant to Chapter X of Act No. 288 of Public Acts of 1939,
are provided care for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days
a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or
legal guardian.



Garage – A non-habitable attached or detached accessory building which is
designed for the storage of private automobiles, materials, tools or other
equipment necessary to maintain the property.



Grade – The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.  See Figure 3
in the Appendix.



Grade, Finished – The final elevation of the ground surface after
development. 



Grade, Natural – The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state,
before man-made alternations.



Gross Acres - The total site area, including the existing public road
right-of-way.



Habitable – A building or a portion of a building which is constructed for
permanent living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation purposes (See also
dwelling unit). Habitable space may be attached or detached from the main
building.



Home Occupation – An occupation or profession carried on as a subordinate
use by a member of a family residing on the premises and conducted entirely
within the dwelling, which occupation or profession is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not
change the character thereof.  In addition to this definition, an occupant
of a one-family residence shall also be allowed to specifically give
instruction in a craft or fine art within the residence, pursuant to Act 376
of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended.



Hospital, General – An installation providing health services primarily for
in-patient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, and includes
related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are integral
parts of the facilities. 



Hotel – A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to
transient guests (no more than 6 months) for compensation and in which there
are six (6) or more guest rooms.  Such facilities may have in room cooking
facilities providing all Building Code requirements have been satisfied.



Housekeeping Unit – A dwelling unit organized as a single entity in which
the members of the household share common facilities.



Housing for the Elderly – A building or group of buildings containing
dwellings intended for, and solely occupied by, elderly persons as defined by
the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.  Housing for the elderly
may include independent and/or assisted living arrangements but shall not
include nursing or convalescent facilities regulated by the State of Michigan.



Kennel, Commercial – A lot or premise on which three (3) or more animals
are either permanently or temporarily boarded for a profit. 



Kennels – any premises where more than three dogs, cats, or combination
thereof, that are not owned by the property owner or tenant, are kept during
the day or overnight in exchange for compensation.



Landscaping – The following definitions shall apply in the application of
this Ordinance:



   (a)   Berm.  A landscaped mound of earth that blends with the
surrounding terrain.



   (b)   Buffer.  A landscaped area composed of living material, wall,
berm, or combination thereof, established and/or maintained to provide visual
screening, noise reduction, and transition between conflicting types of land
uses.  See Figure 4 in the Appendix.



   (c)   Conflicting Non-Residential Land Uses.  Any non-residential
land use, such as office, commercial, industrial, research, parking or public
road right-of-way that abuts a residential land use.  See Figure 5 in the
Appendix.



   (d)   Conflicting Residential Uses.  Any residential land use
developed at a higher density that abuts a residential land use developed at
a lower density.  See Figure 5 in the Appendix.



   (e)   Greenbelt.  A landscaped area, established at a depth of the
minimum required frontyardsetback within a zoning district, which is intended
to provide a transition between a public road right-of-way and an existing or
proposed land use and/or between a conflicting land use and an existing or
proposed land use.  See Figure 6 in the Appendix.



   (f)   Opacity.  The state of being impervious to sight. 



   (g)   Plant Material.  A collection of living evergreen and/or
deciduous, woody-stemmed trees, shrubs, vines and ground cover.



Lighting, Exterior – The following words, terms and phrases related to
lighting, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the following meanings,
except where the context clearly indicates a  different meaning:



   (a)   Canopy Structure.  Any overhead protective structure that is
constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians/vehicles to pass under.



   (b)   Flood or Spot Light.  Any light fixture or lamp that
incorporates a reflector or refractor to concentrate the light output into a
directed beam in a particular direction.



   (c)   Glare.  Direct light emitted by a lamp, luminous tube
lighting, or other light source.



   (d)   Lamp.  The component of the luminaire that produces the
actual light including luminous tube lighting.



   (e)   Light Fixture.  The assembly that holds a lamp and may
include an assembly housing, mounting bracket or pole socket, lamp holder,
ballast, reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens.  A light fixture also
includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting.



   (f)   Light Pollution.  Artificial light that causes a detrimental
effect on the environment, enjoyment of the night sky, or causes undesirable
glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties or uses.



   (g)   Light Trespass.  The shining of light produced by a luminaire
beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.



   (h)   Luminaire.  The complete lighting system including the lamp
and light fixture.



   (i)   Luminous Tube Lighting.  Gas filled tubing which, when
subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of
the particular gas used, e.g., neon, argon, etc.



   (j)   Shielded Fixture.  Outdoor light fixtures shielded or
constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the
horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which
light is emitted, e.g. shoebox-type fixtures.  A luminaire mounted in a
recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure such that the surrounding
structure effectively shields the light in the same manner is also considered
fully shielded for the purposes of this Ordinance.



Lot – A parcel of land, excluding any portion in a street or other
right-of-way, of at least sufficient size to meet minimum requirements for
use, coverage, lot area, and to provide such yards as herein required.  See
Figure 7 in the Appendix.  Such lot shall have frontage on a public street,
or on an approved private street, and may consist of:



   (a)   a single lot of record; or,



   (b)   a parcel of land described by metes and bounds.



Lot Area – The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 



Lot, Corner – A lot where the interior angle of two (2) adjacent sides at
the intersection of two (2) streets is less than one hundred and thirty-five
(135) degrees.  A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a cornerlot for the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance if the arc
is of less radius than one hundred (2) and fifty (150) feet and the tangents
to the curve, at the two (2) points where the lot lines meet the curve or the
straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than one
hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees.



Lot Coverage – That part or percentage of the lot occupied by buildings,
including attached and detached accessorybuildings. 



Lot Depth – The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the side lot lines. 



Lot, Through – Any interiorlot having frontages on two (2), more or less,
parallel streets, as distinguished from a cornerlot.  In the case of a row
of throughlots, all sides of such lots adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and frontyards shall be provided as required.  See
Figure 7 in the Appendix. 



Lot, Interior – Any lot other than a cornerlot.  See Figure 7 in the
Appendix.



Lot Lines – The lines bounding a lot is defined as follows (see Figure 8 in
the Appendix):



   (a)   Front Lot Line.  In the case of an interiorlot, that line
separating the lot from the street right-of- way.  In the case of a corner
lot or a through lot, the "front lot line" is that line separating the lot
from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and in
the application for a building permit.



   (b)   Rear Lot Line.  That lot line opposite the front lot line. 
In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an
imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet
long and lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.



   (c)   Side Lot Line.  A lot line other than the front lot line or
the rear lot line.  A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side
street lot line.  A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an
interior side lot line.



Lot of Record – A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
recorded plat on file with the County Register of Deeds at the time of
adoption of this Zoning Ordinance.



Lot Width – The horizontal distance between the sidelotlines, measured at
the two (2) points where the required frontsetback intersects the
sidelotlines. 



Main Building – A building in which is conducted the principaluse of the
lot upon which it is situated. 



Main Use – The principaluse to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist.



Maneuvering Space – An open space in a parking area that is immediately
adjacent to a parking space, is used for and/or is necessary for turning,
backing, or driving forward a motor vehicle into such parking space but is
not used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles.



Manufactured Home – The following terms shall apply:



   (a)   Mobile Home.  A detached portable one-familydwelling,
prefabricated on its own chassis and intended for long-term occupancy.  The
unit contains sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a washbasin, a tub or
shower, eating and living quarters.  It is designed to be transported on its
own wheels or flatbed arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a
complete dwelling without permanent foundation and connected to existing
utilities.



   (b)   Modular Home.  A structure whose parts are manufactured
separately off-site, but fitted together on a site with a permanent
residential foundation.



   (c)   Pre-Manufactured Home.  A structure which is capable of being
occupied exclusively as a dwelling and which is comprised of pre-fabricated
components which are manufactured off-site, transported and erected on a lot.



Master Plan – The comprehensive land use plan, including graphic and
written proposals, indicating the general location of streets, parks,
schools, public buildings and all physical development of the City, and
includes any unit or part of such Plan and any amendment to such Plan or
parts thereof.  The Planning Commission shall adopt such plans. 



Mausoleum – A building or other structure used as a place for the interment
of the dead in sealed crypts or compartments.



Mezzanine – An intermediate level between the floor and ceiling of any
story with an aggregate floorarea of no more than one-third (1/3) of the area
of the room in which the level or levels are located.



Microbrewery – A facility that brews up to 60,000 barrels per year for
off-premise consumption and is licensed as a micro brewer by the State of
Michigan.



Mobile Home Park – Any parcel of land intended and designed to accommodate
more than one (1) mobilehome for living use which is offered to the public
for that purpose; and any structure, facility, area, or equipment used or
intended for use incidental to that living use.



Motel – A series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units
containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space.  Such units shall provide for
overnight lodging, are offered to the public for compensation and shall cater
primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 



Net Acres – The gross acres or total site area, excluding the existing
public road right-of-way.



Nonconforming Building – A building or portion thereof, existing on the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not
conform to this Zoning Ordinance in the district in which it is located.



Nonconforming Use – A use that lawfully occupies a building or land on the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not
conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.



Non-Habitable – A building or a portion of a building which cannot be
defined as a dwelling unit whether attached or detached from the main
building.



Nudity or State of Nudity – Nudity or State of Nudity means the showing or
either of the following:



   (a)   The human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks
with less than a fully opaque covering;



   (b)   The female breast with less than a fully opaque covering on a
part of the nipple.



Nursery, Plant Material – A space, building or structure, or a combination
thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail
sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping. 



Nursing or Convalescent Home – A state licensed facility for the care of
children, of the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering
bodily disorders.  Said home shall conform and qualify for license under
State law even though State law has different size regulations. 



Occupant – Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.



Off-Street Loading Space – An off-street space on the same lot with a
building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials there from.



Off-Street Parking Lot – A facility providing vehicular parking spaces,
along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, so as to provide
access for entrance and exit, for the parking of more than two (2) vehicles. 



Off-Street Parking Space – An area of definite length and width, exclusive
of drives, driveways, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, fully
accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles.  See Figures
9-11 in the Appendix.



Off-Street Stacking Spaces – An area designated for vehicles waiting to
enter a drive-through facility.  See Figure 12 in the Appendix.



Operator – Operator means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian
manager, operator or person in charge of any sexually oriented business.



Parking lot – A total surface area on 1 parcel of 1,200 or more square feet
or 5 parking spaces used for parking and maneuvering of motor vehicles and
which shall also include unenclosed parking structures.



Parking space – A private area designed or used for the parking of a motor
vehicle and properly accessed from a public street by a driveway or private
street.



Paved Surface Area – An area covered with cobblestone, clay-fired bricks,
concrete precast paver units (including, but not limited to, grasscrete),
poured concrete with or without decorative surface materials, blacktop, or
other asphaltic or rubber mixture which may include sand or gravel as an
ingredient and which creates a hard surface.  A graded natural surface or
one covered with rolled stone or overlaid with loose gravel is not considered
a paved surface.



Person – Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity.



Plot Plan – A plot plan shall include the following:



   (a)   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot;



   (b)   The shape, size and location of all buildings or other
structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other
structure already on the lot;



   (c)   The existing and intended use of the lot and all such
structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of
dwellingunits the building is intended to accommodate; and



   (d)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as
may be essential for determining whether or not this Zoning Ordinance is
being complied with.



Porch, Enclosed – A roofed and potentially heated structure projecting from
the exterior walls adjacent to an entrance to the building with walls that
are more than 50% enclosed with permanent and/or removable windows, also
referred to as a three season porch. When accessibility is limited to the
interior of the structure, it may be referred to as a sleeping porch.



Porch, Unenclosed – A roofed, unheated structure projecting from the
exterior walls adjacent to the entrance of the building with walls that are
at least 50% open and unenclosed except for insect screening or retractable
shades.  These structures, also known as an open gallery or veranda, are
principally used as outdoor living areas.



Portico – An open, covered or uncovered, level space located above grade
between the front steps and the front door, also known as a stoop.



Principal Use – The mainuse to which the premises are devoted and the main
purpose for which the premises exist.



Public Park – Public land which has been designated for park or
recreational activities including a park, playground, nature trails, swimming
pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public
land within the City, which is under the control, operation, or management of
the City, the County Board of Commissioner's, the State of Michigan, or the
U.S. Government.



Public Utility – A person, firm or corporation, or a Municipal department,
board or commission, duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, under
governmental regulations, to the public, the following: gas, steam,
electricity, sewage disposal, communication, transportation or water. 



Recreational Equipment – One (1) or more of the following, or modifications
thereof:  travel trailer, camp trailer, tent trailer, camper, pop-up camper,
folding tent trailer, utility trailer, boat, boat trailer, personal water
craft, float and/or raft, including transportation equipment, manufactured
motorized home, manufactured motor bus, all designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use or periodical
and occasional family recreational and vacation use.



Religious Institution – Religious institution means any church, synagogue,
mosque, temple or other similar building, which is used primarily for
religious worship and related religious activities.



Residential District – Residential district means any zoning district that
permits residential dwellings such as: single-family detached, single-family
attached and multiple family dwellings.



Residential Rental Structure – Any building that contains one or more
residential rental units regardless of whether or not one of the units is
occupied by the owner.



Residential Rental Unit – Any apartment, room, rooming house, boarding
house, dwelling house, or portion thereof or any condominium unit for which a
person or group of person pays rent directly or indirectly to the owner
thereof for the purpose of a person to reside therein. This definition
includes one- and two-family dwellings, multiple and multi-family dwellings,
apartment units, flats, rooming house rooms, and boarding houses. This
definition does not include hotels and motels licensed and inspected by the
state, bed and breakfast establishments, or country-inn establishments.



Restaurant – Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food
and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method
of operation is characteristic of a carry-out restaurant, drive-in
restaurant, drive-through restaurant, standard restaurant, tavern or sidewalk
café, or a combination thereof, as defined below:



   (a)   Carry-out Restaurant.  A restaurant whose method of operation
involves the sale of food, beverages and/or frozen desserts in disposable or
edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption
primarily off the premises.



   (b)   Drive-in Restaurant.  A restaurant whose method of operation
involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a motor
vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed building.



   (c)   Drive-through Restaurant.  A restaurant whose method of
operation involves the delivery of prepared food to the customer in a motor
vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off the
premises.



   (d)   Standard Restaurant.  A restaurant whose method of operation
involves either:



      (1)   The delivery of prepared food by wait staff to customers
seated at tables within a completely enclosed building; or



      (2)   The acquisition by customers of prepared food at a
cafeteria line and its subsequent consumption by the customers at tables
within a completely enclosed building.



   (e)   Tavern.  A type of restaurant that is operated primarily for
the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or
snacks may also be permitted.  If a tavern is part of a larger dining
facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated or
operated. 



   (f)   Sidewalk Café.  An area adjacent to and directly in front of
a street-level eating or drinking establishment located within the sidewalk
area of the public right-of-way exclusively for dining, drinking, and
pedestrian circulation.  The encroachment area of a sidewalk café may be
separated from the remainder of the sidewalk by railings, fencing, or
landscaping planter boxes or a combination thereof.



Rooming House – A building, other than a hotel or dormitory, which is not
occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling, containing rooming units, where
for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging is
provided for 2 or more roomers.



Rooming Unit – Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit,
but which does not contain any cooking facilities.



Salvage Yard – An open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are
bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber tires and bottles.  "Salvageyard" includes automobile wrecking yards
and any area of more than two hundred (200) square feet used for the storage,
keeping or abandonment of salvaged materials, but does not include uses
established entirely within enclosed buildings.



School – Any public or private educational facility including child day
care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary
schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle
schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, special
education schools, junior colleges, and universities.  School includes the
school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally as a school.



Self-Storage Facility – A building consisting of individual, small
self-contained units that are leased for the storage of personal and
household goods.



Setback – The distance required to obtain the front, side or rear yard open
space provided for in this Zoning Ordinance.  See Figure 13 in the Appendix.



Sexually Oriented Business – An establishment that provides adult
entertainment appealing to the sexual interests of its customers. Sexually
Oriented Businesses and their operational characteristics are further defined
as follows:



   (1)   Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, internet
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or
other image producing devices are maintained to show images and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of "sexually explicit activities" or "specific anatomical areas".



   (2)   Adult Bookstore of Adult Video Store means an establishment
which offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration, as one of its
principal business purposes, any one or more of the following:



      (a)   Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video matter or photographs, cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representation which depict or describe "sexually
explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or



      (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with "sexually explicit activities"; or



      (c)   Items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia depicting,
displaying, advertising or packaged as "sexually explicit activities" or
depict or describe "specified anatomical areas".



      (d)   For purposes of this Section, "principal business
purpose" means:



         (i)   The devotion of a significant or substantial
portion, meaning at least twenty-five (25%) percent of its in-store inventory
(either measured by display area or retail value) in the items listed above;
or



         (ii)   The receipt of twenty-five (25%) percent of more
of its revenues from the sale of the items listed above; or



         (iii)   The devotion of a significant or substantial
portion of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of the sale, rental
or viewing, of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, film, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations, items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia
which are characterized by the depiction, description display, advertising or
packaging of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas".



      (e)   An establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of
materials depicting or describing "sexually explicit activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", and still be characterized as an adult book
store, adult novelty or retail store or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store,
so long as the establishment falls within the definition of an adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store as set forth above.



   (3)   Adult Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle club,
or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
sold, which features:



      (a)   persons who appear in a state of restricted nudity; or



      (b)   live performances, exhibitions, shows, dances, revues,
floorshows, songs or other similar presentation which are characterized by
the partial exposure of "specified anatomical areas"; or



      (c)   films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs,
slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".



      (d)   This definition does not include a theater which
features occasional live nude performances with serious literary, artistic or
political value and that have no adverse secondary effects.



   (4)   Adult Massage Parlor means any place where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other manipulation of
the human body occurs as part of or in connection with specified sexual
activities, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or
service related thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical areas. An
Adult Massage Parlor, in contrast to a Myotherapy Establishment, is
considered a sexually oriented business for purposes of these regulations.



   (5)   Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:



      (a)   offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration and provide patrons with closed-circuit television
transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides
or other photographic reproductions which are regularly characterized by the
depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; or which advertises the availability of this adult type of
material by means of a sign, visible from the public right-of-way, or by
means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, internet or television;
or



      (b)   permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing
"sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for
electric transmission over the World Wide Web; or



      (c)   offer a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that
is less than ten (10) hours; or



      (d)   allow a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.



   (6)   Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, compact discs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas".



   (7)   Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the performance of "sexually
explicit activities". This definition does not include a theater which
features occasional live nude performances with serious literary, artistic or
political value and that have no adverse secondary effects.



   (8)   Adult Use Business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty or retail store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude modeling
studio and/or a sexual encounter establishment or any business determined by
the Building Official, City Manager, and/or the Chief of Police, to be an
adult use, due to the activities of the business which involve characteristic
of adult uses, such as nudity, semi-nudity, exposure of "sexually explicit
activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas". The definition of "adult use
business" shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrists or similar professional person licensed by the
State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.



   (9)   Employee means a person who works or performs in and/or for an
adult use business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a
salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.



   (10)   Entertainer means a person who performs some type of activity
or pose with the intent of allowing others to witness that activity or pose.



   (11)   Escort means a person, who for consideration in any form,
agrees or offers to act as a companion guide or date for another person, or
who agrees or offers to privately perform as an entertainer, including, but
not limited to, the modeling of lingerie, the removal of clothing, the
performance of a dance or skit, or the providing of specified sexual
activities for another person. Under this definition, "privately" shall mean
a performance for an individual, or that individual's guests.



   (12)   Escort Agency means a person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.



   (13)   Establishment means and includes any of the following:



      (a)   the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;



      (b)   the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (c)   the location or relocation of any sexually oriented
business.



   (14)   Licensee means the individual listed as an applicant on the
application of a sexually oriented business license, or a person whose name a
license to operate an adult use business has been issued.



   (15)   Licensing Officer means the Clerk of the City of Howell or
his/her designee.



   (16)   Manager means an operator, other than a licensee, who is
employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of
employees, or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the sexually
oriented business.



   (17)   Massage means the treating of external parts of the body for
remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with the hands or with the aid
of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in
the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably
expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided shall pay any
consideration whatsoever therefore. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term
"bodywork" shall mean massage.



   (18)   Myotherapy Establishment means any individual, group of
individuals, person or business which engages in the practice of massage as
defined herein, and which has a fixed place of business where any person,
firm, association, partnership, limited liability company or corporation
carries on any of the activities as defined herein.  Myotherapy
establishment shall also include, but not be limited to, a Turkish bath
parlor, steam bath, sauna, magnetic healing institute, health club, health
spa, or physical fitness club or business that offers massages on occasion or
incidental to its principal operation, as well as an individual's home where
a person is engaged in the practice of massage for consideration. The
definition of sexually oriented business shall not include the practice of
massage in a licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, medical clinic or
the offices of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, psychologist,
clinical social worker and family counselor, who are licensed to practice
their respective professions in the State of Michigan, or who are permitted
to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or an
establishment duly licensed in the State of Michigan, clergymen, certified
members of the American Massage and Therapy Association and certified members
of the International Myomassethics Federation. A Myotherapy Establishment
engaged in the practice of massage as defined herein is considered a
Regulated Use but not a sexually oriented business for purposes of these
regulations.



   (19)   Nude Model Studio means any place where a person appears in a
state of nudity or displays "specific anatomical areas", and is provided
money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. This includes
modeling studios that provide for nude modeling on an occasional basis, but
it does not include modeling studio whose primary function is to provide art
classes as part of a college, university or educational institution and which
is certified by the State of Michigan.



   (20)   Operator means the owner, licensee, manager or person in
charge of any premises.



   (21)   Peep Booth means an adult motion picture theater with a
viewing room or cubical of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor space.



   (22)   Premises or Licensed Premises means any premises that
requires a sexually oriented business license and that is classified as a
sexually oriented business.



   (23)   Principal Owner means any person owning, directly or
beneficially: a) ten percent (10%) or more of a corporation's equity
securities; b) ten percent (10%) or more of the membership interests in a
limited liability company; or c) in the case of any other legal entity, ten
percent (10%) or more of the ownership interests in the entity.



   (24)   Private Room means a room in a hotel/motel that is not a peep
booth, has a bed and a bath in the room or adjacent room, and is used
primarily for lodging.



   (25)   Semi-Nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no
more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   (26)   Sexual Encounter Center means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one (1) of its primary business purposes, offers a place
where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the
purpose of "sexually explicit activities" or the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" for any form of consideration, including, but not limited
to:



      (a)   physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the same or opposite sex; or



      (b)   activities when one or more of the persons is in a state
of nudity or semi-nudity; or



      (c)   permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed
performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical
areas" for recording or transmission over the World Wide Web or any other
media.



   (27)   Sexually Explicit Activities means and includes any of the
following:



      (a)   the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or



      (b)   sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or



      (c)   masturbation, actual or simulated; or



      (d)   any activity intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a
person's lust, passions or sexual desires; or



      (e)   human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; or



      (f)   excretory function as part of or in connection with any
of the activity set forth in (a) through (e) above.



   (28)   Sexually Oriented Business means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore or adult video store, adult novelty or retail store, adult cabaret,
adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude
model studio, sexual encounter center or similar establishment or any place
that permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing "sexually
explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for
electronic transmission over the World Wide Web, film, motion picture,
videocassette, DVD or other photographic reproduction. "Sexually oriented"
when used to describe film, motion picture, videocassette, DVD, slides, or
other photographic reproductions shall mean film, movies, motion picture,
videocassette, DVD, slides or other photographic reproductions that regularly
depict material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing "sexually explicit activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" offered for observation by the patron(s) on the premises of
a sexually oriented business. The definition of "sexually oriented business"
shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the
State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.



   (29)   Specified Anatomical Areas means and includes any of the
following:



      (a)   less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, or female breast or breasts of
any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top
of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or



      (b)   human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, even if
opaquely and completely covered.



   (30)   Specified Criminal Acts means sexual crimes against children,
sexual abuse, criminal sexual conduct, rape, crimes classified as sexual
crimes by the State of Michigan or any other state, or crimes connected with
another adult use business, including, but not limited to, the distribution
of obscenity, prostitution and/or pandering.



   (31)   Significant or Substantial Portion means twenty-five percent
(25%) or more of the term modified by such phrase.



   (32)   Substantial Enlargement of a sexually oriented business means
the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five
percent (25%), as the floor area exists on the date of adoption of this
ordinance.



   (33)   Tenant Space – Tenant Space means a securable area
separated from other area by walls and doors that are available for lease or
rent within a multi-tenant building, such as tenant spaces typically found
within a shopping mall or strip.



   (34)   Transfer of Ownership or Control of a sexually oriented
business means and includes any of the following:



      (a)   the sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (b)   the transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (c)   the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



Shed – A self contained and enclosed single story building of less than or
equal to 200 square feet which does not depend on shared or common walls with
adjacent building or buildings.



Sign – A name, identification, description, display, light, balloon, banner
or illustration which is affixed to, or painted on, or otherwise located or
set upon or in a building, structure or piece of land and which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business and which is visible from any public street,
sidewalk, alley, park, public property or from other private property. The
definition includes interior signs that are directed at persons outside the
premises of the sign owners and exterior signs, but not signs primarily
directed at persons within the premises of the sign owners. The definition
does not include goods for sale displayed in a business window. Also, the
definition does not include religious symbols or paintings which do not
display lettering and do not advertise a business, product or service and
which are not a trademark or logo for a business, product or service. All
such amenities are defined as follows:



   (a)   Freestanding Sign.  A sign that is attached to or part of a
completely self-supporting structure.  The supporting structure shall be
placed in or below the ground surface and not attached to any building or any
other structure whether portable or stationary.



   (b)   Projecting Sign.  A sign other than a wallsign, which is
perpendicularly attached to, and projects from a structure or buildingwall
not specifically designed to support the sign. 



   (c)   Portable Sign.  A single or double surface painted or poster
panel-type sign or some variation thereof, which is easily movable and not
permanently attached to the ground or a building.



   (d)   Real Estate Sign.  A portable temporary non-illuminated sign
placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or
lease of said property or rental of the unit within.



   (e)   Roof Sign.  Any sign wholly erected to, constructed or
maintained on the roof structure of any building.



   (f)   Suspended Sign.  A sign that is suspended or hung from the
underside of an eave, porch roof or awning.



   (g)   Promotional Banner.  A sign made of fabric, cloth, paper or
other non-rigid material that is typically not enclosed in a frame and
advertises a product or service offered on the premises.



   (h)   Wall Sign.  Any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the
wall or printed or painted on the wall of any building.  However, said wall
sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the
building.  For the purpose of this Ordinance, any sign display surface that
is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be
considered a wallsign.



   (i)   Canopy Sign.  A sign displayed and affixed flat on the
surface of a canopy and does not extend vertically or horizontally beyond the
limits of the canopy.



   (j)   Window Sign.  A sign installed inside a window and intended
to be viewed from the outside. 



   (k)   Business Center Sign.  A freestanding or wallsign that
identifies and/or advertises a businesscenter.  A businesscenter shall be
considered a group of two (2) or more stores, offices, research facilities or
manufacturing facilities which collectively have a name different than any
individual establishment and which have common parking and entrance
facilities.  A businesscenter may also be considered a nonresidential
platted subdivision or sitecondominium development, such as an industrial or
office park.



   (l)   Sign Surface.  That part of the sign upon, against, or
through which the message is displayed or illustrated.



   (m)   Total Surface Area of the Sign.  The sum total of all
exterior surfaces of the sign, computed in square feet.  In the case of a
broken sign (a sign with open spaces between the letters, figures, numbers or
symbols) the totalsurfacearea shall be measured by multiplying the height of
the individual letters or combination of letters by the distance between the
outer edges of the two (2) outermost letters, figures, numbers or symbols.



   (n)   Banners and Flags.  Considered part of a sites signage and
shall include all removable fabric, cloth, paper or other non-rigid material
suspended or hung from light poles, buildings or other site amenities. 
These signs may or may not include a business logo or symbol.



   (o)   Menuboard.  A sign that displays menu items and may contain a
communication system for placing food orders or other items at an approved
drive-through facility.



   (p)   Digital/Electronic Sign. Any signs that use changing lights or
other electronic media to form a sign message wherein the sequence of
messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be
modified by an electronic process. Video display signs shall be considered
synonymous with digital/electronic signs.



   (q)   Sign Message Area.  A sign message is the same as the total
surface area of the sign but relates exclusively to digital/electronic signs
and may include graphics as well as text.



   (r)   Abandoned Sign.  A sign which, for 30 days or more, fails to
direct a person to or advertises a bona fide business, tenant, owner, product
or activity conducted, or product available on the premises where such sign
is displayed and shall be deemed a nuisance per se.



Site Plan – A scaled drawing showing the relationship between the lotlines
and their uses, buildings or structures, existing or proposed on a lot,
including such details as parking areas, access points, landscaped areas,
building areas, setbacks from lotlines, buildingheights, floorareas,
densities, utility lines, of a special or particular use.



Small Distiller – A facility that manufactures up to 60,000 gallons of
spirits per year and is licensed as a small distiller by the State of
Michigan.



Small Wine Producer – A facility that manufactures up to 50,000 gallons of
wine per year and is licensed as a small wine producer by the State of
Michigan.



Spouse Abuse/Domestic Violence Shelter – A structure owned or leased by a
nonprofit entity for the purpose of providing short-term shelter care for
abused individuals and their children, which structure may also contain an
office for the administrative staff of such nonprofit entity.



Story – That part of a building, except a mezzanine, included between the
upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next
above.  A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than
fifty (50) percent of its area, by cubic content, is below the height level
of the adjoining ground.  See Figure 14 in the Appendix.



Story, Half – An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the
usablefloorarea of which, at a height of four (4) feet above the floor, does
not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floorarea in the story directly below, and
the height of which above at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor
space is seven (7) feet and six (6) inches tall.



Street – A public thoroughfare (such as a street, avenue or boulevard) that
affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 



Structure – Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground, but not including pavements, curbs, walks or open air surfaced areas
or moving vehicles.



Structure, Historic.



   (a)   Significant Historic Structures. Those structures which are
identified by any study conducted by the City to determine the historic value
of those buildings that contribute significantly to the character of the
City. All such structures retain a basic integrity of architectural design,
setting, materials and workmanship. Such structures are identified with
important persons, events or types of service, or embody the distinguishing
characteristics of an architectural specimen, inherently valuable as a
representation of a period, style or method of construction.



   (b)   Contributing Historic Structures. Those structures which,
while not possessing the importance of significant historic structures, make
a positive contribution to the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance due to age or
physical integrity. With appropriate repairs and restoration, such structures
may be designated significant at the request of the owners.



   (c)   Historic Structures.  Those structures which were constructed
fifty (50) years or greater from the current date which may or may not be
considered significant or contributing.



   (d)   Noncontributing Structures.  A noncontributing structure
means all structures not identified as significant or contributing.



Swimming Pool – Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing
or wading that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep.  This
includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and
fixed-in-place wading pools.



Temporary Use or Building – A use or building permitted under Section 3.08
to exist during periods of construction of the mainbuilding or use, or for
special events.



Tenants – Occupants, lessees, and/or persons residing in a residential
rental structure or residential rental unit.



Terrace – An open, uncovered level space at ground level that is either
natural or man-made, also know as a patio.



Transitional Housing Facility – A facility that provides housing
accommodations and support services for persons or families but restricts
occupancy to no more than twenty-four (24) months. Support services may
include meals, counseling, and other services. Transitional housing shall not
include state-licensed residential facilities, spouse abuse/domestic violence
shelters, or housing otherwise exempted from local regulation by the State of
Michigan.



Use – The permitted or specially permitted purpose, as specified in the
Zoning Ordinance, for which any land or building is occupied, arranged,
designed or intended.



Veterinary Clinic – A place where animals are given medical or surgical
treatment, with use as a kennel limited to short-term boarding that is
incidental to the medical use, all within an enclosed building.



Visibility at Intersections – The portion of a cornerlot that shall be
maintained free of any structures or plantings to ensure sufficient
visibility for motor vehicles.  See Figure 15 in the Appendix.



Wall – An artificially constructed barrier made of impenetrable materials
or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 



Wireless Communication Facilities – Means and include all structures and
accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for
the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals.  This may include,
but shall not be limited to: radio towers; television towers; telephone
devices and exchanges; microwave relay towers; telephone transmission
equipment buildings and commercial mobile radio service facilities.  Not
included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short
wave facilities; ham, amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and
governmental facilities which are subject to State or Federal law or
regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority.  For purposes of
this Ordinance, the following additional terms are defined:



   (a)   Attached Wireless Communications Facilities.  Facilities that
are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water
tanks, utility poles and the like.  A wireless communication support
structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this
definition.



   (b)   Wireless Communication Support Structures.  Structureserected
or modified to support wireless communication antennas.  Support structures
within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles,
lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures
which appear to be something other than a mere support structure.



   (c)   Collocation.  The location by two (2) or more wireless
communication providers of wirelesscommunicationfacilities on a common
structure, tower or building, with the view toward reducing the overall
number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas with
the City.



Yards – The open spaces on the same lot with a mainbuilding, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
Zoning Ordinance, defined as follows:



   (a)   Front Yard.  A space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the horizontal distance between the frontlotline and the
nearest line of the mainbuilding.  In the case of a cornerlot or a
throughlot, the frontyard is that line separating the lot from that street
which is designated as the frontstreet in the plat and in the application for
a building permit.  This yard shall also be referred to the addressed side
of the lot.



   (b)   Rear Yard.  A space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the horizontal distance between the rearlotline and the
nearest line of the mainbuilding, and opposite the frontlotline that is the
addressed side of the lot.



   (c)   Side Yard.  A space between the mainbuilding and the
sidelotline, extending from the frontyard to the rearyard, the width of which
is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the sidelotline to the
nearest point of the mainbuilding.



Zoning Administrator – The administrative official designated by the City
Council to enforce the Zoning Ordinance, or a duly authorized representative.



ARTICLE 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



• Section 3.01  Zoning Administration.



   This Zoning Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
ZoningAdministrator or by such deputies as the Administrator may delegate to
enforce this Zoning Ordinance.



• Section 3.02  Duties.



   The ZoningAdministrator shall:



   (a)   Receive and review for completeness all applications for
siteplan review and special land uses which the Planning Commission is
required to decide under this Ordinance and refer such applications to the
Planning Commission for determination.



   (b)   Receive and review for completeness all applications for
appeals, variances, or other matters which the Zoning Board of Appeals is
required to decide under this Ordinance and refer such applications to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for determination.



   (c)   Receive and review for completeness all applications for
amendments to this Ordinance and refer such applications to the Planning
Commission and City Council for determination. 



   (d)   Make periodic site inspections to determine Ordinance
compliance, and answer complaints on Zoning Ordinance violations.



   (e)   Implement the decisions of the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (f)   The building numbers, also known as the address, shall be set
by the ZoningAdministrator, following coordination with the Building
Official, and upon submittal of a building permit application.



• Section 3.03  Special Land Uses.



   (a)   When the Zoning Administrator receives an application for a
special land use, the procedure for public hearing notification shall follow
the procedures set forth in Section 3.13 of this ordinance.



   (b)   When the ZoningAdministrator receives an application for a
special land use, the following procedure shall be followed:



      (1)   One (1) notice indicating that a request for a special
land use has been received shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City no less than fifteen (15) days before the
Planning Commission meeting.



      (2)   Notices indicating that such a request has been received
will also be sent by mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom real
property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the
property for which a special land use has been requested.  Notices will also
be sent by mail or personal delivery to the occupants of structures located
within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question.  If the name of
an occupant is not known, the term "Occupant" may be used in making
notification.  Notices to property owners and occupants shall not be given
less than fifteen (15) days before the special land use application is
considered by the Planning Commission. 



      (3)   Notification referred to in paragraph (b)(2) hereof need
not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure.  However, if a
structure contains more than one (1) dwellingunit or spatial area owned or
leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations,
one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the
case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwellingunits or
other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager
or owner of the structure who then shall be requested to post the notice at
the primary entrance to the structure.  The notice shall:



         A.   Describe the nature of the special land use request;



         B.   Indicate the property that is the subject of the
special land use request; 



         C.   State when and where the special land use public
hearing will be held; and



         D.   Indicate when and where written comments will be
received concerning the request.



   (c)   A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission for
all special land use requests.  Notification as required in subsection (b)
hereof, shall be provided before a decision is made on the special land use
request. 



   (d)   The Planning Commission may deny, approve, or approve with
conditions, requests for special land use.  The decision on a special land
use shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the
special land use under consideration.  The statement shall specify the
findings and conclusions for the basis for the decision and any conditions
imposed. 



   (e)   The Planning Commission shall review the proposed special land
use in terms of the standards stated within this subsection and shall
establish that such use and the proposed location comply with the following
criteria: 



      (1)   Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general
objectives or any specific objectives of the MasterPlan; 



      (2)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained
so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential
character of the area; 



      (3)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or
future nearby uses;



      (4)   Will be an improvement in relation to property in the
immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole; 



      (5)   Will be served adequately by essential public services
and facilities or that the persons responsible for the establishment of the
proposed use will provide adequately any such service or facility; 



      (6)   Will not create excessive additional public costs and
will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community; and 



      (7)   Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this
Zoning Ordinance. 



   (f)   The Planning Commission may impose additional conditions and
safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of
individual property rights and for ensuring that the purposes of this Zoning
Ordinance and the general spirit and purpose of the district in which the
special land use is proposed will be observed.



   (g)   Any special land use approval given by the Commission, shall
become null and void unless construction and/or use is commenced within one
(1) year.  Any special land use that has been commenced but abandoned for a
period of one (1) year, shall lapse and cease to be in effect.



   (h)   The Planning Commission may authorize a 12-month extension of
the time limit to begin construction or commence the use of any special land
use if in the Commission’s view the conditions supporting the special land
use are still applicable. The applicant must submit a request to the Planning
Commission in writing a least one month prior to the expiration of the Site
Plan under subsection (g) above.



• Section 3.04  Site Plan Review.



   Siteplan review and approval of all development proposals within
specific zoning districts shall be required as provided in this section. 
The intent of this section is to provide for consultation and cooperation
between the developer and the Planning Commission so that both parties might
realize maximum utilization of land and minimum adverse effect upon the
surrounding land uses.  Through the application of the following provisions,
the attainment of the MasterPlan will be assured and the City will develop in
an orderly fashion. 



   (a)   SitePlan Review Required.  A siteplan shall be submitted to
the Commission for review and approval for the following: 



      (1)   Any permitted use or special land use within the City,
except one-familydetached and two- familydwellings and their
accessorybuildings and uses; 



      (2)   Any use or development for which the submission of a
siteplan is required by any provision of the City's Ordinances; 



      (3)   Any change and/or conversion of use as permitted and
regulated by this Ordinance that may result in a modification to
off-streetparking, traffic circulation, services, facilities or other
physical conditions on the site;



      (4)   Any use or development subject to the Michigan
Condominium Act, Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended; and 



      (5)   Any addition to an existing principal or
accessorybuilding within the City, except one-familydetacheddwellings and
their accessorybuildings and uses. 



   (b)   SitePlan Review Standards.  The siteplan shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following standards: 



      (1)   The proposed design will not be injurious to the
surrounding neighborhood or impede the normal and orderly development of
surrounding property for uses permitted by the City's Ordinances.



      (2)   The location, design and construction materials of all
buildings and structures will be compatible with the topography, size and
configuration of the site, and the character of the surrounding areas. 



      (3)   There will be a proper relationship between streets,
sidewalks, service drives, driveways and parking areas protecting the safety
of pedestrians and motorists. 



      (4)   The location of buildings, outside storage receptacles,
parking areas, screen walls and utility areas is such that the adverse
effects of such uses will be minimized for the occupants of that use and the
occupants of surrounding areas. 



      (5)   City requirements and standards for streets, lighting,
driveway approaches, grading, surface drainage, storm sewers, storm water
retention facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers and necessary easements
will be met. 



      (6)   All buildings or groups of buildings will be so arranged
as to permit emergency vehicle access by some practical means to all sides. 



      (7)   Appropriate site design measures have been taken which
will preserve and protect the landscape, existing topography, natural
resources and natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, steep
slopes, groundwater recharge areas and woodlands. 



      (8)   Sites which include storage of hazardous materials or
waste, fuels, salt or chemicals will be designed to prevent spills and
discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the ground, ground water
or nearby water bodies. 



      (9)   Landscaping, including greenbelts, trees, shrubs and
other vegetative materials, is provided to maintain and improve the aesthetic
quality of the site and the area. 



      (10)   The proposed use is in compliance with the City's
Ordinances and any other applicable standards and laws. 



   (c)   Information Required on SitePlan.  A siteplan submitted for
review shall contain all of the following data prior to its submission to the
Commission for review and approval:



      (1)   General Information. 



         A.   Plans drawn to a scale of not less than one (1)
inch equals fifty (50) feet for property less than three (3) acres or not
less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet for property three (3)
acres or more; 



         B.   The proprietors', applicants' and owners' names,
addresses and telephone numbers;



         C.   The date (month, day, year), title block, scale and
north arrow; 



         D.   The signed professional seal, name and address of
the architect, engineer, surveyor, landscape architect or planner responsible
for the preparation of the plan; 



         E.   The zoning district classification of the
petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels; 



         F.   Pertinent area, height, lotcoverage and setback
requirements of the zoning district in which the parcel is located; and 



         G.   A legal description, including a gross acreage
figure; 



      (2)   Physical Features. 



         A.   Existing and proposed lotlines, buildinglines,
structures and parking areas on the parcel and within one hundred (100) feet
of the site; 



         B.   The location of existing and proposed traffic and
pedestrian circulation facilities, including: 



            i.   Centerline and existing and proposed
right-of-way lines of abutting streets; 



            ii.   Access drives; 



            iii.   Service drives; 



            iv.   Fire lanes; 



            v.   Street intersections; 



            vi.   Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes
and approaches;



            vii.   Sidewalks and pedestrian paths; and



            viii.   Curbing.



         C.   The location of existing and proposed service
facilities above and below ground, including: 



            i.   Chemical and fuel storage tanks and
containers; 



            ii.   Storage, loading and disposal areas of
chemicals, hazardous substances, salt and fuels; 



            iii.   Water mains, hydrants, pump houses,
standpipes and building services and sizes;



            iv.   Sanitary sewers and pumping stations; 



            v.   Stormwater control facilities and structures,
including storm sewers, swales, retention/detention basins, drainage ways and
other facilities, including calculations for sizes; 



            vi.   Existing and proposed easements; and



            vii.   Publicutility distribution systems. 



         D.   Dimensioned floor plans, finished floor elevations,
typical elevation views and specifications of building materials of all
buildings; 



         E.   Dimensioned parking spaces and calculations, drives
and type of surfacing; 



         F.   Exterior lighting locations, type of light and
illumination  patterns; 



         G.   The location and description of all existing and
proposed landscaping, berms, fencing and walls; 



         H.   The trash receptacle pad location and the method of
screening; 



         I.   The transformer pad location and the method of
screening; 



         J.   Sign locations, height and size; and



         K.   Any other pertinent physical features.



      (3)   Natural Features. 



         A.   For parcels of more than one (1) acre, existing and
proposed topography with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet on the
site and beyond the site for a distance of one hundred (100) feet in all
directions;



         B.   The location of existing drainage courses and
associated bodies of water, on and off site, and their elevations; and



         C.   The location of natural resource features,
including wetlands and woodlands. 



      (4)   Additional Requirements for R-M Districts. 



         A.   Density calculations by type of unit; 



         B.   Designation of units by type and number of units in
each building; 



         C.   Carport locations and details where proposed; and



         D.   Details of community building and recreational
facilities.



         E.   Where deemed necessary the Planning Commission may
require an applicant to provide a traffic study, economic feasibility study
and/or other analyses to help determine the viability of the proposed project.



      (5)   Additional Requirements for O-1, CBD, B-1, B-2, I-1 and
I-2 Districts. 



         A.   Loading/unloading areas;



         B.   Total and usablefloorarea; and



         C.   Number of employees, customers, clients or patients
in peak usage.



         D.   Where deemed necessary the Planning Commission may
require an applicant to provide a traffic study, economic feasibility study
and/or other analyses to help determine the viability of the proposed project.



   (d)   Application Procedure.  An application for siteplan review
shall be processed in the following manner:



      (1)   All siteplans shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator by the third Wednesday of each month in order to be considered
for the following month’s Planning Commission agenda and must contain the
following to be accepted:



         A.   A completed application signed by the owner.  If
the owner is not the applicant, the signature of the owner required on the
application shall constitute authorization for representation by the
applicant.  If the owner is a corporation, the application must be signed by
a corporate officer.  If the owner is a partnership, the application must be
signed by a general partner.  If the owner is an individual, each individual
owner must sign the application.



         B.   Sufficient copies of the siteplan as determined by
the Zoning Administrator, as well as all of the required fees.



         C.   All items required by subsection (c) hereof.



      (2)   Upon receipt of the siteplan, the following shall
apply: 



         A.   The Zoning Administrator, upon determining that the
application is informationally complete, shall forward a copy of the siteplan
and application to the appropriate City departments, the City Planning and
Engineer for their concept plan review;



         B.   Prior to submission to the Commission, the Zoning
Administrator shall schedule a meeting with the Development Team (applicable
staff and consultants) and then schedule a meeting with the applicant and
representatives from the Development Team; and



         C.   The applicant shall then submit revised plans to
the Zoning Administrator prior to review of the site plan at a subsequent
Commission meeting.



   (e)   Planning Commission Review.  The Commission shall consider
the application for approval, conditional approval or denial at the scheduled
meeting.



      (1)   Upon a determination by the Commission that a siteplan
is in compliance with the City's Ordinances, Planning Commission shall grant
approval.  In this case, the basis for the decision shall be indicated in
the official minutes from the proceedings. 



      (2)   Upon a determination by the Commission that a siteplan
is in compliance, except with minor revisions, the Commission may grant
conditional approval.  In this case, the basis for the decision shall be
indicated in the official minutes from the proceedings. 



      (3)   If the siteplan does not comply with the provisions of
the City's Ordinances, it shall be denied.  In this case, the basis for the
action shall be indicated in the official minutes from the proceedings.



      (4)   The Commission may further require landscaping, fences,
walls or other improvements pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection
(b) hereof and the same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of
the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are
appurtenant. 



   (f)   Effect of Approval.  When an applicant receives final
siteplan approval, he or she must develop the site in complete conformity
with the approved siteplan.  If the applicant has not obtained a building
permit and commenced construction within one (1) year of siteplan approval,
the siteplan approval becomes null and void and the developer shall make a
new application for approval. 



   (g)   Amendment of a SitePlan.  If an applicant seeks an amendment
to an approved siteplan it shall be granted only upon the mutual agreement of
the Commission and the applicant.



   (h)   Administrative Review.  In the following cases, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to approve a site plan without
submission to the Planning Commission, but subject to all the criteria set
forth in subsections (a) to (c) hereof.



         (1)   Where Applicable.



            A.   Accessoryuses incidental to a conforming
existing use where said use does not require any variance or further site
modifications;



            B.   The conversion of an existing building from
one permitted use to another permitted use within the same district, provided
there is no substantial modification necessary to the building or the site;



            C.   Expansion and/or addition of five hundred
(500) square feet or less to an existing conforming structure or use; and



            D.   Provision for additional loading/unloading
spaces and landscape improvements as required by this section.



      E.   Modifications to an existing parking lot that will meet
all applicable ordinance standards.



         (2)   Information Required.  The ZoningAdministrator
shall require all applicable criteria set forth in subsections (a) to (c)
hereof to be met and shall have the authority to waive information required
in subsection (c) hereof which is not necessary to determine whether site
plan review requirements have been met.  The ZoningAdministrator shall also
have the authority to refer any siteplan eligible for administrative review
under subsection (h)(1) hereof to the Planning Commission and/or any
consultants employed by the City for the purposes of siteplan review.



      (i)   Site Plan Extension. The Planning Commission may
authorize a 12-month extension of the time limit to begin construction on any
site plan. The applicant must submit a request to the Planning Commission in
writing at least one month prior to the expiration of the Site Plan under
subsection (f) above. Once work on the proposed site plan has begun, it shall
be completed in accordance with the provisions and limits or extended limits
of this chapter.



• Section 3.05  SiteCondominium and Condominium Project Regulations.



   (a)   Intent.  Pursuant to the authority conferred by the
Condominium Act, sitecondominiums and condominium projects shall be regulated
by the provisions of this Ordinance and approved by the Planning Commission. 



   (b)   General Requirements. 



      (1)   Each condominiumlot shall be located within a zoning
district that permits the proposed use.



      (2)   Each condominiumlot shall front on and have direct
access to a public street or a private street approved by City Council. 
Approval for a private street may be conferred by City Council prior to
siteplan approval by the Planning Commission.  An approved private street
shall comply with the same standards for public subdivision streets as set
forth in Chapter 1226 of the General Ordinances.



      (3)   For the purposes of this section, each condominiumlot
shall be considered equivalent to a single lot and shall comply with all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 



   (c)   SitePlan Approval Required.  Approval of the siteplan by the
Planning Commission shall be required to construct, expand or convert a
condominium project.



      (1)   SitePlan Approval.



         A.   A siteplan pursuant to the standards and procedures
set forth in Section 3.04 shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
review. 



         B.   In the interest of insuring compliance with this
Ordinance and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the City, the Planning Commission, as a condition of approval of the
siteplan, shall require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee as
set forth in Section 3.09 for the completion of improvements associated with
the proposed use. 



      (2)   Condominium Document/Engineering Plan Approval. 



         A.   Following siteplan approval, the applicant shall
submit the condominiumdocuments to the City Attorney and other appropriate
staff and consultants for review.  The condominiumdocuments shall be
reviewed with respect to all matters subject to regulation by the City,
including, without limitation: ongoing preservation and maintenance of
drainage, retention, wetland and other natural and/or common areas;
maintenance of private roads if any; and maintenance of stormwater, sanitary
and water facilities and utilities.  All review comments shall be submitted
to the City Attorney, who shall compile the findings.



         B.   Following receipt of siteplan approval, the
applicant shall also submit to the ZoningAdministrator engineering plans in
sufficient detail for the City, along with appropriate consultants, to
determine compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and standards for
construction of the project.  All review comments shall be submitted to the
ZoningAdministrator, who shall compile the findings. 



         C.   Condominiumdocuments and/or engineering plans shall
conform to the siteplan approval by the Planning Commission.  No permit
shall be issued until the Condominiumdocuments and Engineering Plans have
been approved by the City.



   (d)   Information Required Prior to Occupancy.  Prior to the
issuance of occupancy permits for any condominiumunits, the applicant shall
submit the following to the City: 



      (1)   A copy of the recorded condominiumdocuments (including
any  exhibits); 



      (2)   A copy of any recorded restrictive covenants; 



      (3)   A copy of the siteplan on a mylar sheet; and 



      (4)   Evidence of the completion of improvements associated
with the proposed use, including two (2) copies of an "as-built survey." 



   (e)   Revision of the SiteCondominium or Condominium Plan.  If the
sitecondominium or condominium subdivision plan is revised, the siteplan
shall be revised accordingly and submitted for review and approval or denial
by the Planning Commission before any building permit may be issued, where
such permit is required. 



   (f)   Amendment of CondominiumDocuments.  Any amendment to a
masterdeed or bylaws that affects the approved siteplan, or any conditions of
approval of a siteplan, shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney
and Planning Commission before any building permit may be issued, where such
permit is required.  The Planning Commission may require its review of an
amended siteplan if, in its opinion, such changes in the masterdeed or bylaws
require corresponding changes in the original siteplan. 



• Section 3.06  Use of Consultants.



   From time to time, at the cost of the applicant, the City may employ
planning, engineering, legal, traffic or other special consultants to assist
in the review of special use permits, siteplans, rezonings or other matters
related to the planning and development of the City.



• Section 3.07  Certificate of Zoning Compliance.



   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant a
certificate of zoning compliance and to make inspections of buildings,
structures or lots, prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or
certificate of occupancy.



   (a)   Applications.  An application for a certificate of zoning
compliance shall be made to the Zoning Administrator.  Each application
shall include a site plan as required in Section 3.4 and all information
necessary to determine zoning compliance.



   (b)   Building Permits.  All plans to be submitted to the Building
Official for a building permit shall first be submitted for review and
approval by the Zoning Administrator with respect to the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.  No building permit shall be issued unless a certificate
of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator for the same.



   (c)   Certificate of Occupancy.  In all cases in which a
certificate of occupancy is required, but a building permit is not required,
a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless a certificate of zoning
compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator and is in effect.



   (d)   Non-Conforming Uses, Structures of Lots.  A certificate of
zoning compliance shall not be issued for any use, building, structure or
lot, unless said use, building, structure or the lot upon which it is
situated meets all the requirements of this Ordinance. A certificate of
zoning compliance may be issued for an existing legal non-conforming use,
building, structure or lot; however, in such cases, the certificate of zoning
compliance shall clearly list all such non-conformities. A certificate of
zoning compliance shall not be issued for any use, building, structure or lot
if any illegal non-conformity exists thereon.



   (e)   Issuance of Certificate.  The Zoning Administrator shall
examine or cause to be examined all applications for a certificate of zoning
compliance and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing.  If
the application or the plans do not conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefore.  If the application or plans do so conform,
the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance as
soon as practical.  The Zoning Administrator shall also stamp or endorse all
sets of corrected and approved plans submitted with such application as
"Approved."



   (f)   Duration. An application for a certificate of zoning
compliance shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the
date of filing unless such application has been diligently pursued, a
building permit has been issued, or a certificate of occupancy has been
issued for a use not requiring a building permit. The Zoning Administrator
may, for reasonable cause grant not more than two (2) extensions of time, for
periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each. Any permit issued shall become
invalid if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period  of
six (6) months after time of commencing the work.



   (g)   Conditions of Certification. Issuance of a certificate of
zoning compliance shall be subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   No permit shall be issued until the required fees have
been paid.



      (2)   All work or use shall conform to the approved
application and plans for which the permit has been issued and any approved
amendments thereof.



      (3)   All work or use shall conform to the approved final site
plan, if required.



   (h)   Inspection. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, an
inspection shall be completed by the Zoning Administrator if deemed necessary
to examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and lots for
which the certificate of zoning compliance is to be granted.



• Section 3.08  Temporary Buildings and/or Use Permits.



   (a)   Application.  Prior to locating a temporary building or use
within the City of Howell, an applicant shall submit an application for a
temporary building and/or use permit from the Zoning Administrator. The
application shall be reviewed in accordance with the administrative site plan
provisions of Section 3.04(h) and shall at a minimum include the following:



      (1)   Description of the proposed use and a description of the
on-site operations.



      (2)   Duration of the proposed use.



      (3)   Necessary information to demonstrate compliance with the
setback, lot coverage, off-street parking, loading, access/circulation,
lighting, and signage requirements of the applicable zoning district.



      (4)   Demonstrated compliance with Section 5.07, Temporary
Buildings and/or Uses.



   (b)   Permit.  Upon demonstrating compliance with the above
provisions, the Zoning Administrator may grant the permit, stipulating all
conditions as to time, the nature of the development permitted and
arrangements for removal upon termination of the temporary permit.



   (c)   Extension.  With the exception of Sidewalk Café Service (see
Section 6.20) only one (1)  extension may be granted by the Zoning
Administrator. Should a subsequent extension be required it will require site
plan approval by the Planning Commission.



   (d)   In the administration of these provisions, the Zoning
Administrator shall be permitted to refer a request to the Planning
Commission for review and approval where site conditions may create
difficulty in adherence to the standards contained herein.  Planning
Commission review shall include, but is not limited to, the following
situations:



      (1)   The temporary building or use is a significant departure
from the permitted uses in the zoning district where it is proposed.



      (2)   The location of the temporary building or use may have
significant impacts to parking, vehicular circulation, pedestrian
circulation, or non-motorized access.



      (3)   There is a question about the relationship between the
proposed structure/use and the principal use on the property.



      (4)   The proposed duration of the use presents potentially
significant impacts to the surrounding area.



• Section 3.09  Performance Guarantee.



   In the interest of insuring compliance with the Zoning Ordinance
provisions, protecting the natural resources and the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of an
area for which a siteplan for a proposed use has been submitted, the Planning
Commission shall require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee for
all projects with greater than $50,000 in site improvements.  The purpose of
the performance guarantee is to insure completion of improvements connected
with the proposed use as required by this Ordinance, including but not
limited to, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, drainage, fences,
walls, screens, and landscaping.



   (a)   "Performance guarantee" as used herein shall mean a cash
deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or corporate
surety bond in the amount of the estimated cost of the improvements to be
made as determined by the applicant and verified by the City.  The City
shall be authorized to employ the City Engineering Department and/or City
consultants to review cost estimates and conduct periodic inspection of the
progress of improvements.



   (b)   Where the Planning Commission requires a performance
guarantee, said performance guarantee shall be deposited with the City prior
to the issuance of a building permit for the development and use of the
land.  Upon the deposit of the performance guarantee the City shall issue
the appropriate building permit, and the City shall thereafter deposit the
performance guarantee, if in the form of a cash deposit or certified check,
in an interest bearing account to the applicant.



   (c)   The approval shall also prescribe the period of time within
which the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been required
are to be completed.  The period will begin from the date of the issuance of
the building permit.



   (d)   In the event the performance guarantee deposited is a cash
deposit or a certified check, the City shall rebate to the applicant fifty
(50) percent of the deposited funds when seventy-five (75) percent of the
required improvements are completed as confirmed by the City, and the
remaining fifty (50) percent of the deposited funds when one hundred (100)
percent of the required improvements are completed as confirmed by the
City.  If a request is made by the applicant for a temporary certificate of
occupancy without completion of required exterior improvements, the
performance guarantee herein required may be applied by said applicant to
assure compliance with Zoning Ordinance standards and the specifications of
the approved siteplan. 



   (e)   Upon the satisfactory completion, as determined by the City,
of the improvement for which the performance guarantee was required, the City
shall return to the applicant the performance guarantee deposited and any
interest earned thereon.  However, the City is not required to deposit the
performance guarantee in an interest-bearing account.



   (f)   In the event the applicant defaults in making the improvements
for which the performance guarantee was required within the time period
established by the City, the City shall have the right to use the performance
guarantee deposited and any interest earned thereon to complete the
improvements through contract or otherwise, including specifically, the right
to enter upon the subject property to make the improvements.



   If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the City to
complete the improvements for which such guarantee was posted, the applicant
shall be required to pay the City the amount by which the cost of completing
the improvements exceeds the amount of the performance guarantee deposit. 
Should the City use the performance guarantee, or a portion thereof, to
complete the required improvements, any amounts remaining after said
completion shall be applied first to the City's administrative costs
including, without limitation, attorney fees, planning consultant fees, and
engineering consultant fees in completing the improvement with any balance
remaining being refunded to the applicant. 



   If the applicant has been required to post a performance guarantee or
bond with another governmental agency other than the City to insure
completion of an improvement associated with the site, the applicant shall
not be required to deposit with the City a performance guarantee for that
same improvement.  At the time the performance guarantee is deposited with
the City and prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall
enter an agreement incorporating the provisions hereof with the City
regarding the performance guarantee.



• Section 3.10  Fees.



   The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and
expenses, and a collection procedure, for all zoning and building permits,
certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to the
Zoning Ordinance.  The City shall have the authority to include fees for the
use of engineering, planning, legal or other special consultants.  The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the City Offices, and may be altered or
amended only by the City Council.  No permit, certificate, special use
approval, or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges,
fees, or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on
proceedings before the Board of Appeals, unless or until preliminary charges
and fees have been paid in full.



• Section 3.11  Violations and Penalties.



   Unless otherwise expressly provided, whoever violates any of the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance is responsible for a Municipal civil
infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set forth in the General
Ordinances of Howell, Part Two - Administrative Code, Title Two - General
Provisions, Chapter 208 - Municipal Civil Infractions.



• Section 3.13  Public Notice.



   All applications for development approval requiring a public hearing
shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as
amended and the other provisions of this Section with regard to public
notification.



   (a)   Responsibility: When the provisions of this Ordinance or the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice,
having published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Howell
and mailed or delivered as provided in this Section.



   (b)   Content: All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public
hearings shall:



      (1)   Identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text
amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal,
ordinance interpretation, or other purpose.



      (2)   Indicate the property that is in the subject request.
The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within
the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed
if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no
street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax
parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or
including a map showing the location of the property. No street addresses may
be listed when eleven (11) or more adjacent properties are proposed for
rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not
involving specific property.



      (3)   Indicate the date, time and place of the public
hearing(s).



      (4)   Include a statement describing when and where written
comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that
the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.



   (c)   Personal and Mailed Notice



      (1)   General: When the provisions of this Ordinance or state
law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be
provided to:



         A.   The owners of property for which approval is being
considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the property.



         B.   Except for rezoning requests involving eleven (11)
or more adjacent properties or an ordinance interpretation request that does
not involve a specific property, to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property
subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is
located with the boundaries of the City of Howell. If the name of the
occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making
notification. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of
a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling
unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses, or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area
shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than
four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may
be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to
post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.



         C.   All neighborhood organizations, public utility
companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice
pursuant to Section 3.14, Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.



         D.   Other governmental units or infrastructure agencies
(i.e. utilities, CSX, State of Michigan, Comcast, etc.) within one mile of
the property involved in the application.



      (2)   Notice by mail/affidavit: Notice shall be deemed mailed
by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed,
postage paid. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of property
owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to
whom personal notice was delivered.



   (d)   Timing of Notice: Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended, or this Ordinance where
applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided as follows:



      (1)   For a public hearing on an application for a rezoning,
text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal,
or ordinance interpretation: not less than fifteen (15) days before the date
the application will be considered for approval.



• Section 3.14  Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.



   (a)   General: Any neighborhood organization, public utility
company, railroad or any other person may register with the Zoning
Administrator to receive written notice of all applications for development
approval pursuant to Section 3.13(c)(1)(C), Personal and Mailed Notice, or
written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning
district in which they are located. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the
provision of this notice, as established by the legislative body.



   (b)   Requirements: The requesting party must provide the Zoning
Administrator information on an official form to ensure notification can be
made. All registered persons must re-register biannually to continue to
receive notification pursuant to this Section.



ARTICLE 4
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS



• Section 4.01  District Designations.



   For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, the City is hereby divided
into the following districts:



   (a)   R-1 One-Family Residential;



   (b)   R-2 One-Family Residential;



   (c)   R-T Two-Family Residential;



   (d)   R-M MultipleFamily Residential;



   (e)   MHP MobileHomePark;



   (f)   O-1 Office;



   (g)   CBD Central Business;



   (h)   B-1 Local Business;



   (i)   B-2 General Business;



   (j)   MXD Mixed Use.



   (k)   I-1 Light Industrial;



   (l)   I-2 General Industrial;



   (m)   P-1 Vehicular Parking;



   (n)   HL-1 Historic Limited;



   (o)   HL-2 Historic Limited Residential; and



   (p)   South Michigan Avenue District.



• Section 4.02  Zoning District Map.



   The boundaries of the districts enumerated in Section 4.01 are hereby
established as shown on the Zoning Map which accompanies this Zoning
Ordinance and which, with all notations, references and other information
shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this Zoning Ordinance as if fully
described herein.  Unless shown otherwise, the boundaries of the districts
are lotlines; the centerlines of streets, alleys, roads or such lines
extended; and the corporate limits of the City.



   Where unzoned property exists, or where, due to the scale, lack of
detail or illegibility of the Zoning Map, there is any uncertainty,
contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any district
boundary line shown thereon, the exact location of a district boundary line
shall be determined, upon written application, or upon its own motion, by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



• Section 4.03  Zoning Vacated and Annexed Areas.



   (a)   Zoning Vacated Areas.  Whenever any street, alley or other
public way or portion thereof, within the City is vacated, such street, alley
or other public way, or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in
the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches.



   (b)   Zoning Annexed Areas.  Territory annexed to the City shall
continue under the zoning of the detaching governmental body for a period of
one (1) year from the date of annexation to the City, unless such property is
rezoned by Council.  After one (1) year has elapsed, such annexed property
shall be automatically zoned to the most restrictive use if Council has not
acted.



• Section 4.04  Application of District Regulations.



   (a)   All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the
general provisions and exceptions set forth in this Zoning Ordinance. 



   (b)   No portion of a lot or parcel once used in compliance with
this Zoning Ordinance, with respect to yards, lotarea per family, density as
for a development in a multiplefamilydistrict or percentage of lot occupancy,
in connection with an existing or proposed building or structure, shall again
be used as part of the lot or parcel required in connection with any other
building or structure existing or intended to exist at the same time.



   (c)   Consistent with Section 125.3207 of the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, as amended, uses for enterprises o



• Section 4.05  District Regulation Exceptions.



   The following exceptions shall apply:



   (a)   Height of Buildings and Structures.  The height limitations
of this Zoning Ordinance do not apply to farmbuildings, chimneys, church
spires, flagpoles, public monuments, or water towers.



   (b)   Area of Lots Adjoining Alleys.  In calculating the area of a
lot that adjoins an alley or lane, for the purpose of applying the lotarea
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, one-half (½) the width of such alley
abutting the lot shall be considered part of the lot.



   (c)   Yard Regulations.  When yard regulations cannot reasonably be
complied with, as in the case of a planned unit development in a
multiplefamilydistrict, or where their application cannot be determined
because of lots of peculiar shape or topography or because of architectural
or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (d)   Porches and Porticos.  An unenclosed porch or portico may
project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet.
However, when attached to a residential structure that is older than fifty
(50) years (historic), the Planning Commission may consider an increased
front yard encroachment as a special land use.  In review of the special
land use, the Commission shall consider the standards set forth in Section
3.03 and the following:



      (1)   Verification that the unenclosed porch or portico is not
located above the elevation of the first floor of the residence.



      (2)   The age and style of the house.



      (3)   The compatibility of the unenclosed porch or portico
with the subject house and the adjacent homes.



      (4)   The front yard setback of the adjacent houses.



      (5)   The potential impacts on vehicular and pedestrian
visibility and access.



      (6)   The Secretary of Interior's Standards for Historic
Preservation.



   (e)   Projection into Yards.  An architectural feature, such as a
chimney, bow window not including a vertical projection, or a window well
accessing a basement, may extend or project into a required sideor rear yard
not more than two (2) feet.



   (f)   Common Property Lines. When two or more adjacent parcels are
developed through an integrated site plan, setbacks along the common property
lines shall not apply. The Planning Commission may require easements to
assure shared parking and traffic flow between the adjacent parcels.



• Section 4.06  Purposes and Uses within Zoning Districts.



   (a)   R-1, One-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  R-1, One-Family Residential Districts are
designed to provide for one-familydwelling sites and residentially related
uses in keeping with the density character of the City.  The preservation of
the natural terrain and the standards under which the community has had its
development take place are reflected in the controls set forth in this
Article. 



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   One-familydetacheddwellings; 



         B.   Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks,
parkways and recreational facilities; 



         C.   Homeoccupations subject to requirements set forth
in Section 5.09; and



         D.   Accessorybuildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Public, parochial and private elementary,
intermediate and/or high schools subject to the requirements of Section 6.07;



         B.   Municipal office buildings, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.08; 



         C.   Churches and other facilities normally incidental
thereto, subject to the requirements of Section 6.09;



         D.   Utilities and public service buildings and uses
(without storage yards), subject to the requirements of Section 6.10; 



         E.   Golf courses, country Clubs, recreational centers,
and swim Clubs, subject to the requirements of Section 6.11;



         F.   Cemeteries, subject to the requirements of Section
6.13; 



         G.   Spouseabuse/domesticviolenceshelters;



         H.   Bedandbreakfast accommodations, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.14;



         I.   Childday-carefacilities, when located within a
church or school, subject to the requirements of Section 6.02; and



         J.   Domestic units with 3 or more residents in
accordance with Section 5.14.



   (b)   R-2, One-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  R-2, One-Family Residential Districts are
designed to provide for one-familydwelling sites and residentially related
uses at a lower density than the R-1 District.  The preservation of the
natural terrain and the standards under which the community has had its
development take place are reflected in the controls set forth in this
Article.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   One-familydetacheddwellings;



         B.   Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks,
parkways and recreational facilities; 



         C.   Homeoccupations , subject to the requirements of
Section 5.09; and



         D.   Accessorybuildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Public, parochial and private elementary,
intermediate and high schools, subject to the requirements of Section 6.07;



         B.   Municipal office buildings, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.08;



         C.   Churches and other facilities normally incidental
thereto, subject to the requirements of Section 6.09;



         D.   Utilities and public service buildings and uses
(without storage yards), subject to the requirements of Section 6.10;



         E.   Golf courses, country clubs, private recreational
centers and swim clubs, subject to the requirements of Section 6.11;



         F.   Cemeteries, subject to the requirements of Section
6.13; 



         G.   Spouseabuse/domesticviolenceshelters;



         H.   Bedandbreakfast accommodations, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.14; and



         I.   Childday-carefacilities, when located within a
church or school, subject to the requirements of Section 6.02.



   (c)   R-T, Two-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  R-T, Two-Family Residential Districts are
designed to provide sites for two-familystructures.  Such sites may be
provided where streets and facilities are able to support the increased
density and as zones of transition between nonresidential districts and
one-family residential districts.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   All uses permitted and as regulated in R-1
One-Family Residential Districts.  Standards in Section 4.06(a) applicable
to the R-1 District shall apply as minimum standards when
one-familydetacheddwellings are erected; 



         B.   Two-familydwellings; and 



         C.   Accessorybuildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Bedandbreakfast accommodations, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.14;



         B.   Childday-carefacilities, when located within a
church or school, subject to the requirements of Section 6.02; and



         C.   Fosterfamilygrouphomes and
adultfostercarefacilities subject to the requirements of Section 6.04.



   (d)   R-M,  Multiple Family Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  R-M, MultipleFamily Residential Districts are
designed to provide sites for multiple family dwelling structures which will
generally serve as zones of transition between nonresidential districts and
lower density One-FamilyDistricts.  The multiplefamilydwelling is further
provided to serve the limited need for an apartment-type unit in an otherwise
one-family residential community.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   All uses permitted and as regulated in an R-T,
Two-Family Residential District; 



         B.   Multiplefamilydwellings;



         C.   Spouseabuse/domesticviolenceshelters; and



         D.   Accessorybuildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Child and adultday-carefacilities, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.02;



         B.   Housing for the elderly, Nursing homes, and
convalescent centers, subject to the requirements of6.03;



         C.   Funeral homes or mortuaries, provided that such use
have direct access to an existing or proposed major thoroughfare or
collectorstreet;



         D.   Bedandbreakfast accommodations, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.14;



         E.   Foster family group homes and adult foster care
facilities subject to the requirements of Section 6.04;



         F.   Domestic units with 3 or more residents in
accordance with Section 5.14; and



         G.   Transitional housing facility, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.27.



   (e)   MHP, Mobile Home Park.



      (1)   Purpose.  This intent of this district is to provide
for mobilehome residential development in areas where the natural conditions
and features, public services, and infrastructure are capable of supporting
such development areas zoned MHP shall be located in areas that are
compatible with the character and density of adjacent uses.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   Mobile home parks, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.24; 



         B.   Parks and playgrounds; and 



         C.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Sections 5.02.



   (f)   O-1, Office District.



      (1)   Purpose. O-1, Office Districts are designed to
accommodate uses, such as offices, banks and funeral homes, which can serve
as transitional areas between commercial and residential districts and
provide transitions between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
O-1 Districts will provide greater protection to existing one-family homes
located in areas that are becoming less desirable for one-family residential
use.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   Offices for any of the following kinds of
occupations: executive, administrative and professional, including legal,
real estate and insurance;



         B.   Professional offices of doctors, dentists,
chiropractors, osteopaths and similar or allied professionals; 



         C.   Banks, including drive-in facilities; 



         D.   Libraries, post offices, governmental office
buildings and publicutility offices, not including storage yards, transformer
stations, exchanges or substations;



         E.   Funeral homes or mortuaries provided such use has
direct access to an existing or proposed thoroughfare or collectorstreet; 



         F.   Churches and other incidental facilities, subject
to the requirements of Section 6.09; 



         G.   Clinics; 



         H.   Off-street parking lots; 



         I.   Spouse abuse/domestic violence shelters;



         J.   Publicly owned and operated parks and recreational
facilities;



         K.   Other uses similar to the uses permitted in this
section; and



         L.   Accessorybuildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Professional pharmacies, located within an office
building;



         B.   One-family attached dwellings, located within a
building containing another permitted use or as a stand alone use, and
subject to the requirements of Section 5.16;



         C.   Child and adult day-care facilities, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.02;



         D.   Generalhospitals, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.15;



         E.   Public and private colleges, universities and other
such institutions of higher learning, subject to the requirements of Section
6.12; and



         F.   Private clubs, lodges and reception halls, subject
to the requirements of Section 6.26 . 



      (4)   Conditions of Use.



         A.   No interior displays shall be visible from the
exterior of the building;



         B.   The outdoor storage of goods or materials in such a
district is prohibited, irrespective of whether or not such goods or
materials are for sale; and



         C.   Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or
materials, beyond that normally incidental to the uses permitted in this
subsection, is prohibited in such a district.



   (g)   CBD, Central Business District.



      (1)   Purpose.  CBD, Central Business Districts are designed
to provide for office buildings and the great variety of large retail stores
and related activities which occupy the prime retail frontage, by serving the
comparison, convenience and service needs of the entire Municipal area as
well as a substantial area of the adjacent and surrounding residential
developments beyond the limits of the City.  The regulations of such
Districts are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the
stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage
and by prohibiting automotive-related services and non-retail uses which tend
to break up such continuity.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   All permitted uses in the O-1, Office District;



         B.   Generally recognized retail businesses which supply
commodities on the premises within completely enclosed buildings, such
commodities including, but not limited to, foods, drugs, liquor, furniture,
clothing, dry goods, notions or hardware;



         C.   Personal service establishments which perform
services on the premises within completely enclosed buildings, such
establishment include, but are not limited to, repair shops (watches, radio,
television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior
decorators, photographers and drycleaners; 



         D.   Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are
served while seated within the building occupied by such establishment, such
establishment not to extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any
service of a drive-in or drive-through facility; 



         E.   Theaters, when completely enclosed; 



         F.   Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians,
decorators or similar tradesmen, in connection with whom not more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the floorarea of the building or part of the
building occupied by such establishment is used for making, assembling,
remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing or refinishing the products or
merchandise of the tradesman, provided that the ground floor premises facing
upon, and visible from, an abutting street shall be used only for entrances,
offices or display.  All storage of materials of any kind shall be within
the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by such establishment; 



         G.   Newspaper offices and printing plants; 



         H.   One-family dwellings located above the first floor
within a building containing a permitted use, and subject to the requirements
of Section 5.08;



         I.   Sidewalk café service, operated by a restaurant or
other food establishment which sells food for immediate consumption, subject
to the requirements of Section 6.20;



         J.   Private clubs, lodges and reception halls, subject
to the requirements of Section 6.26;



         K.   Seasonal and transient display of products or
materials intended for retail sale or rental, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.19;



         L.   Outdoor display of products or materials intended
for retail sale or rental, subject to the requirements of Section 6.18; and



         M.   Other uses similar to the uses permitted in this
section; 



         N.   Accessorybuildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Brewpubs, small distillers, and small wine
producers meeting all licensing requirements of the State of Michigan.



      (4)   Conditions of Use.



         A.   All business establishments in a CBD, Central
Business District shall be retail or service oriented uses which deal
directly with the customers;



         B.   When goods are produced on-site, the majority of
sales shall be make on premises to retail customers; and



         C.   All business operations in such a district, except
off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted in completely enclosed
buildings.



   (h)   B-1, Local Business District.



      (1)   Purpose.  B-1, Local Business Districts are designed
solely for the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent
residential areas and to permit only such uses as are necessary to satisfy
those limited basic shopping and/or service needs which by their very nature
are not related to the shopping pattern of CBD, Central Business Districts.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   All uses permitted in the O-1, Office District;



         B.   Generally recognized retail businesses which supply
commodities on the premises for persons residing in adjacent residential
areas, such commodities include, but are not limited to, groceries, meats,
dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing,
notions and hardware; 



         C.   Personal service establishments which perform
services on the premises for persons residing in adjacent residential areas,
such establishments include, but are not limited to, repair shops (watches,
radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors and barber
shops; 



         D.   One-family detached dwellings, subject to the
requirements of Section 5.08;



         E.   Self-service laundry and/or dry cleaning
establishments; 



         F.   Seasonal and transient display of products or
materials intended for retail sale or rental, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.19;



         G.   Outdoor display of products or materials intended
for retail sale or rental, subject to the requirements of Section 6.18;



         H.   Other uses similar to uses permitted in this
section; and



         I.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Automobile filling stations for the sale of
gasoline, oil and minor accessories, subject to the requirements of Section
6.17; 



         B.   Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings,
telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations
and gas regulator stations with service yards, but without storage yards;



         C.   One-family attached, residential dwelling units
located within a building containing another permitted use or as a stand
alone use, and subject to the requirements of Section 5.16;



         D.   Child and adult day-care facilities, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.02; and



         E.   Private clubs, lodges and reception halls, subject
to the requirements of Section 6.26.



         F.   Brewpubs and small wine producers meeting all
licensing requirements of the State of Michigan.



      (4)   Conditions of Use.



         A.   All business establishments in a B-1, Local
Business shall be retail or service oriented uses that deal directly with the
customers.



         B.   All goods produced on-site shall be sold on the
premises to retail customers only; and



         C.   All business operations in such a district, except
off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted in completely enclosed
buildings.



   (i)   B-2, General Business District.



      (1)   Purpose. B-2, General Business Districts are intended to
provide for a variety of commercial and service uses, including more
intensive commercial uses not permitted in the O-1, CBD and B-1 Districts. 
B-2 Districts are intended to permit commercial establishments that cater to
the convenience and comparison shopping needs of City residents.  Because of
the variety of business types permitted in B-2 Districts, special attention
must be focused on site layout, building design, vehicular circulation and
coordination of site features between adjoining sites.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   All permitted uses in O-1, Office District and B-1,
Local Business Districts as set forth in Sections 4.06(f) and 4.06(h), with
the exception of one-family dwellings;



         B.   Generally recognized retail businesses which supply
commodities such as groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other
foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions, hardware, office supplies, and
other business to business sales intended to serve a broader market;



         C.   Public utility transformer stations and
substations, telephone exchanges and public utility offices;



         D.   Photographic studios;



         E.   Establishments which perform services on the
premises within completely enclosed buildings, which may include, but are not
limited to, repair shops, tailors, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior
decorators, photographers, printing and photocopying services, and dry
cleaners;



      F.   Public and private colleges, universities and other such
institutions of higher learning, subject to the requirements of Section 6.13;



      G.   Indoor commercial recreation and entertainment, such as
bowling alleys, theaters, health and fitness clubs, skating rinks, billiard
parlors and video game arcades;



      H.   Restaurants, including carry-out, sit-down, drive-in and
drive-through facilities, and Taverns;



      I.   Outdoor display of products or materials intended for
retail sale or rental, subject to the requirements of Section 6.18;



      J.   Seasonal and transient display of products or materials
intended for retail sale or rental, subject to the requirements of Section
6.19;



      K.   Other uses similar to the uses permitted in this section;



      L.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the applicable
requirements of Section 5.02; and



      M.   Outdoor seating areas for restaurants. Decks shall be
subject to the requirements of Section 5.02(c).



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Establishments of plumbers, heating contractors,
decorators, electricians or similar tradesman. Outdoor storage shall be
limited to vehicles;



         B.   Automobile filling stations, repair garages,
service stations, washes, and dealerships, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.17;



         C.   Bus passenger stations;



         D.   Motels and hotels, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.16;



         E.   Outdoor recreational space, such as amusement
parks, carnivals or miniature golf courses;



         F.   One-family attached, residential dwellingunits
located within a building containing another permitted use or as a stand
alone use, and subject to the requirements of Section 5.16;



         G.   Child and adult day-care facilities, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.02;



         H.   Outdoor sales of automobiles and vehicles, subject
to the requirements of Section 6.06;



         I.   Private clubs, lodges and reception halls, subject
to the requirements of Section 6.26; and



         J.   Self-storage facilities, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.05.



      (4)   Conditions of Use.



         A.   All business establishments in a B-2, General
Business District shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly
with consumers. When goods are produced on- site, the majority of sales shall
be made on the premises to retail customers.



         B.   All operations in a B-2 District shall be conducted
in a completely enclosed building, except where outdoor use and storage are
specifically permitted by this Article.



         C.   Warehouses and storage facilities shall be
permitted when incident to, and physically connected with, a principal
permitted use, provided that such a warehouse or storage facility is within
the confines of the building or part hereof occupied by such use and does not
exceed 25% of the total floor area of the building.



   (j)   MXD, Mixed Use District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The Mixed Use District is intended to
implement the Goals and Policies of the Master Plan through the provision of
a mixture of residential, office, and low intensity commercial uses.  The
specific goals which the MXD, Mixed Use District seeks to implement, include
the following:  1) Provide for planned growth which maintains the core of
the City while allowing for appropriate growth at and beyond its perimeters;
2) Maintain and encourage a diversity of housing; 3) Control strip commercial
development and minimize negative impacts of existing strip development; and,
4) Creating new residential and commercial development opportunities at the
City perimeters thereby preventing a "landlocked" City.



This designation is intended to encourage the development of traditional
neighborhoods through a coordinated land use pattern of residential, office
or local commercial uses.  Upper floor residential above retail or office is
also encouraged.  It is further the intent of this District to promote
excellence in the use of land and the design of buildings and sites;
encourage cross boundary provisions for infrastructure; maintain the existing
natural features; ensure compatible land use; and improve the visual image
for safe vehicular and pedestrian movement.  Additionally, the District is
intended to conform with any conceptual and sub-area plans completed by the
City.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   One-family and two-family detached/attached
dwellings;



         B.   Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks,
parkways and recreational facilities;



         C.   Public, parochial and other private elementary
schools, subject to the requirements of Section 6.07;



         D.   Accessorybuildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02; and



         E.   Home occupations , subject to the requirements of
Section 5.09.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Multiple family dwellings or apartment buildings;



         B.   Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or
secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for
profit, subject to the requirements of Section 6.07;



         C.   Utilities and public service buildings and uses
(without storage yards), subject to the requirements of Section 6.10;



         D.   Golf courses, country clubs, recreational centers
and swim clubs, subject to the requirements of Section 6.11;



         E.   Bed and breakfast accommodations, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.14;



         F.   Business, professional and medical offices;



         G.   Banks, credit unions and savings and loan
associations;



         H.   One-family dwellings located within a building
containing another permitted or specially permitted use, and subject to the
requirements of Section 5.16;



         I.   Personal service establishments, such as, but not
limited to, repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor
shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior decorators, photographers and
drycleaners;



         J.   Generally recognized retail businesses which supply
commodities on the premises within completely enclosed buildings, such
commodities include, but are not limited to, foods, personal use items
(drugs, health care, notions, books, magazines, periodicals, stationary and
office supplies), liquor, clothing, dry goods, florist's shops, hobby and
craft stores, gifts, antiques, jewelry, hardware and household supplies,
wearing apparel, and similar products.



         K.   Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are
served while seated within the building occupied by such establishment, such
establishment not to extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any
service of a drive-in or an open-front store.



         L.   Sidewalk café service, operated by a restaurant or
other food establishment which sells food for immediate consumption, and
subject to the requirements of Section 6.20;



         M.   Child and adult day-care facilities, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.02;



         N.   Housing for the elderly, Nursing homes and
convalescent centers, subject to the requirements of Section 6.03;



         O.   Funeral homes and mortuaries; and



         P.   Automobile fueling stations that are incidental to
a principal retail use in a shopping center, subject to all of the following:



            i.   The portion of the site occupied by the
fueling station shall not exceed five percent or one acre, whichever is less,
of the shopping center site.



            ii.   The fueling station shall be located no
further than 500 feet from the primary entrance of the principal retail use
it is incidental to.



            iii.   A single building servicing the fuel
islands that does not exceed 1,000 square feet shall be permitted.



            iv.   Access to the fueling station shall be
provided solely from drives which are internal to the shopping center.
Separate access from the fueling station to a public road shall be prohibited.



            v.   The fueling station shall meet all of the
applicable standards in Section 6.22 Mixed Use District Development
Regulations.



            vi.   Vehicular access to and circulation within
the fueling station site shall control the flow of traffic and be arranged in
a manner that will not create a hazard to motorists and pedestrians.



            vii.   Canopy and building design and materials
shall be compatible with and visually complement the design of the shopping
center, per the requirements of Section 6.22(k).



            viii.   Exterior lighting shall comply with the
standards of Section 6.22(i). Canopy lighting shall be recessed.



            ix.   In addition to meeting all applicable
requirements of Section 5.10, the perimeter boundary of the fueling station
site shall be defined with curbing and landscaping.



         Q.   Drive-thrus that are incidental to a permitted
retail, standard restaurant, or service use in a shopping center, subject to
all of the following in addition to the requirements of section 10.08:



            i.   Access to the drive-thru must be provided
solely from drives which are internal to the shopping center.



            ii.   Drive-thru restaurants, as defined in this
ordinance, are prohibited in the MXD District.



            iii.   No more than one drive-through servicing a
cashier, payment and/or pickup window shall be permitted for each individual
building, regardless of the number of uses. Dual ordering stations for
drive-through food services shall not be permitted.



         R.   Accessory building and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02.



      (4)   Conditions of Use.



         In addition to all regulations applicable to those uses
located within the district, the Mixed Use Development Regulations as
outlined in Section 6.22, shall also apply.



   (k)   I-1, Light Industrial.



      (1)   Purpose.  I-1, Light Industrial Districts are designed
so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses and
industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the
area of the District and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the
surrounding districts.  I-1 District is so structured as to permit, along
with any specified use, the manufacturing, compounding, processing,
packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products
from previously prepared material.  It is further intended that the
processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an
industrial operation at another location, not be permitted in the district.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   Research and development, technical training, and
product design offices;



         B.   Manufacturing, processing, packaging or assembling
of merchandise from previously prepared raw materials.



            i.   Communication, transmission and reception
equipment such as coils, tubes, semi- conductors, navigation control
equipment and systems guidance equipment;



            ii.   Data processing equipment and systems;



            iii.   Metering instruments;



            iv.   Optical and photographic devices, equipment
and systems;



            v.   Scientific and mechanical instruments such as
calipers and transits;



            vi.   Testing equipment;



            vii.   Electrical machinery, equipment and
supplies, electronic equipment, components and accessories;



            viii.   Office, computing and accounting machines;
and



            ix.   Bottling plants.



         C.   Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and
gas service buildings and yards; public utility buildings; telephone exchange
buildings; electrical transformer stations and substations and gas regulator
stations; water supply and sewage disposal plants; water and gas tank
holders; railroad transfer and storage tracks; railroad rights of way; and
freight terminals in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.13; 



         D.   Municipal uses such as water treatment plants,
reservoirs, water supply and sewage treatment plants, and all other Municipal
buildings and uses, including outdoor storage; 



         E.   Self-storage facilities, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.05;



         F.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02;



         G.   Publicly owned and operated parks and recreational
facilities;



         H.   Data processing and computer centers including the
servicing and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment; and



         I.   Printing, publishing and related activities;



         J.   Laboratories for medical, research, or other
experimental testing;



         K.   Tool, die, gauge, and machine shops; and



         L.   Office space and/or buildings for administrative
functions associated with another permitted use.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Automobile repair garages, and collision services
when completely enclosed, and subject to the requirements of Section 6.17; 



         B.   Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed;



         C.   Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to
appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious
results and/or nuisances; 



         D.   Storage facilities for building materials, sand,
gravel, stone, lumber and contractors' equipment and supplies, provided that
such storage is enclosed in a building or within an obscuring wall or fence
as per the conditions of use in Section 4.06(4) and Section 5.13 of the
Zoning Code;



         E.   Auto washes intended for industrial use only;



         F.   Other uses similar to the uses permitted in this
sub-section;



         G.   Microwbreweries, meeting all licensing requirements
of the State of Michigan; and



         H.   Kennels, subject to the requirements of Section
6.28.



      (4)   Condition of Use.



All uses conducted outside of a fully enclosed building shall be located in a
designated area and enclosed and screened in accordance with the requirements
of Section 5.13 of the Zoning Code.



   (l)   I-2, General Industrial District.



      (1)   Purpose.  I-2, General Industrial Districts are
designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities,
including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external
physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts.  I-2
District is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and
compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw materials.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   Principal uses permitted in an I-1 Light Industrial
District; 



         B.   Contractor's establishments provided all products,
material, and equipment is stored within an enclosed building;



         C.   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products which conforms
with the performance standards set forth in Article 8, except such uses as
are specifically excluded from the City by ordinance; 



         D.   Trucking and cartage facilities, truck and
industrial equipment storage yards, repairing and washing equipment and yards
subject to the requirements of Section 5.13;



         E.   The following production, processing, packaging,
assembling or manufacturing uses (not including the storage of finished
products) provided that they are located not less than eight hundred (800)
feet from a Residential District and not less than three hundred (300) feet
from any other district:



            i.   Blast furnaces, steel furnaces and blooming
or rolling mills;



            ii.   The manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali,
cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris;



            iii.   The production, refining or storage of
petroleum or other inflammable liquids;



            iv.   The smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore; 



            v.   Pharmaceutical preparations, cosmetics and
toiletries;



            vi.   Plastic products such as laminate, pipe,
plumbing products, and miscellaneous molded or extruded products;



            vii.   Stone, clay, glass and leather products;



            viii.   Food products, bakery goods, candy and
beverages;



            ix.   Prefabricated buildings and structured
members; and



            x.   Appliances.



         F.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Section 5.02;



         G.   Metal fabrication and tool and die shops;



         H.   Fabrication of paper and wood products such as
office supplies, bags, books, cabinets, furniture and toys;



         I.   Packaging operations, but not including baling of
discarded or junk materials, such as, but not limited to: paper, cloth, rags,
lumber, metal or glass;



         J.   Printing, publishing, or related activities;



         K.   Manufacture and repair of signs, and heating and
ventilating equipment; and



         L.   Recycling operations.



      (3)   Special Land Use.



         A.   Salvage yards, provided that they are entirely
enclosed in buildings or enclosed and screened in accordance with Section
5.13, and provided, further, that one (1) property line abuts a railroad
right-of-way.  There shall be no burning on the site, and all industrial
processes involving the use of equipment for cutting, compressing or
packaging shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building;



         B.   Heating and electric power generating plants and
all necessary uses; and



         C.   All uses conducted outside of a fully enclosed
building shall be located in a designated area and enclosed and screened in
accordance with Section 5.13.



   (m)   P-1, Vehicular Parking District.



      (1)   Purpose.  P-1, Vehicular Parking Districts are designed
to accommodate off-street parking for those nonresidential uses which are not
able to provide adequate space within their own district boundaries or to
provide a buffer area between residential and nonresidential uses. 



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   Premises in a P-1 Vehicular Parking District shall
be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed
and maintained subject to this Article 10.



      (3)   Conditions of Use.



         A.   A parking area in a P-1, Vehicular Parking District
shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with, one (1) or more
business or industrial establishments, or in connection with one (1) or more
existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions;



         B.   Such parking area shall be used solely for the
parking of private passenger vehicles for periods of less than one day; 



         C.   No sign, other than signs designating entrances,
exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking areas; 



         D.   No building shall be erected on the premises,
except for a building for the shelter of attendants, which shall not exceed
fifteen (15) feet in height;



         E.   Such parking area shall be contiguous to an R-M
Multiple Family Residential, O-1 Office, CBD Central Business, B-1 Local
Business, B-2 General Business, I-1 Industrial 1 or I-2 Industrial 2
District. There may be a private driveway, public street or public alley
between the P-1 District and such R-M, O-1, CBD, B-1, B-2, I-1 or I-2
District; and



         F.   An application for P-1 District rezoning shall be
made to the Building Department by submitting a layout of the area requested
showing the intended parking plan.



   (n)   HL-1, Historic Limited Use District.



      (1)   Purpose.  HL, Historic Limited Use Districts are
designed to safeguard the unique historical heritage of the City by
preserving historic districts, structures, objects and areas which reflect
elements of the City's unique cultural, social, economic, political or
architectural history; to stabilize and improve property values and the
economy within historic districts; to foster civic beauty and pride; to
promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare
of the citizens of the City.  The HL-1 district specifically intends to
preserve the historic character of the properties within the district and to
permit residential, office and private school uses.  See Section 6.23 for
the specific use provisions.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   One-family detached dwellings, including
manufactured homes when located outside trailer courts, except that
manufactured homes are subject to the requirements of Chapter 1286, provided,
however, that a dwelling is exclusively owner-occupied for residential
purposes only, and provided, further, that any revenue-generating enterprise
carried on therein, whether an office, a professional practice or residential
rental of all or any part of the premises, shall be a specially permitted use;



         B.   Private pools, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.17;



         C.   Home occupations as provided in Section 5.09; and



         D.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Sections 5.02 and 6.17.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Residential rental (whether or not owner-occupied
in part) country inns;



         B.   Professional offices of doctors, dentists,
chiropractors, osteopaths and similar or allied professionals;



         C.   Offices for executive, administrative or
professional occupations; 



         D.   Bed and breakfasts accommodations, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.14; and



         E.   Parochial and private elementary, intermediate
and/or high schools subject to the requirements of Section 6.07 and the
Historic Overlay District Regulations of Section 6.23.



      (4)   Conditions of Use.



         In addition to all regulations applicable to those uses
located within the HL District, the Historic Overlay District Regulations as
outlined in Section 6.23, shall also apply.



   (o)   HL-2, Historic Limited Residential Use District.



      (1)   Purpose.  HL, Historic Limited Use Districts are
designed to safeguard the unique historical heritage of the City by
preserving historic districts, structures, objects and areas which reflect
elements of the City's unique cultural, social, economic, political or
architectural history; to stabilize and improve property values and the
economy within historic districts; to foster civic beauty and pride; to
promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare
of the citizens of the City.  The HL-2 district specifically intends to
preserve the historic, residential character of the properties within the
district.  See Section 6.23 for the specific use provisions



      (2)   Permitted Uses.



         A.   One-family detached dwellings, including
manufactured homes when located outside trailer courts, except that
manufactured homes are subject to the requirements of Chapter 1286, provided,
however, that a dwelling is exclusively owner-occupied for residential
purposes only, and provided, further, that any revenue-generating enterprise
carried on therein, whether an office, a professional practice or residential
rental of all or any part of the premises, shall be a specially permitted use;



         B.   Private pools, subject to the requirements of
Section 6.17;



         C.   Home occupations as provided in Section 5.09; and



         D.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental
to any of the uses permitted in this subsection, and subject to the
applicable requirements of Sections 5.02 and 6.17.



      (3)   Special Land Uses.



         A.   Residential rental (whether or not owner-occupied
in part); and



         B.   Bed and breakfasts accommodations, subject to the
requirements of Section 6.14.



      (4)   Conditions of Use.  In addition to all regulations
applicable to those uses located within the HL-2 District, the Historic
Overlay District Regulations as outlined in Section 6.23, shall also apply.



• Section 4.07  Schedule of Area, Height, Width and Setback Regulations.






 
Zoning District

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Lot Width 

 

Front  

 

Side Feet

 

Rear 

 

Stories

 

Feet

 






 



 



 


R-1, One-Family Residential
 

8,400

 

70

 

25

 

8

 

20

 

35

 

2 ½

 

25

 


R-2, One-Family Residential
 

9,600

 

80

 

25

 

10

 

20

 

35

 

2 ½

 

25

 

R-T, Two-Family Residential 
 

4,200 

 

35 

 

25

 

8

 

20

 

35

 

2 ½

 

25

 


R-M, MultipleFamily Residential
 

-

 

-

 

30

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

3

 

35

 


MHP, Mobile Home Park
 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 



O-1, Office
 

8,400

 

70

 

(p)

 

8

 

20

 

20

 

3

 

35

 



CBD, Central Business District
 
-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

3

 

35

 


B-1, Local Business
 

8,400

 

70

 

-

 

8

 

20

 

20

 

2 ½

 

25

 


B-2, General Business
 

8,400

 

70

 

-

 

8

 

20

 

20

 

3

 

35

 




MXD, Mixed Use
 

10 acres

 

-
 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-

 

-
 



I-1, Light Industrial
 

20,000

 

100

 

50

 

10

 

20

 

25

 

-

 

-

 


I-2, General Industrial
 

20,000

 

100

 

50

 

10

 

20

 

25

 

-

 

-

 


P-1, Vehicular Parking
 

-
-
 

25

 
-

 

-

 

-
 

-

 

-

 



HL-1, Historic Limited Use
 
8,400
 
70
 
25
 
8
 
20
 
35
 
2 ½
 
25
 



HL-2 Historic Limited Residential Use
 
8,400
 
70
 
25
 
8
 
20
 
35
 
2 ½
 
25




 



Section 4.07 Footnotes:



   (a)   For all dwelling units, the minimum yard setback shall be
twelve (12) feet between main buildings on adjoining lots, or the setback as
described in subsection (a) hereof, whichever is greater.  The setback shall
be determined by measuring from the exterior wall of each building to the
side lot line or to the next main building on any adjoining lot.  If the
building roof overhang is more than two (2) feet, then, in such an event, the
setback shall be measured from the exterior edge of the overhang.



   For all principal uses other than dwelling units, the minimum yard
setback shall be determined by the applicable provisions of the Building and
Housing Code or the setback as described in subsection (a) hereof, whichever
is greater.



   (b)   For all uses permitted, other than one-family residential, the
setback shall equal the greater of the height of the main building or the
required setback.



   (c)   The side yard setback abutting a street shall not be less than
ten (10) feet when there is a common rear yard relationship in the block and
a common side yard relationship with the block directly across the common
separating street.  In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an
adjacent lot, the side yard setback abutting a street shall not be less than
the required minimum front yard of the district.



   (d)   The maximum density shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Efficiency or one-bedroom units shall not exceed ten
(10) dwelling units per acre or 4,356 square feet of site area for each
dwelling unit.



      (2)   Two-bedroom units shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling
units per acre of 5,445 square feet of site area for each dwelling unit.



      (3)   Three-bedroom units shall not exceed six (6) dwelling
units per acre or 7,260 square feet of site area for each dwelling unit.



The area used for computing density shall be the total site area, exclusive
of any dedicated public right of way of either an interior or adjacent street.



   (e)   In an R-M, Multiple Family Residential District, the minimum
distance between two (2) buildings shall be twenty-five (25) feet.



   (f)   Parking is permitted in the front yard with a minimum ten (10)
foot setback from the street right of way provided.  The parking plan
layout, points of access and screening shall be approved by the Planning
Commission.  Screening shall be provided in accordance with Section
5.10(d)(3).



   (g)   The Planning Commission may approve a building height in
excess of thirty-five (35) feet in accordance with the Section 3.03, Special
Land Use provisions, and providing the following conditions have been met:



      (1)   All structures, or portions of structures, within one
hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned parcel shall be maintained at no
greater than thirty-five (35) feet tall;



      (2)   All structures, or portions of structures, between one
hundred (100) and one hundred and fifty (150) feet from a residentially zoned
parcel shall be maintained at no greater than forty-five (45) feet tall;



      (3)   All structures, or portions of structures, beyond one
hundred and fifty (150) feet from a residentially zoned parcel shall be
maintained at no greater than fifty-five (55) feet tall;



      (4)   The structure has compatible architectural style and
mass with the adjacent parcels; and



      (5)   One (1) or more of the following shall apply: off-street
parking is provided on-site, the building is part of a mixed use development,
or there is a demonstrated community benefit (i.e. parkland, public parking,
community buildings, etc.).



   (h)   No building shall be closer than sixty (60) feet from the
outer perimeter (property line) of the district when such property line abuts
a residential district.



   (i)   For all uses permitted, other than one-family dwellings, the
maximum height of a structure shall be three stories or thirty-five (35) feet.



   (j)   Parcels in an I-1, Light Industrial District with an acreage
of less than forty (40) acres can have a maximum structural height of fifty
(50) feet.  I-1, Light Industrial District parcels greater than forty acres
(40) can have a maximum structural height of seventy-five (75) feet.



   (k)   Refer to Article 6, Section 6.24. 



   (l)   Refer to Article 6, Section 6.22.



   (m)   Where a P-1, Vehicular Parking District is contiguous to a
residential district which has a common frontage on the same block with a
residential structure, or wherein no residential structures have been yet
erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback
for such residential district, or a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet,
whichever is greater, unless, under unusual circumstances, the Planning
Commission finds that no good purpose would be served by compliance with such
setback requirements.  The required wall shall be located on a minimum
setback line.



   (n)   For all one-family and two-family residential dwellings the
maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30% for the main building including
attached accessory buildings.



   (o)   Front yard encroachments for porches or porticos may be
considered by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 4.05(d).



   (p)   All buildings shall be located at the build-to-line located no
more than the average distance from the road right-of-way to the existing
building setback of all buildings within five hundred (500) feet of the
property in question. The distance shall be measured along the abutting road
frontage whether located mid- block or at the corner of two (2) intersection
streets (see subsequent graphic attached to this footnote). When a parcel
within the distance noted has an excessively large or small setback, or is
used for non- commercial purposes, it may be excluded from the determination
of the build-to-line. The build-to-line will be determined by the Planning
Commission on a parcel by parcel basis.







 



(q)   All principal residential buildings shall be set back at least
twenty-five (25) feet from the road right-of-way, except in cases where the
average setback is greater than 40 feet, then the average setback shall apply.



   (1)   The average setback shall be the average (arithmetic mean)
distance from the road right-of-way to the existing building face of the
enclosed structure for all residential dwellings within one hundred (100)
feet of the property in question, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (2)   The distance shall be measured along the abutting road
frontage whether located mid-block or at the corner of two (2) intersecting
streets (see subsequent graphic attached to this footnote). The average
calculation includes properties that are corner lots. The average ignores
vacant properties.



   (3)   Residential front setback averaging shall apply to new
construction as well as additions and renovations located in the front yard.



   (4)   Unenclosed porches and porticos on a residential structure are
subject to the requirements of Section 4.05(d).







 



 



ARTICLE 4A
FORM BASED DISTRICTS



•  Section 4A.01  General Intent, Purpose, and Use.



   (a)   Intent.  There are areas within the City where the intent is
to place greater emphasis on regulating urban form and character of
development as well as use and intensity of use.  The City also intends to
encourage development by allowing a flexible mix of uses, while requiring
specific development standards that will provide a more compact, walkable
environment.  The Form-Based Districts are intended to implement the vision,
goals, and objectives of the City of Howell Master Plan and any other
applicable Plans.  In addition to the general standards applicable to all
Form-Based Districts, there are specific standards applicable to each
District.



   (b)   Purpose.  The general purpose of these regulations is as
follows:



      (1)   Promote new investment opportunities by allowing a wide
range of potential uses and techniques to expand the employment and economic
base.



      (2)   Ensure that development is designed for people in cars
as well as on foot or bike, creates attractive streetscapes and pedestrian
spaces.



      (3)   Promote mixed-use development in both a horizontal and
vertical form.



      (4)   Ensure reasonable transition between higher intensity
development and adjacent neighborhoods.



      (5)   Increase options for people driving, walking or biking
to reach their destinations and reduce the need for on-site parking.



      (6)   Provide a more predictable development approval process.



   (c)   Factors for Regulation.  These regulations are based on two
(2) significant factors:  site context and building form.



      (1)   Site context is derived from existing and desired
characteristics of an area, and recognizes the inherent conditions of the
areas where these regulations are applied.  Sites are categorized by shape,
size, orientation and location.  Sites are also characterized by the type of
street upon which the property is located.



      (2)   Building form addresses the manner in which buildings
and structures relate to their lots, surrounding buildings, and street
frontage.  The shape of the building, the land area to volume ratio, and the
orientation of the building has a significant impact upon the character of an
area.  Building form standards control height, placement, building
configuration, parking location, and ground story activation applicable to
the site context.



      (3)   Regulations are tailored to meet a more specific intent
of each district.  These districts and intents are set forth elsewhere in
this Article.



•  Section 4A.02  Applicability and Organization.



   (a)   Applicability.



      (1)   Any new use or expansion of existing use that requires
site plan review shall comply with the requirements of this Article and other
applicable requirements of this Ordinance.



      (2)   The requirements of this Article shall not apply to:



         A.   Continuation of a permitted use within an existing
structure.



         B.   Changes of use within existing structures that do
not require increased parking.



         C.   Normal repair and maintenance of existing
structures that do not increase its size or parking demand.



         D.   Continuation of a legal non-conforming use,
building, and/or structure, in accordance with Article 11.



   (b)   Regulating Plans.  Each Form Based District shall be governed
by a Regulating Plan that is specific to each area.



      (1)   The Regulating Plan based on the site type determines
building form and allowable use for each property within a form-based
district.



      (2)   Relationship to Master Plan.  All development shall be
compatible to the vision and in accordance with the goals and objectives set
forth in the Howell Master Plan and any other applicable Plan.



      (3)   The Regulating Plan is based on three (3) factors: 
Site Type; Building Form; and Use Group.



         A.   Site Types, as described in Section 4A.03(b), are
determined by lot size, location, and relationship to neighboring sites.



         B.   Building Form, as described in Section 4A.03(c),
which are determined by Site Type.



         C.   Use Groups, as described in Section 4A.03(d), which
are determined by Site Type and Building Form.



   (c)   Site Types.  Site Types, as set forth in Section 4A.03(b),
are determined by street orientation, lot size, lot configuration, location,
and relationship to neighboring sites.  Site type provides the basis for
building forms and authorized use groups.



   (d)   Building Form Standards.  Building form standards, set forth
in Section 4A.03(c), establish the parameters for building form, height, and
placement, and are specifically applied to each district based upon the
regulating plan.



   (e)   Authorized Use Groups.  Authorized land uses are organized by
use groups.  Authorized use groups, as set forth in Section 4A.03(d), are
specifically applied to each District based upon the regulating plan.



   (f)   Design Standards.  General design standards, set forth in
Section 4A.03(e), are established for each district and are supplementary to
other requirements of the Ordinance.  Generally, the design standards
regulate building placement, parking orientation, landscaping, and other site
design requirements.



   (g)   Modification of District Boundaries.  Any modification to the
boundaries of any form-based district shall require rezoning, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 14, Amendments.



   (h)   Modification of Regulating Plan.  Specific building form, use
group, and design standards applied within each Regulating Plan are based
upon the designation of site type.  Any modification of site type may be
determined by the Planning Commission, notice and after conducting a public
hearing in accordance with Section 3.13.



      The Planning Commission shall consider the following in making a
determination to modify a site type or street type designation:



      (1)   The applicant's property cannot be used for the purpose
permitted in the form-based district.



      (2)   Area has been added to or deleted from the subject
property in question, requiring the modification.



      (3)   The proposed modification and resulting development will
not alter the essential character of the area.



      (4)   The proposed modification meets the intent of the
district.



      (5)   Existing streets have been improved and/or new streets
constructed that may result in the modification of a specific site type.



      (6)   Modification to the Regulating Plan is in conformance to
the Master Plan.



•  Section 4A.03  Standards Applicable to All Form-Based Districts.



   (a)   Form-Based Code Hierarchy.



      (1)   Each parcel has a site type, building form, and is
assigned a use group.



      (2)   The steps to determine the regulations that apply to a
specific property within a form-based district are as follows:



         A.   Find the site in question on the appropriate
regulating plan map.



         B.   Identify the Site Type for the site in question. 
Sites are classified based on their size, shape and location.



         C.   Consult the Use Groups and for the District in
which the site is located listed in Section 4A.03(d).



         D.   Follow the regulations for the chosen building form
when designing the proposed development.  Building form regulations are
established in Section 4A.03(c).



         E.   Follow the design standards as listed in Section
4A.03(d).



         F.   Obtain site plan approval or special use approval
for the chosen building form and use, as appropriate.



 

Locate the Site



 



 

Determine Site Type (4A.03(b)) for site in question



 



 

Review permissible Building Forms (4A.03(c)) and Use Groups (4A.03(d)) for
Site Type



 



 

Apply Building Form standard (4A.03(c)) for applicable building form



 



 

Apply Design Standards (4A.03(e))



 



 

Submit site plan for approval



 



   (b)   Site Types.



      (1)   Site Type A (small residential or mixed use sites). 
Site Type A is composed of lots one-half (0.5) acre or smaller, and are
reserved primarily for residential use and for smaller non-residential use
which is compatible with a residential setting.  Site Type A is generally
located in areas which serve as a transition between the street and
neighboring residential areas.  The building form selected for these sites
must consider both the front elevation that fronts on the street but also the
rear/side elevation that is adjacent to residential in order to maintain
compatibility with adjacent uses.



      (2)   Site Type B (small commercial/office or mixed use
sites).  Made up mostly of lots in the one-half (0.5) acre and smaller
range, the Site Type B category is reserved for the smallest, single-use
sites developed for free standing commercial and office or mixed use
developments.  Site Type B size and character may vary based on the unique
characteristic of each parcel.  Small retail and food-service uses would
often be found in this category, as well as small multi-tenant office
buildings or single-tenant office buildings.



         Site Type B sites must be designed to better integrate with
their surroundings to contribute to a more cohesive District, a more
consistent building line, and more efficient access between sites.  Access
for pedestrians and cross access for vehicles will help sites in this
Category reduce trips entering and existing from corridors and arterials. 
When located at corners, the buildings should frame and enhance street
corners through the use of architecturally prominent features at the corners
or prominent three dimensional site improvements (fountains, towers,
sculpture, art, etc.).  Groups of Site Type B properties may make excellent
candidates for assembly to create more cohesive development projects.



      (3)   Site Type C (medium commercial/office and mixed use
sites).  The sites in Site Type C are mostly between one-half (0.5) and two
(2) acres in area, and are located at the edges of larger Site Type D
sites.  Site Type C size and character may vary based on the unique
characteristic of each parcel.  This category can include free standing
single-use developments situated nearby one another; however the Site Type C
category should be designed to consider of integration of adjacent parcels. 
Integration will allow for better interaction between users, which could lead
to a more readily shared customer and tenant base and could help reduce City
traffic.



         The setback and orientation of the buildings in Site Type C
should be situated as to reinforce a consistent building line with minor
variations.  Primary building entries, public areas, administration areas,
and windows should be visible, oriented, and accessible from the primary
street and parking facilities.  When located at corners, the buildings
should frame and enhance street corners through the use of architecturally
prominent features at the corners or prominent three dimensional site
improvements (fountains, towers, sculpture, art, etc.).



      (4)   Site Type D (large scale regional sites).  Site Type D
properties are greater than two (2) acres in area, but designed to function
as one unit.  Site Type D size and character may vary based on the unique
characteristic of each parcel.



         Walkability within and between sites and provision of
supporting buildings and uses are important to the success of the very large,
Site Type D developments.  They should be designed with a mix of uses in
mind to allow for users to obtain basic services on or immediately near the
site.  Especially within large office centers, where hundreds of workers may
populate the site during the day, restaurants, postal facilities and other
daily needs should be integrated within existing buildings or permitted to
exist in smaller out-lot developments or nearby developments in Site Type A,
or B, or C categories.



         Site design should strongly focus on putting the densest
components of the project within close range of the primary right-of-way to
combat the vast open areas that frequently make such sites difficult or
undesirable for pedestrians.  The development of these sites is often
phased.  The phasing must include consistent building form treatment.



   (c)   Building Form Standards.



      (1)   The mixed-use districts permit a series of building
forms, dependent on the site context.  The building forms, set forth in
Tables 4A.03(c), are established in this section as follows.



      (2)   Building forms are designated within each district
location based on the regulating plan.  Building forms are classified in the
following manner:



         A.   Permitted Building Forms.  These building forms
are permitted as of right in the locations specified, and are depicted with
the symbol P.



         B.   Prohibited Building Forms.  Building forms that
are not identified as permitted in the locations specified are prohibited.



         C.   Exceptions:  For all building forms in all
locations, awnings, signs, other projections (architectural projections, bay
windows, etc.) may project into the right-of-way beyond the required building
line by up to 5 feet.  Projections will be reviewed by the City to ensure
public safety.



      (3)   The regulating plan dictates the site type for each
individual property in the district.  Building forms are identified within
each district as permitted or not permitted based upon the site type.



      (4)   Non-Residential Development Height, Setback, and
Greenbelt Provisions when Adjacent to any Residentially Zoned or Used
Property.



         A.   Setback and Greenbelt:



            1.   Site Type A and B.  The following setback
and greenbelt shall be provided for any parcel zoned Site Type A or B that is
adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel.



               a.   When a parcel is abutting or adjacent
to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening alley or
street, the building setback from the property line of the residentially
zoned or used parcel shall be no less than the height of the building on the
non-residential parcel.



               b.   When a parcel is abutting or adjacent
to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening alley or
street, a minimum 20-foot landscaped greenbelt shall be maintained from the
property line of the residentially zoned or used parcel.  The greenbelt
shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with Section 5.10.



               c.   The Planning Commission may deviate
from these setback and greenbelt provisions in the course of its site plan
review process; however, the Planning Commission shall not permit a setback
or greenbelt that is less than required in the building form.  In the review
of the deviation, the Planning Commission shall consider the standards as set
forth in Section 4A.03(c)(4)C.



            2.   Site Type C and D.  The following setback
and greenbelt shall be provided for any parcel zoned Site Type C or D that is
adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel.



               a.   When a property is abutting or adjacent
to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening alley or
street, the setback from the property line of the residentially zoned or used
parcel shall be no less than twice the height of the building on the
non-residential parcel.



               b.   When a property is abutting or adjacent
to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening alley or
street, a minimum 40-foot landscaped greenbelt shall be maintained from the
property line of the residentially zoned or used parcel.  The greenbelt
shall be landscaped, screened in accordance with Section 5.10 and include a
minimum 6-foot high berm.



               c.   The Planning Commission may deviate
from these setbacks and greenbelt provisions in the course of its site plan
review process; however, the Planning Commission shall not permit a setback
or greenbelt that is less than required in the building form.  In the review
of the deviation, the Planning Commission shall consider the following
standards set forth in Section 4A.03(c)(4)C.



         B.   Deviation Standards:



            1.   Height, setback, and greenbelt deviations may
be granted by the Planning Commission if the following is found:



               a.   The deviation shall not adversely
impact public health, safety, and welfare.



               b.   The deviation shall maintain
compatibility with adjacent uses.



               c.   The deviation shall be compatible with
the Master Plan and in accordance with the goals and objectives of the Master
Plan and any associated subarea and corridor plans.



               d.   The deviation shall not adversely
impact essential public facilities and services, such as: streets, pedestrian
or bicycle facilities, police and fire protection, drainage systems, refuse
disposal, water and sewage facilities, and schools.



               e.   The deviation shall be in compliance
with all other zoning ordinance standards.



               f.   The deviation shall not adversely
impact any on-site or off-site natural features.



 



 

Table 4A-1

Building Form A.1


Building Form A.1:  Small, generally single-purpose buildings for
residential.  Typically situated on a smaller lot, in more remote site
location within the district, adjacent to single family residential.




Building Height
 
Minimum 1 story, 14-foot height

Maximum 3 stories, 38-foot height
 


 

 




Building Placement
 
Front Yard:  10-foot required build- to line1

75% of the building facade must meet the required build-to line, while up to
25% of the facade can be setback to allow for architectural consideration


Side Yard:  No minimum side setback

 

If provided, minimum 5 feet


Rear Yard:  Minimum 10-foot rear setback


Lot
 
Impervious Surface:  Maximum 80%


Access and circulation:  Driveways may access the site from any side,
pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way, and cross access
shall be provided in instances where a development is within an out lot of a
higher classified building form


Parking location:  Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when
located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to line adjacent to
the right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry
wall on the required build-to line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to
line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the
required build-to line


1   The Planning Commission may adjust the required build-to line to a
maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a
permanent space for an outdoor café, public space, or a cross access drive
with an adjacent parcel.  Outdoor cafés or public spaces must be developed
as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or
landscaping area along the required build-to line.




 



 

Table 4A-2

Building Form A.2


Building Form A.2:  Small, generally single-purpose buildings for retail,
office, restaurant, or service uses.  Typically situated on a smaller lot
within the district.  Adjacent to single-family residential.




Building Height
 
Minimum 1 story, 14-foot height

Maximum 3 stories, 38-foot height
 


 

 

 




Building Placement
 
Front Yard:  10-foot required build- to line1

75% of the building facade must meet the required build-to line, while up to
25% of the facade can be setback to allow for architectural consideration


Side Yard:  No minimum side setback

 

If provided, minimum 5 feet


Rear Yard:  Minimum 10-foot rear setback


Lot
 
Impervious Surface:  Maximum 80%


Access and circulation:  Driveways may access the site from any side,
pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way, and cross access
shall be provided in instances where a development is within an out lot of a
higher classified building form


Parking location:  Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when
located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to line adjacent to
the right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry
wall on the required build-to line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to
line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the
required build-to line


1   The Planning Commission may adjust the required build-to line to a
maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a
permanent space for an outdoor café, public space, or a cross access drive
with an adjacent parcel.  Outdoor cafés or public spaces must be developed
as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or
landscaping area along the required build-to line.




 



 

Table 4A-3

Building Form B


Building Form B:  Small, generally single-purpose buildings for retail,
office, restaurant, or service uses.  Typically situated in an out lot of a
larger classification building form, or on a smaller, more remote site
location within the district.




Building Height
 
Minimum 1 story, 14-foot height

Maximum 3 stories, 38-foot height
 


 

 

 




Building Placement
 
Front Yard:  10-foot required build- to line1

75% of the building facade must meet the required build-to line, while up to
25% of the facade can be setback to allow for architectural consideration


Side Yard:  No minimum side setback

 

If provided, minimum 5 feet


Rear Yard:  Minimum 10-foot rear setback


Lot
 
Impervious Surface:  Maximum 80%


Access and circulation:  Driveways may access the site from any side,
pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way, and cross access
shall be provided in instances where a development is within an out lot of a
higher classified building form


Parking location:  Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when
located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to line adjacent to
the right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry
wall on the required build-to line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to
line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the
required build-to line


1   The Planning Commission may adjust the required build-to line to a
maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a
permanent space for an outdoor café, public space, or a cross access drive
with an adjacent parcel.  Outdoor cafés or public spaces must be developed
as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or
landscaping area along the required build-to line.




 



 

Table 4A-4

Building Form C


Building Form C:  Single or multiple-tenant buildings for retail,
restaurant, office, service, or residential uses.  This category also
includes multiple-tenant development, although it requires a second story to
encourage a mix of use.




Building Height
 
Minimum 2 stories, 24-foot height

Maximum 4 stories, 45-foot height

Ground floor 14-foot minimum height
 


 

 




Building Placement
 
Front Yard:  Maximum 60-foot required build-to line


Side Yard:  No minimum side setback

If provided, minimum 5 feet


Rear Yard:  Minimum 30-foot rear setback


Lot
 
Impervious Surface:  Maximum 80%


Access and circulation:  Driveways may access the site from any side,
pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way, and cross access
shall be provided


Parking location:  Parking may be located in any yard; when located in a
front or side yard adjacent to the primary building and abutting the
right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall
on the required build-to line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to
line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the
required build-to line; if parking is provided in the front yard only 1 row
is permitted







 



 

Table 4A-5

Building Form D


Building Form D:  This category is primarily designed for attached
residential, however, non-residential use may be included in the ground
floor.  Townhouses and urban-style residential developments that are
compatible with the Master Plan identified higher-density and more urban
character of this area.




Building Height
 
Minimum 2 stories, no minimum height

Maximum 4 stories, 45-foot height

Ground floor:  No minimum height
 


 

 




Building Placement
 
Front Yard:  10-foot required build-to line1

75% of the building facade must meet the required build-to line, while up to
25% of the facade can be setback to allow for architectural consideration


Side Yard:  No minimum side setback

If provided, minimum 5 feet


Rear Yard:  Minimum 10-foot rear setback


Lot
 
Impervious Surface:  Maximum 60%


Access and circulation:  Parking may be accessed from right-of-way (ROW) or
alley; detached garages or multi-garage structures are permitted only in a
rear yard, or behind primary buildings; pedestrian pathways shall be provided
from the right-of way


Parking location:  Parking shall be located in a rear yard; parking may also
be provided in integrated garages or detached garages; on-street parking
within private roads in developments is highly encouraged


1   The Planning Commission may adjust the required build-to line to a
maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a
permanent front yard, enclosed space that shall incorporate a permanent wall
or landscaping area along the required build-to line.




 



 

Table 4A-6

Building Form E


Building Form E:  This category provides an opportunity for large-format
retail or entertainment uses within the district.  They directly abut the
right-of-way, provide parking in the rear or side yards, and contribute to
the street atmosphere by providing a consistent street front with other, more
pedestrian-oriented projects.  They may be set back from the right-of-way,
but only when they provide out-lots within the same project for category B,
C, or D building forms on the same or on separate lots.




Building Height
 
Rear building:  Minimum 14 feet, 1 story; Maximum 38 feet, 3 stories

Front buildings:  Minimum 26 feet, 2 stories (14 feet minimum ground floor);
Maximum 45 feet, 4 stories
 


 

 




Building Placement
 
Front Yard:  10-foot required build-to line1


Side Yard:  No minimum side setback;

if provided, minimum 5 feet


Rear Yard:  Minimum 10-foot rear setback


Lot
 
Building Frontage:  Minimum 70% of lot frontage for 2-story buildings and
50% for 3-story buildings or more


Impervious Surface:  Maximum 90%


Access and circulation:  Driveways may access the site from any side,
pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way, and cross access
shall be provided in instances where a development is within an out lot of a
higher classified building form


Parking location:  Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when
located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to line adjacent the
primary building, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry
wall on the required build-to line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to
line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the
required build-to line


1   The Planning Commission may eliminate the required build-to line for
projects incorporating a permanent series of additional lots or smaller
buildings in the A, B, C, or D building form categories, provided that those
additional lots and/or buildings make up the entire frontage of the overall
development along the required build-to line, with the exception of access
drives.  The required build-to line frontage minimum for the additional lots
and/or other buildings forms along the required build-to line shall apply for
each individual additional lot and/or building.




 



   (d)   Authorized Use Groups.



      (1)   Authorized uses are categorized by use groups as set
forth in Table 4A-7.  Use groups generally contain similar types of uses in
terms of function, character, and intensity.



      (2)   Use groups are designated in locations within each
district based on the regulating plan.  Use groups are classified in the
following manner:



         A.   Permitted Use Groups.  These use groups are
permitted as of right in the locations specified.



         B.   Special Use Groups.  These use groups are
permitted after review and approval by the Planning Commission, in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Section 3.03 and the standards in this
Ordinance.



         C.   Prohibited Use Groups.  These use groups not
indicated as permitted are prohibited in the locations specified.



         D.   Uses permitted in all locations within the
District.  Public parks and essential public services are permitted by right
in all locations.



         E.   Similar Uses.  If a use is not listed but is
similar to other uses within a use group, the Zoning Administrator may make
the interpretation that the use is similar to other uses within a use group.



            The Zoning Administrator may also make the
determination whether the use is permitted as of right, permitted in upper
stories only, or permitted as a special use.  The Zoning Administrator may
obtain a recommendation from the Planning Commission as to whether or not the
proposed use is similar to a use permitted as of right, permitted in upper
stories only, or permitted as a special use.



 

Table 4A-7

Use Groups by Category




PRINCIPAL USE


Use Group 1

Residential Uses:


One-Family detached and attached dwellings


Two-Family dwellings


Use Group 2

Misc. Residential / Related Uses:


Places of Worship


Multiple-Family dwellings


Live/Work units, Home Occupations


Senior assisted/independent living


Group day care homes


Child care centers


Bed and Breakfast


Use Group 3

Office / Institutional:


Civic Buildings


General office


Professional and medical office


Hospitals


Medical office


Primary/secondary schools (private)


Post-secondary schools


Data centers


Technology centers/office research


Publicly owned/operated office and service facilities


Funeral homes


Veterinary clinics or hospitals


Use Group 4

Automobile / Transportation Uses:


Vehicle sales


Vehicle service station


Vehicle repair station


Vehicle body repair


Vehicle wash


Drive-Thru Uses


Use Group 5

Retail, Entertainment, and Services Uses:


Financial institutions


General retail


Restaurant


Personal services


Business services


Use Group 6

Misc. Commercial Uses:


Building and lumber supply


Garden centers, nurseries


Outdoor commercial recreation


Commercial kennels / pet day care


Lodging


Retail, large format


Shopping centers


Fitness, gymnastics, and exercise centers


Theatres and places of assembly


Indoor commercial recreation establishments


Use Group 7

Industrial Uses:


Contractor's Equipment Storage


Food Products


Commercial outdoor storage


Manufacturing, Processing, etc.


Metal Plating


Plastics


Printing


Tool and Die, Gauge and Machine Shops


Truck / Trailer Rental


Warehousing / Wholesale


Experimental Research and Testing Labs




 



   (e)   Design Standards.  In addition to standards set forth in this
Ordinance, all proposed development shall comply with the standards set forth
herein.



      (1)   Pedestrian/Non-Motorized Access.



         A.   Intent.  To ensure that site layout and building
design provides safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access both to and
within a site and between adjacent sites.



         B.   Standards.



            1.   A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear
connection between the primary street upon which the building fronts and the
building.  Connection may include pavement striping.



            2.   Pedestrian access shall be clearly identified
from parking areas and all entrances to a building.



            3.   Where appropriate, sidewalks fronting the
public right-of-way should be designed to accommodate space for activities
such as outdoor dining.



      (2)   Building Placement and Orientation.



         A.   Intent.  To require building placement that
provides a strong visual and functional relationship with its site, adjacent
sites, and the primary street upon which the site is located.  Ensure
consistency within sites and to adjacent sites to provide distinct building
groups which exhibit similar orientation, scale, and proportion.



         B.   Standards.



            1.   Setbacks and building orientation shall
reinforce a consistent pattern of siting.



            2.   Primary building entrances shall front on the
public street and have a direct pedestrian access from the parking area. 
All Building entries shall be located so that they are easily identifiable
with convenient public access.



            3.   Buildings should enhance street corners
through the use of prominent architectural or site features.



      (3)   Parking Placement, Orientation, and Screening.



         A.   Intent.  To provide a circulation system that
efficiently moves vehicles in a well-defined manner, while reducing the
visual impact of parking areas and mitigating conflict between pedestrians,
bicycles, and automobiles.



         B.   Standards.



            1.   Required Parking.  Off-street parking shall
be provided for a principal use erected, altered, or expanded after the
effective date of this Ordinance in accordance with the standards set forth
in Article 10.



               a.   The Form Based districts are intended
to encourage pedestrian and friendly design and compact mixed-use
developments.  Applicants are encouraged to consider the provisions for
shared parking and flexibility in application set forth in Article 10,
Section 10.03(e).



               b.   The placement and design of parking
areas and structures shall foster safe pedestrian access and circulation and
clearly identifiable public access and visitor parking.  Pedestrian access
shall be provided between all parking areas and public building entrances.



            2.   Location.



               a.   When parking is located in a side yard
(behind the front building line) but fronts on the required building line, no
more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total site's linear feet along the
required building line or sixty (60) feet, whichever is less, shall be
occupied by parking.



               b.   For a corner lot, no more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the site's cumulative linear feet along the
required building lines or sixty (60) feet, whichever is less, shall be
occupied by parking.  The building shall be located in the corner of the lot
adjacent to the intersection.



               c.   Where off-street parking is visible
from a street, it should be screened in accordance with the standards set
forth herein.



      (4)   Architectural Design and Building Materials.



         A.   Intent.  To create a character for the form based
district that encourage the greatest amount of visual interest, architectural
consistency, and high quality material use.  The standards are not intended
to limit imagination, innovation, or variety.



         B.   Architectural Design Standards.



            1.   Building Massing and Scale.



               a.   Rooflines and pitches shall be
proportionate to nearby structures so as to provide transition or mitigation
of significant changes to scale.  Variety in massing can occur though
step-backs as a building ascends upward.



               b.   Buildings shall maintain a consistent
streetwall with the longest edge of the buildings oriented parallel to the
roadway, where possible.



               c.   Buildings within the same development
shall be designed to provide a unified and easily identifiable image. 
Methods to achieve this include using similar architectural styles and
materials, complementary roof forms, signs, and colors.



            2.   Facade Variation.



               a.   Facade articulation or architectural
design variations for building walls facing the street are required to ensure
that the building is not monotonous in appearance, using the following
architectural techniques:  Building wall offsets (projections and recesses);
cornices, varying building materials or pilasters shall be used to break up
the mass of a single building; staggering of vertical walls; recessing
openings; providing upper-level roof overhangs; using deep score lines at
construction joints; contrasting compatible building materials; use of
variety and rhythm of window and door openings; use of horizontal and
vertical architectural elements, use of horizontal bands of compatible
colors; and providing changes in roof shape or roof-line.



               b.   Materials shall be selected for
suitability to the type of buildings and the architectural design in which
they are used.



               c.   Material selection shall be consistent
with architectural style in terms of color, shades, and texture, however
monotony shall be avoided.



      (5)   Ground Story Activation.



         A.   Intent.  The first floors of all buildings shall
be designed to encourage and complement pedestrian-scale activity and crime
prevention techniques.  It is intended that this be accomplished principally
by the use of windows and doors arranged so that active uses within the
building are visible from or accessible to the street, and parking areas are
visible to occupants of the building.



         B.   Standards.



            1.   Facade transparency shall be defined as the
use of glass or transparent material that provides from the building exterior
a view into the building of interior habitation and human scale.  Signs
covering windows, and the use of tinted, reflective or opaque glass do not
meet the definition of facade transparency.



            2.   The first floor of any front facade facing a
right-of-way shall be no less than fifty (50) percent windows and doors, and
the minimum transparency for facades facing a side street, side yard, or
parking area shall be no less than thirty (30) percent of the facade.  The
minimum transparency requirement shall apply to all sides of a building that
abut an open space, including a side yard, or public right-of-way. 
Transparency requirements shall not apply to sides which abut an alley. 
Nothing shall be placed on or inside window to reduce transparency less than
the 50% requirement.



            3.   Modified wall design may be used as an
alternative to the standard set forth in Section 4A.03(e)(5)B.2. but may
count for no more than eighty (80) percent of the transparency requirement. 
Wall designs must provide a minimum of three (3) of the following elements,
occurring at intervals no greater than twenty-five (25) feet horizontally and
ten (10) feet vertically:



               a.   Expression of structural system and
infill panels through change in plane not less than three (3) inches.



               b.   System of horizontal and vertical
scaling elements such as:  belt course, string courses, cornice, pilasters.



               c.   System of horizontal and vertical
reveals not less than one (1) inch in width/depth.



               d.   Variations in material module, pattern,
and/or color.



               e.   System of integrated architectural
ornamentation.



               f.   Green screen or planter walls.



               g.   Translucent, fritted, patterned, or
colored glazing.



      (6)   Landscaping.



         A.   Intent.  To incorporate appropriate landscaping to
enhance visual appearance, provide transitions between properties, and screen
unsightly areas.



         B.   Landscaping Standards.



            1.   The standards set forth in Section 5.10, the
following standards shall be met.



            2.   Landscaping shall conform and incorporate
existing landscape and topographic features.



            3.   Landscaping within courtyards, patios, and
pedestrian realm may include hardscape and softscape materials.



            4.   Landscaping shall maintain adequate sight
lines for visual safety, visibility and efficient security.



            5.   Landscaped areas, including landscaped
parking islands and medians, shall be separated from vehicular and pedestrian
encroachment by curbs and raised planting areas.



            6.   Measured from the inside of the outermost
curb line, a parking lot shall employ at least 10% of landscaped area in the
form of parking islands, planting strips between parking rows.



      (7)   Loading and Storage Areas.



         A.   Intent.  To ensure that loading, storage, and
other building utility features are designed to be a part of the overall
building as so to reduce the visual impact.



         B.   Standards.



            1.   Utilities and Mechanical Screening.



               a.   Utility structures located between the
building and the public right-of-way be screened as set forth in Section
5.10.  Screening may include walls, fencing, or landscaping that is
consistent with the character and materials of the development.



               b.   Trash enclosures shall be placed
adjacent to the rear wall of corresponding buildings or shall be located away
from portions of the site which are highly visible from public roadways or
private properties with dissimilar improvements.  Trash enclosures shall be
screened as set forth in Section 5.10 with walls, fencing or landscaping that
are consistent with the character and materials of the development.



            2.   Loading.



               a.   Service areas should be designated by
markings and/or signage to delineate them from pedestrian access and limit
conflicts between service/delivery vehicles and patrons (e.g. pedestrians,
bicyclists and transit users).



               b.   Service areas should be shared and/or
consolidated within multi-tenant developments.



               c.   Loading and service areas shall be
located on the sides or rears of the buildings.



               d.   Loading and service areas shall be
screened from the public right-of-way with the use of fencing, landscaping,
or walls.



               e.   Freestanding storage facilities
(including warehousing) shall comply with all design standards.



               f.   Accessory facilities such as storage
areas, and vehicle service areas shall be located away from portions of the
site which are highly visible from public roadways or private properties with
dissimilar improvements.



   (8)   Signs.



      1.   All signs within a Form Based District shall meet all of
the requirements of Article 7 Signs unless otherwise specified herein.



      2.   Freestanding Signs.



         a.   Freestanding signs within each Use Group shall
comply with the following height and area requirements:



 


 
Requirement


Use Groups
 
Height
 
Area


1, 2
 
6
 
32 per side, not to exceed a total of 64


3
 
8
 
50 per side, not to exceed 100


4, 5, 6, 7
 
8
 
50 per side, not to exceed 100



 



         b.   A freestanding sign in a Form Based District shall
be located no closer than five (5) feet from the public right-of-way.



      3.   Wall Signs. Wall signs within each use group shall comply
with the following area requirements:



 




 

Requirement




Use Groups

 

Area per One Foot of Building Frontage (sq. ft.)

 

Maximum Area (sq. ft.)




1, 2

 

1

 

30




3

 

2

 

100




4, 5, 6, 7

 

2

 

100




 



      4.   Projecting Signs. Projecting signs shall be permitted for
Use Group 3-6 only in accordance with Section 7.05 .



      5.   Interior Window Signs. Interior window signs shall be
permitted for Use Groups 3-6 only in accordance with Section 7.06 , provided
such signs do not reduce transparency requirements set forth in Section 4.04A
(e)(5)B.



•  Section 4A.04  South Michigan Avenue District.



   (a)   Intent.  The South Michigan Avenue District is intended to
implement the vision established by the City's Master Plan and the South
Michigan Avenue Corridor Plan.  The South Michigan Avenue Area Form Based
District allows for the consolidation and creative redevelopment of parcels
to develop a building pattern set close to the street along South Michigan
Avenue.  Though the existing built-out pattern is established with buildings
set back from the street, redevelopment within the South Michigan Avenue Form
Based District shall coordinate site design with adjoining sites to take
advantage of buildings placed at the street, shared access and parking,
similar perimeter landscape themes, or similar features.



      Development of buildings and sites, including retrofitting and
redevelopment of existing sites and buildings, can include residential,
retail, office, service, and light industrial uses.  Uses designed to
support the residents and local workers are also encouraged, such as
mixed-use developments with small scale retail or restaurant uses
incorporated with housing units.  The redeveloped Corridor will help
diversify the City's housing and commercial stock, and incorporate
architecturally interesting buildings.



      Consolidation of parcels in the District is encouraged in order
to provide for a quality and consistent development patterns.  Incentives
include additional building forms and more permitted uses.



   (b)   Regulating Plan.



      1.   The Regulating Plan, as set forth in Map 4A-1, identifies
allowable uses and permissible development within the District based on
location.



      2.   Site Types.  The South Michigan Avenue District
Regulating Plan includes four (4) different Site Types, described as follows:



         A.   Site Type A (small residential or mixed use) - Site
Type A, as described in Section 4A.03(b).



         B.   Site Type B (small commercial/office or mixed use
sites) - Site Type B, as described in Section 4A.03(b).



         C.   Site Type C (medium commercial/office or mixed use
site) - Site Type C, as described in Section 4A.03(b).



         D.   Site Type D (large scale regional sites) - Site
Type D, as described in Section 4A.03(b).



   (c)   Authorized Building Forms.  Authorized building form
regulations, as set forth in Section 4A.03(c) and Tables 4A-1 through 4A-6,
are applied to the site types in the South Michigan Avenue District.



   (d)   Authorized Use Groups.  Authorized use groups, as set forth
in Section 4A.03(d) and Table 4A-7 are applied to the site types and street
types in South Michigan Avenue District Regulating Plan.



   (e)   Design Standards.  In addition to standards set forth in this
Ordinance, all proposed development shall comply with the standards set forth
herein.



Map 4A-1



South Michigan Avenue Form Based District Reglating Plan







 



 

Table 4A-8


South Michigan Avenue Form Based Code District Regulating Plan Table



Site Type

 

Building Form

 

Use Group





Site Type: A
 
Permitted Building Form
 
A1, A2
 
Permitted Use Group
 
1, 2, 3


Special Use Group
 



Site Type: B
 
Permitted Building Form
 
A1, A2, B
 
Permitted Use Group
 
1, 2, 3, 5


Special Use Group
 
4


Site Type: C
 
Permitted Building Form
 
B, C, D
 
Permitted Use Group
 
1, 2, 3, 5


Special Use Group
 
4, 6, 7


Site Type: D
 
Permitted Building Form
 
B, C, D, E
 
Permitted Use Group
 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6


Special Use Group
 
7




 



 



ARTICLE 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS



• Section 5.01  Intent.



   The intent of this Article is to provide for those regulations that
generally apply to all uses regardless of the particular zoning district.



• Section 5.02  Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses.



   (a)   Detached Accessory Buildings (Residential).  Except as
otherwise permitted in this Zoning Ordinance, all detached accessory
buildings located in a residential district are subject to the following
regulations:



      (1)   All accessory buildings shall be architecturally
compatible with the main building (i.e. building materials, roof pitch,
height, etc.) A determination of architectural compatibility can be referred
to the Planning Commission at the sole discretion of the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   All multiple story detached accessory buildings shall be
subject to the special land use criteria and procedures of Section 3.03.



      (3)   All detached accessory buildings with habitable space
shall be subject to the special land use criteria and procedures of Section
3.03 and subsection 5.02(f).



      (4)   All detached accessory buildings exceeding 200 square
feet shall be provided with an approved foundation system in accordance with
The Michigan Building or Residential Code, as appropriate.



 

 
 
Location
 

Ground FloorArea

 
Minimum Yard Setbacks
 
Maximum BuildingHeight


Districts
 
 
 
Lesser of
 
Front (ft.)
 
Side (ft.)
 
Rear (ft.)
 
Btw. Bldgs. (ft.)
 
Stories4
 
Feet4


R-1, R-2, R-T, and HL5
 
Rear Yard1
 
30% of the rear yard or 900 sq. ft.
 
25
 
3
 
3
 
See footnote 3
 
2
 
25


RM5
 
Rear Yard1
 
30% of the rear yard or 900 sq. ft.2
 
25
 
6
 
6
 
See footnote 3
 
2
 
25



 



Footnotes:



1.   If located on a corner lot, the detached accessory building may be
located in the side yard providing the front yard setback is comparable to
the main building on the adjacent lot, and a minimum side yard setback of
eight (8) feet is maintained.



2.   These provisions only apply to maintenance garages and storage sheds.
Carports and garages shall be subject to the same provisions as the main
buildings.



3.   No detachedaccessory building of greater than two hundred (200)
square feet shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from a main building,
nor closer than six (6) feet from any other accessory building, regardless of
whether or not the buildings are on the same or adjacent lots. 
Additionally, no detached accessory building shall be located closer than
three (3) feet from the side or rear lot line so long as the maintenance of
six (6) feet between the accessorybuildings exists.



4.   The height shall not exceed that of the existing main building.



5.   Only one (1) detached accessory building and one (1) shed is
permitted per lot.



   (b)   Detached Accessory Buildings (Office and Commercial). Except
as otherwise permitted in this Zoning Ordinance, all detached accessory
buildings located in an office or commercial district are subject to the
following regulations:



      (1)   All buildings shall be subject to site plan review.



      (2)   All buildings shall be located in the rear yard only.



      (3)   All buildings are subject to the same placement and
height requirements applicable to main buildings in the district in which
located except the O-1 and B-1 districts. Detached accessory buildings in the
O-1 and B-1 districts shall be located no less than six (6) feet from the
side and rear property lines and shall be located no less than ten (10) feet
from all other on-site or off-site buildings.



      (4)   All buildings shall not exceed a ground floor area of
nine hundred (900) square feet.



   (c)   Attached Accessory Buildings.  Except as otherwise permitted
in this Zoning Ordinance, all attached accessory buildings are subject to the
following regulations:



      (1)   All accessory buildings shall be architecturally
compatible with the main building (i.e. building materials, roof pitch,
height, etc.).  A determination of architectural compatibility can be
referred to the Planning Commission at the sole discretion of the Zoning
Administrator.



      (2)   The minimum yard setbacks shall be the same as the main
building and governed by Section 4.07, Schedule of Area, Height, Width and
Setback Regulations.



      (3)   Attached accessory buildings within the O-1, B-1 and B-2
districts shall be subject to the special land use criteria and procedures of
Section 3.03.



 




 

Ground Floor Area

 

Maximum
Building Height




Districts

 

Greater of

 

Stories1

 

Feet1



R-1, R-2, R-T, and R- M
 
40% of the main building or 528 sq. ft.
 

2-1/2

 

25



HL
 
40% of the main building or 528 sq. ft.
 

2-1/2

 

25




 



Footnotes:



1.   The height shall not exceed that of the existing main building.



   (d)   Decks.  Decks requiring a foundation shall be subject to the
following:



         (1)   The total square footage, excluding steps, shall
not exceed the ground floor area of the principal building.



         (2)   Decks shall be subject to the following minimum
setback requirements:



            A.   A deck shall meet the required side yard
requirements of the district in which it is located, except that steps shall
be permitted to encroach up to five feet in the required side yard setback.



            B.   A deck shall be permitted to encroach in the
required rear and/or front yard by no more than ten (10) feet, provided the
portion of a deck that occupies the required yard shall not be above the
elevation of the first floor of the residence.  Furthermore, the portion of
a deck that occupies the required yard shall not contain any enclosed or
covered structures, such as a gazebo or screened porch.



   (e)   Private Swimming Pools.  Except as otherwise permitted in
this Zoning Ordinance, all private swimming pools shall be subject to the
following:



      (1)   Only permitted in the rear yard.



      (2)   There shall be a distance of not less than ten (10) feet
between the adjoining property line and the outside of the pool wall.



      (3)   No swimming pool shall be located less than thirty-five
(35) feet from a front lot line.



      (4)   No swimming pool shall be located less than ten (10)
feet from a side street or alley right-of- way, or the distance required for
side yards by this Zoning Ordinance, whichever is greater.



      (5)   No swimming pool shall be located in an easement.



      (6)   For the protection of the general public, all swimming
pools shall comply with the Building Code as it relates to safety enclosures.



      (7)   All pools shall comply with the clearance requirements
associated with overhead service power lines as per the Building Code.



   (f)   Accessory Residential Dwelling Units.  Except as otherwise
permitted in this Zoning Ordinance, all accessory residential dwelling units
located on a parcel containing a permitted or special land use is subject to
the following conditions:



      (1)   Dwelling units shall be located above the first floor.



      (2)   The minimum floor area requirements for multiple family
dwellings set forth in Section 5.03 shall be met.



      (3)   The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions
to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the occupants.



   (g)   Barrier Free Ramps.



      (1)   Temporary ramps to provide barrier free access to a
single-family home shall be permitted to encroach into the required front or
side yard setback to meet the required slope. Temporary ramps shall not have
permanent below grade footings.



      (2)   Permanent ramps to provide barrier free access to a
single-family home, or ramps at a structure other than a single-family home,
shall be required to meet necessary side yard setbacks and shall be permitted
to encroach into the front yard setback up to ten (10) feet.



• Section 5.03  Minimum Floor Area of Dwelling units.



   The minimum floor area of dwelling units shall be as follows, and shall
be satisfied within the stories above the basement:



 


Type of Dwelling

 

Total Floor Area (sq. ft.)






 



One-family
 

900




 





Two-family, per dwelling unit
 

800




 





Multiple family:
 





   Efficiency Unit
 

250



   1 bedroom unit
 

450



   2 bedroom unit
 

600



   3 bedroom unit
 

750





 



• Section 5.04  Buildings to be Moved.



   (a)   No permit shall be granted for the moving of buildings or
structures from outside of or within the limits of the City to be placed on
property within said limits unless the Building Official completed an
inspection of the building to be moved and has found that it is structurally
safe, will not adversely affect the character of existing buildings in the
neighborhood at the new location, and will fully comply with the Building
Code and other codes regulating public health, safety, and general welfare. 
A performance guarantee, as established by the City Council, of sufficient
amount to insure the cost of completing the building for occupancy within a
period of not less than six (6) months from date of permit shall be furnished
before permit is issued.



   (b)   Any building to be moved shall be subject to all the
limitations and requirements herein set forth relating to uses, construction,
permits, and certificates of said new zoning district.



• Section 5.05  Demolition of Buildings.



   No permit shall be issued to demolish a building except in accordance
with the requirements of this section.



   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a demolition permit, the
Building Official, in coordination with the Zoning Administrator, shall make
a determination whether the building is historically significant or
contributing, based on historic studies that may be prepared from time to
time.  If sufficient information is not available to make a determination,
the Building Official may request the assistance of the Planning Commission.



   (b)   If a building is determined to be historically significant or
contributing, the Building Official shall not issue a demolition permit until
a period of ninety (90) days from the date of application has elapsed.



   (c)   If a building is determined to be non-contributing, the
Building Official shall issue a demolition permit within a period of ten (10)
days from the date of application.



   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prevent
enforcement of Chapter 1480, Unsafe Buildings Ordinance.



• Section 5.06  Visibility at Intersections.



   In any district except a CBD Central Business District, no fence, wall,
shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of thirty-six
(36) inches from the established street grade shall be permitted within the
triangular area formed at the intersection of street right-of-way lines, by
drawing a straight line between such right-of-way lines at a distance along
each line of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection.  See
Figure 15 in the Appendix.



• Section 5.07  Temporary Buildings and/or Uses.



   (a)   A temporary building and/or use shall be reviewed in
accordance with the provisions outlined in Section 3.08.



   (b)   The following standards shall apply to temporary buildings
and/or uses:



      (1)   The granting of a permit for the temporary building
and/or use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in
the district or on the property where the temporary building and/or use are
permitted.



      (2)   No temporary building shall be located on a parcel
without a permanent, principal building.



      (3)   Temporary buildings (including tents and commercial
vehicles) may not be used for commercial purposes unless the proposed
building/use is incidental to an existing commercial use located on the same
parcel.



      (4)   With the exception of Sidewalk Café Service, approval
may be granted for a period not to exceed one (1) year.



      (5)   All temporary buildings shall comply with all setback
requirements for the district in which the building is being located.



   (c)   Use of Property as Voting Place.  This Zoning Ordinance shall
not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as
a voting place in connection with a City or other public election.



   (d)   Outdoor seasonal sales shall be permitted at any retail
establishment, subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   The request for outdoor sales shall be submitted, in
writing to the Zoning Administrator, prior to the beginning of the sale and
shall outline the time period for the outdoor sales.



      (2)   Any tents being used as part of the outdoor sale shall
be approved only upon the issuance of a building permit and an inspection by
the Fire Marshal.



      (3)   All outdoor seasonal sales shall comply with the
standards of Section 6.18.



• Section 5.08  One-Family Dwellings and Pre-Manufactured Housing.



   (a)   Standards.



      (1)   Construction Standards.  Minimum construction standards
for all one-family dwellings shall be pursuant to all applicable State,
Federal and/or local laws, codes and ordinances.



      (2)   Unit Size and Dimensions.  Each dwellingunit shall
comply with the minimum square footage requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located.  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum width on all
elevations of twenty-four (24) feet.



      (3)   Foundation and Anchoring.



         A.   One-familydwellings must be installed on a
permanent foundation.  At a minimum, this shall include a cement block or
poured foundation with cement footings around the complete outside perimeter
of the dwelling.  A basement, in accordance with applicable City Codes, may
be substituted for equivalent portions of the foundation.  If the foundation
or basement does not meet specifications for imposed load capacity, adequate
additional support shall be provided.



         B.   A crawl space of not less than twenty-four (24)
inches shall be provided between the bottom of the home and the ground
level.  The crawl space shall not be utilized for storage purposes.



         C.   A minimum of two (2) exterior doors must be
provided.  All means of access, such as porches, steps and ramps, shall be
fixed to the foundation of dwellings.



      (4)   Roof Design.  The roof of each dwelling unit shall be
pitched with a minimum 5:12 slope and shingled, with an overhang of not less
than six (6) inches on all sides.  The roof must be permanently attached to
and supported by the dwelling and not by exterior supports.  All dwellings
shall have roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection
points.  Eaves troughs must be provided where appropriate.



   Exceptions to roof design and materials may be granted when said roof
design and materials are typical of a particular architectural style and/or
are compatible with dwelling units in the surrounding area.  Sealed
architectural plans shall be furnished to the Zoning Administrator for his or
her review as to this exception.



      (5)   Sewer and Water Service.  All one-familydwellings shall
be served by public sewer and water service, where available, or approved
on-site systems in the case where public sewer and water service are not
available.



      (6)   Storage Areas.  All one-family dwellings shall contain
inside storage areas equal to ten (10) percent of the square footage of the
building, or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less.  Such storage
areas may be located in a basement beneath the dwelling, in an attic area, in
one (1) or more closet areas or in an attached or detached structure, with
construction standards and material of equal quality and durability to the
principal structure.



   (b)   Compatibility Determination.



      (1)   In terms of construction standards, character,
materials, design, appearance, aesthetics and quality, all dwellings shall be
compatible, (i.e. meet equal or greater standards), as compared with existing
dwellings in the area.  The Zoning Administrator shall make the
determination of compatibility in the first instance, based upon the plans,
specifications and elevations that shall be presented upon application for a
building permit.  Such determination shall be made in view of the following:



         A.   The area of consideration.  If the dwelling is to
be located in a platted subdivision, planned unit development or site
condominium development, it shall be compatible with the houses in the
plat.  If not in a platted subdivision, planned unit development or site
condominium development, it shall be compatible with the dwellings within
five hundred (500) feet of the property in question.



         B.   The square footage of floor space.



         C.   The length, width and height of the structure.



         D.   The architectural type and design, including,
without limitation, exterior materials, the custom nature of the design, the
roof style and the like, to the extent that the same would likely bear upon
property values.



         E.   The attachment of garages.



         F.   Maximum lot coverage shall be in accordance with
Section 4.07(n).



These regulations shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design
concepts involving such matters as energy conscious devices, including solar
energy, view, unique land contour and/or custom qualities.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may request a review by the
Planning Commission of any dwelling unit with respect to this section.  The
Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission shall not seek to discourage
architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable
compatibility of the character of dwellingunits, thereby protecting the
economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the
City at large.



• Section 5.09  Home Occupations.



   Home occupations that are clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal residential use are permitted in specific zoning districts;
however, the following conditions shall apply:



   (a)   The total floor area utilized by the home occupation shall not
exceed an area defined as not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total
floor area of any one (1) story of the residential premises so used. 



   (b)   The home occupation shall involve no employees on the
premises, other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises.



   (c)   All home occupation activities shall be conducted indoors,
except gardening.



   (d)   There shall be no outside display of any kind, or other
external or visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation.  Signs
advertising a home occupation are prohibited.



   (e)   There shall be no vehicular traffic permitted for the home
occupation, other than that which is normally generated for a one-family
dwelling unit in a residential area, both as to volume and type of vehicles.



   (f)   No home occupation shall be permitted which is injurious or a
nuisance to the general character of the residential district or which
creates a congested or otherwise hazardous traffic or parking condition.



   (g)   Any uses inconsistent with the home occupation provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted to continue, but only until there is
any change in the ownership of the land so used from and after the effective
date of this section.



   (h)   Any uses inconsistent with the home occupation provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance shall have one (1) year from and after the effective
date hereof to cease and desist or to comply with this section.



• Section 5.10  Landscaping, Greenbelts, Buffers, and Screening.



   (a)   Intent.  The intent of this section is to promote the
public's health, safety, and general welfare by: minimizing noise, air, and
visual pollution; improving the appearance of off-street parking and other
vehicular use areas; requiring buffering between non-compatible land uses;
regulating the appearance of property abutting public rights-of-way;
protecting and preserving the appearance, character, and value of the
community and its residential neighborhood areas; preventing soil erosion and
soil depletion; and promoting soil water retention.  It is further the
intent of this section to ensure an appropriate mixture of plant material,
such as evergreens, deciduous trees and shrubs, as a protective measure
against insect and disease infestation and to produce a more aesthetic and
cohesive design.



   (b)   Application.  These requirements shall apply to all uses for
which site plan review is required.  No site plan shall be approved unless
said site plan depicts landscaping, greenbeltbuffers, and screening
consistent with the requirements set forth herein.



   (c)   Landscape Plan Required.  A separate detailed landscape plan
shall be required to be submitted as part of the site plan review.  On sites
of greater than one (1) acre, landscape plans shall be prepared and sealed by
a registered landscape architect, licensed in the State of Michigan.  The
landscape plan shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following items:



      (1)   Location, spacing, size, and root type (bare root (BR)
or balled and burlapped (BB)) and descriptions for each plant type proposed
for use within the required landscape area.



      (2)   The minimum scale shall be 1" = 40' for property less
than five (5) acres, or 1" = 100' for property five (5) acres or more.  A
different scale may be used provided it is sufficient to properly illustrate
the landscape plan concept and that Ordinance requirements are met.



      (3)   On parcels of more than one (1) acre, existing and
proposed contours on-site and fifty (50) feet beyond the site at intervals
not to exceed two (2) feet.



      (4)   Typical straight cross-section, including slope, height,
and width of berms and type of ground cover, or height and type of
construction of wall, including footings.



      (5)   Significant construction details to resolve specific
site conditions, such as tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to
maintain natural drainage patterns.



      (6)   Planting and staking details in either text or drawing
form to ensure proper installation of proposed plant materials.



      (7)   Identification of existing wetlands, forested areas,
trees and vegetative cover to be preserved.



      (8)   Identification of grass and other ground cover and
method of planting.



      (9)   Identification of landscape maintenance program,
including a statement that all diseased, damaged, or dead materials shall be
replaced in accordance with standards of this section.



      (10)   Identification of mulch in planting beds.



   (d)   Screening Between Land Uses.



      (1)   Upon any improvement for which a site plan is required,
excluding duplexes, a landscape buffer shall be constructed to create a
visual screen at least six (6) feet in height along all adjoining boundaries
with residentially zoned or used property, as well as along all parcels
abutting the I-96 corridor.  A landscape buffer may consist of earthen berms
and/or living materials so as to maintain a minimum opacity of at least
eighty (80) percent.  Opacity shall be measured by observation of any two
(2) square yard areas of landscape screen between one (1) foot above the
established grade of the area to be concealed and the top or the highest
point of the required screen.  The plantings must meet this standard based
upon reasonably anticipated growth over a period of three (3) years.



      (2)   Where there is a need to provide a greater noise or dust
barrier or to screen more intense development, a solid wall or fence shall be
required.  Such wall or fence shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height
as measured on the side of the proposed wall having the higher grade.



   A required wall shall be located on the lot line except where
underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this Zoning
Ordinance requires conformity with front yard setback requirements.  Upon
review of the landscape plan, the Planning Commission may approve an
alternate location of a wall.  A required wall may be located on the
opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a non-residential district that
abuts a residential district or use when mutually agreeable to affected
property owners and the Planning Commission.  The continuity of the required
wall on a given block shall be a major consideration of the Planning
Commission in reviewing such a request.  The Planning Commission and the
Zoning Administrator shall approve the construction materials of the wall or
fence, which may include face brick, poured- in-place simulated face brick,
precast brick face panels having simulated face brick, stone or wood.



      (3)   For off-street parking areas located either within a P-1
or other district, there shall be provided and maintained a solid wall of at
least four (4) feet in height on those sides where the parking area abuts a
residentially zoned or used property.  When a front yardsetback is required,
all land between the wall and the front property line or street right-of-way
line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with
deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees.  The ground area
shall be planted and kept in lawn.



   (e)   Parking Lot Landscaping.  Separate landscaped areas shall be
required either within or at the perimeter of parking lots.  There shall be
one (1) tree for every eight (8) parking spaces, with a minimum landscaped
space within a designated parking area of fifty (50) square feet.  A minimum
distance of three (3) feet shall be established between proposed tree or
shrub plantings and the backside of the curb or edge of the pavement.  See
Figures 4 and 16 in the Appendix for a depiction of landscaping options for
parking lots.



   (f)   Greenbelt Buffers.  The greenbelt, which is equal to the
minimum required yard setback of its zoning classification, shall be
landscaped with a minimum of one (1) tree per each thirty (30) linear feet. 
All greenbelt trees shall be no less than twelve (12) feet in height or a
minimum caliper of two and one-half (2.5) inches (whichever is greater at the
time of planting).  The remainder of the greenbelt shall be landscaped with
grass, ground cover, shrubs, and/or other natural landscape material. 
Access ways from public rights-of-way through required landscape strips shall
be permitted, but such access ways shall not be subtracted from the linear
dimension used to determine the minimum number of trees required, unless such
calculation would result in a violation of the spacing requirement set forth
in this section.  However, when an unusual or limiting hardship exists that
is not self-created, the Planning Commission may waive the side and/or rear
greenbelt requirements.



   (g)   Site Landscaping.  In addition to any landscape greenbelt
and/or parking lot landscaping required by this section, ten (10) percent of
the site area, excluding existing thoroughfare right-of-way, shall be
landscaped.  Such site area landscaping may include a combination of the
preservation of existing tree cover, planting of new trees and plant
material, landscape plazas and gardens and building foundation planting
beds.  Site area landscaping shall be provided to screen potentially
objectionable site features, such as, but not limited to, retention/detention
ponds, transformer pads, air-conditioning units, and loading areas.  See
Figure 17 in the Appendix for a depiction of example site landscaping.



   Up to five (5) percent of the net site area in a required landscape
area may consist of landscaped areas used for storm drainage purposes, such
as drain courses and retention areas, which are located in front or side
yards, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The area may not have a slope greater than one (1) on
six (6).



      (2)   The area within a fenced drain course or retention pond
may not be included in the required landscape area.



      (3)   Drain courses or stream bottoms may not be included in
the required landscape area.



      (4)   Materials used to landscape these areas must be those
which will not be damaged by intermittent water conditions and shall be
maintained in a healthy and growing condition as well as being neat and
orderly in appearance.



   (h)   Landscape Elements.  The following minimum standards shall
apply.



      (1)   Quality.  Plant material and grasses shall be of
generally acceptable varieties and species, free of insects and diseases,
hardy to Livingston County, conform to the current minimum standard of the
American Association of Nurserymen, and have proof of any required
governmental regulations and/or inspections.



      (2)   Berms.  Berms shall be constructed with slopes not to
exceed a 1:3 gradient.  Berm slopes shall be protected with sod, seed, or
other form of natural ground cover.



      (3)   Existing Trees.  If existing plant material is labeled
"To Remain" on site plans by the applicant or required by the City,
protective techniques, such as, but not limited to, fencing or barriers
placed at the drip line around the perimeter of the plant material shall be
installed during construction.  No vehicle or other construction equipment
shall be parked or stored within the drip line of any plant material intended
to be saved.  Other protective techniques may be used provided such
techniques are approved by the City.



   In the event that healthy trees which are used to meet the minimum
requirements of this section or those labeled to remain are cut down,
destroyed, damaged, or excavated at the drip line, as determined by the City,
the contractor shall replace them with trees which meet Ordinance
requirements. 



      (4)   Installation, Maintenance, and Completion.  All
landscaping required by this section shall be planted prior to obtaining a
certificate of occupancy.  Cash, a letter of credit, and/or a certified
check may shall be placed in escrow in the amount of the cost of landscaping
to be released only after landscaping is completed.



      All landscaping and landscape elements shall be planted, and
earth moving or grading performed, in a sound, workmanlike manner and
according to accepted good planting and grading procedures.



   The owner of property required to be landscaped by this section shall
maintain such landscaping in a reasonably healthy condition, free from refuse
and debris.  All unhealthy and dead material shall be replaced within one
year of damage or death or the next appropriate planting period, whichever
comes first.



   (i)   Screening of Trash Containers.



      (1)   Outside trash disposal containers shall be screened on
three (3) sides with a solid wall no less than one (1) foot taller than the
dumpster and no less than six (6) feet in height, while the fourth side shall
consist of a lockable fence of equal height.  See Figure 18 in the Appendix
for a depiction of a typical trash container screen.



      (2)   Containers shall be consolidated to minimize the number
of collection sites, and located so as to reasonably equalize the distance
from the building they serve.



      (3)   Containers and enclosures shall be located away from
public view insofar as possible.



      (4)   Containers and enclosures shall be situated so that they
do not cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings.



      (5)   Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall
be provided for containers or groups of containers having a capacity of six
(6) thirty (30) gallon cans or more.  Aprons shall be provided for loading
of bins with capacity of 1.5 cubic yards or more.



      (6)   For storage of recyclable materials, the enclosure area
and pad size shall be increased to amply accommodate the extra materials and
their containers.



      (7)   Screening and gates shall be of a durable
construction.  Fences, walls, footings, slabs, and curbs shall meet Building
Code requirements.  Gates shall be constructed of heavy-gauge metal or of a
heavy-gauge metal frame with covering of wood or other suitable material. 
Gates shall be secured with sturdy hinges or sliders and latches.  If the
enclosure is situated directly adjacent to parking spaces or drives, it shall
be protected at its base by concrete curb blocks.



   (j)   Entranceway Structures.  In residential districts, so-called
entranceway structures (including, but not limited to, walls, columns and
gates), marking entrances to one-family subdivisions or multiplefamily
housing projects, may be permitted and may be located in a required yard,
except as otherwise provided in Section 5.06, provided that such entranceway
structures comply with all codes and ordinances of the City, are approved by
the Zoning Administrator and have a permit issued therefore.



   (k)   Trees in the Right-of-Way.  All trees proposed to be located
within the public right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Livingston
County Road Commission and/or Michigan Department of Transportation, and
shall prohibit the planting of the following tree species:



   Silver Maple         Tree of Heaven   Northern
Catalpa      Poplar



   American Elm         Box Elder      Norway
Maple      Willow



   Eastern Red Cedar      Chinese Elm      Siberian Elm



Additionally, all trees planted in the right-of-way shall comply with Section
5.06, visibility requirements are provided in this Zoning Ordinance.



   (l)   Minimum Size and Spacing Requirements.  Where landscaping is
required, the following schedule sets forth minimum size and spacing
requirements.



 




 

Minimum Size Allowable

 

Recommended On-Center Spacing (in feet)




Height

 

Caliper




TREES

 

5' - 6'

 

3' - 4'

 

2' - 3'

 

18" - 2'

 

2"

 

2.5"

 

30

 

25

 

15

 

10





Evergreen Trees:
 



   Fir
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Spruce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Pine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Hemlock
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Douglas Fir
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 




 

Minimum Size Allowable

 

Recommended On-Center Spacing (in feet)




Height

 

Caliper




TREES

 

5' - 6'

 

3' - 4'

 

2' - 3'

 

18" - 2'

 

2"

 

2.5"

 

30

 

25

 

15

 

10





Narrow Evergreen Trees:
 



   Red Cedar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Arborvitae
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Juniper (selected varieties)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Large Deciduous Trees:
 



   Oak
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Maple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Beech
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Linden
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Ash
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Ginko (male only)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Honeylocust (seedless, thornless)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Birch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Sycamore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Small Deciduous Trees:
 



   Flowering Dogwood (disease resistant)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Flowering Cherry, Plum, Pear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Hawthorn (thornless)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Redbud
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Magnolia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 




 

Minimum Size Allowable

 

Recommended On-Center Spacing (in feet)




Height

 

Caliper




TREES

 

5' - 6'

 

3' - 4'

 

2' - 3'

 

18" - 2'

 

2"

 

2.5"

 

30

 

25

 

15

 

10





Small Deciduous Trees:
 



   Flowering Crabapple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Mountain Ash
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Hornbeam
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Russian Olive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 




 

Minimum Size Allowable

 

Recommended On-Center (in feet)




Height

 

Spread




SHRUBS

 

5' - 6'

 

3' - 4'

 

2' - 3'

 

18" - 2'

 

18" - 2'

 

6'

 

5' - 6'

 

5'

 

>4'





Large Evergreen Shrubs:
 



   Irish Yew
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Hicks Yew
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Upright Yew
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Spreading Yew
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Pfitzer Juniper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Savin Juniper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Mugho Pine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Small Evergreen Shrubs:
 



   Brown's Ward's Sebion Yew
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Dwarf Spreading Yew
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Dwarf Mugho Pine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Euonymus varieties
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 




 

Minimum Size Allowable

 

Recommended On-Center (in feet)




Height

 

Spread




SHRUBS

 

5' - 6'

 

3' - 4'

 

2' - 3'

 

18" - 2'

 

18" - 2'

 

6'

 

5' - 6'

 

5'

 

>4'





Large Deciduous Shrubs:
 



   Honeysuckle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Lilac
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Border Privet (hedge planting)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Sumac
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Buckhorn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Pyracantha
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Weigela
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Flowering Quince
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Barberry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Cotoneaster (Peking & Spreading)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Sargent Crabapple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Dogwood (Red Osier & Gray)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Euonymus varieties
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Vibernum varieties
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Tall Hedge (hedge planting)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Small Deciduous Shrubs:
 



   Dwarf Winged
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Regal Privet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Fragrant Sumac
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Japanese Quince
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Cotoneaster (Rockspray)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Potentilla
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



• Section 5.11  Fences and Walls.



   A.   Residential Through and Interior Lots. A fence or wall not more
than six (6) feet in height may be constructed in a required rear or side
yard, and a fence or wall not more than thirty-six (36) inches in height may
be constructed in the required front yard (e.g. along the property line). For
buildings existing within the required front setback, the thirty-six (36)
inch height restriction shall be in line with the adjacent house farthest
from the front property line. However, the posts or columns associated with a
thirty-six (36) inch fence may be forty-eight (48) inches tall.



   B.   Residential Corner Lots. A fence or wall shall be subject to
the height requirements of Section 5.06, which details the clear space
requirements for visibility at the intersection. Additionally, a fence or
wall located within the addressed side of the front yard and outside of the
clear space may be not more than thirty-six (36) inches in height while along
the nonaddressed required front yard the fence or wall may be forty-eight
(48) inches in height. For buildings existing within the required front
setback, the height restrictions shall be in line with the adjacent house
farthest from the front property line. Fences along the rear yard may be six
(6) feet in height as noted for residential through and interior lots.



   C.   Nonresidential Lots. A fence or wall not more than six (6) feet
in height may be constructed in a required rear or side yard, except as
permitted elsewhere in this Chapter. For buildings existing within the
required front setback, the height restrictions shall be in line with the
front line of the existing building.



   D.   Exceptions. Municipal or other governmental uses are exempt
from the fence and wall restrictions.



• Section 5.12  EssentialServices.



   Essential services are permitted as authorized and regulated by law and
other ordinances of the City, it being the intention of this section to
exempt such essential services from the application of this Zoning Ordinance.



• Section 5.13  Outdoor Storage of Commercial/Industrial Equipment and
Vehicles.



   (a)   The outdoor storage of commercial/industrial equipment and
vehicles, when not intended for resale, is only permitted within the I-1,
Light Industrial and I-2, General Industrial zoning districts. In all other
districts, the storage of equipment and vehicles, when not intended for
resale shall be within a fully enclosed structure.



   (b)   All areas intended for outdoor storage shall be designated as
such on the site plan.



   (c)   The designated outdoor storage area shall be screened from
view by no less than an eight (8) foot fence or solid wall and/or a double
staggered row of eight (8) foot tall evergreens planted to ensure an 80%
opacity.



   (d)   No equipment and/or vehicles shall be visible from the
adjacent property and/or roadway.



   (e)   Semi-trailers and other similar vehicles may not be used as
temporary storage facilities unless associated with a freight terminal,
trucking/cartage facility, and/or truck and industrial equipment storage
yards for which they may remain on-site for no more than seven (7)
consecutive days. All such vehicles shall remain operable and licensed during
the time they remain on the property.



   (f)   All outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a hard surface
and curbed to ensure adequate containment in the event a contaminant spills
while stored on site.



   (g)   No outdoor storage shall be permitted within the front yard
and shall be setback no less than fifty (50) feet from any non-industrial
property line and from all perimeter roadways.



   (h)   No less than one (1) acre of land shall be required to operate
all such uses.



   (i)   When intended as a temporary building and/or use, the
provisions of Section 5.07 shall apply.



• Section 5.14  Residential Occupancy.



   (1)   Intent.  This section is intended to reasonably regulate the
number of persons who can live in a residential dwelling unit. The City finds
that occupancy limits are needed to provide density control; preserve and
enhance residential neighborhoods as stable, quiet places for citizens to
live and raise children; protect safety and welfare; and maintain property
values. Such limits are also needed to ensure that there are adequate public
and private facilities including adequate offstreet parking, utilities, and
adequate lot size to accommodate the residents of each dwelling unit without
impairing the character of the neighborhood. The City also finds there are a
number of residential living arrangements other than the traditional
biological family arrangement. This section is intended also to accommodate
those alternative living arrangements.



   (2)   A dwelling unit may not be occupied by more persons than 1 of
the following family living arrangements:



      (a)   A family.



      (b)   A domestic unit living as a single housekeeping unit
which has received either administrative approval from the Zoning
Administrator (domestic units with two or fewer members) or a Special Land
Use Permit pursuant to Section 3.03.



   (3)   In addition to the standards of Section 3.03, a special land
use permit for a domestic unit with three or more occupants is subject to the
following standards and regulations:



      (a)   It must meet the definition of Domestic Unit in Section
2.02.



      (b)   Two offstreet parking spaces must be provided. 
Additional parking spaces may be required by the Planning Commission if any
of the following conditions are met:



         i.   Street parking available for visitor parking is
limited.



         ii.   The petitioner intends to park more than 2
vehicles regularly on the site and there is limited area available for tandem
parking in a driveway.  In order for the Planning Commission to determine if
adequate parking will be provided, the petitioner must submit a plan
indicating the location of proposed offstreet parking and an analysis of
public parking provided within a 300-foot radius of the parcel.



      (c)   The permit shall apply only to the domestic unit which
obtained the permit and shall be limited to the number of persons specified
in the permit.



      (d)   There is a contact person who will act as head of
household in relating to the City.



   (4)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the
standards of this section if it is reasonably necessary to give a handicapped
person (as defined in 42 USC Section 3602) equal opportunity to use and enjoy
a dwelling.



   (5)   The occupancy limits of this section do not apply to rooming
or boarding houses, fraternity or sorority houses, student cooperatives,
emergency shelters, or convalescent homes.



• Section 5.15  Garage Sales.



   (1)   Garage sales are permitted on all residentially zoned property
in the City for homeowners or tenants to sell household items. General
retailers and resellers are not permitted to operate under the garage sale
provisions.



   (2)   No more than three (3) garage sales are permitted in any
calendar year and seven (7) days must pass between each consecutive sale.



   (3)   Sales are permitted for no more than four consecutive days
between the hours of 8 am and 6 pm.



   (4)   Sale items cannot be stored outside overnight prior to the
start of the sale and must be moved inside of a structure upon the completion
of a sale.



   (5)   During the sale, precautions must be taken to prevent items
from blowing onto neighboring properties.



   (6)   Motor vehicles, alcohol, and food items are prohibited to be
sold through garage sales.



• Section 5.16  Residential Units in Mixed Use Buildings.



   (1)   First Floor Uses. Due to the potential for incompatibilities
of use when a residential dwelling unit is located on the first floor of a
building in a non-residential area, certain criteria must be satisfied as
part of the special land use request. The criteria associated with a first
floor residential use include the following:



      A.   The front facade of the building shall be designed to be
compatible with the adjacent structures when located in a predominantly
nonresidential area.



      B.   Only one driveway will be permitted for the structure
unless located on a corner lot.



      C.   The required parking shall be provided on-site and
located within the rear of the property.



      D.   All such containers shall be located within an enclosure
situated within the rear of the property.



      E.   A residential use shall not occupy more than 50% of the
gross first floor area.



   (2)   Upper Floor Uses. A residential use located above a first
floor office or commercial use is permitted through the special land use
process, and subject to the requirements of subsection (1) A through D above.



   (3)   Basement Uses. Residential uses shall not be permitted as a
basement use in a mixed-use building.



ARTICLE 6
SPECIFIC USE PROVISIONS



• Section 6.01  Intent.



   The intent of this Article is to provide for those regulations that are
applied to special land uses as identified in Article 4.



• Section 6.02  Child and Adult Day-Care Facilities.



   (a)   Familyday-carehomes serving six (6) or fewer children shall be
considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all
residential districts.  The family day-care home shall receive minor
children for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24)
hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children
related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
Such facilities also include homes that give care to an unrelated minor child
for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.



   (b)   Child group day-care homes with greater than six (6) children
are subject to the following:



      (1)   The proposed use of the residence for group day-care
shall not change the essential character of the surrounding residential area,
and shall not create a nuisance of the surrounding residential area, and
shall not create a nuisance relating to vehicular parking, noise, or
additional congestion in excess of residential uses in the district.



      (2)   There shall be an outdoor play area of at least five
hundred (500) square feet provided on the premises.  Said play area shall
not be located within the front yard.  This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Commission if a public play area is within five hundred (500) feet
of the subject parcel.



      (3)   All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a fence that
is designed to discourage climbing, and is at least four (4) feet in height,
but no higher than six (6) feet.



      (4)   The hours of operation do not exceed sixteen (16) hours
within a twenty-four (24) hour period.  Activity between the hours of 10:00
PM and 6:00 AM shall be limited so that the drop-off and pick-up of children
is not disruptive to neighboring residents.



      (5)   Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be
maintained.



      (6)   The granting of the special land use application shall
not impair the health, safety, welfare, or reasonable enjoyment of adjacent
or nearby residential properties.



   (c)   Child day-care centers, are subject to the following
conditions:



      (1)   The property is maintained in a manner that is
consistent with the character of the area.



      (2)   A separate drop-off and pick-up area shall be provided
adjacent to the main building entrance, located off a public street and the
parking access lane, and shall be of sufficient size so as to not create
congestion on the site or within a public roadway.



      (3)   There shall be an on-site outdoor play area of the
greater of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or seventy-five (75)
square feet for each child.  Said play area shall not be located within the
front yard.  This requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission if a
public play area is available within five hundred (500) feet from the subject
parcel.



      (4)   All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a fence that
is designed to discourage climbing and is at least four (4) feet in height,
but no higher than six (6) feet.



      (5)   For each child, a center shall have a minimum of fifty
(50) square feet of indoor activity space for use by, and accessible to, the
child, exclusive of all of the following: hallways, storage areas and
cloakrooms, kitchens and reception and office areas.



      (6)   Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be
maintained.



   (d)   Adult day-care home with greater than six (6) adults is
subject to the following:



      (1)   The proposed use of the residence for group day-care
shall not change the essential character of the surrounding residential area,
and shall not create a nuisance in fact or law relating to vehicular parking,
noise, or additional congestion in excess of residential uses in the district.



      (2)   Where outdoor areas are provided, they shall be enclosed
by a fence that is at least four (4) feet in height, but no higher than six
(6) feet.



      (3)   The hours of operation do not exceed sixteen (16) hours
within a twenty-four (24) hour period.  Activity between the hours of 10:00
PM and 6:00 AM shall be limited so that the drop-off and pick-up is not
disruptive to neighboring residents.



      (4)   Appropriate license with the State of Michigan shall be
maintained.



   (e)   Adult day-carecenters are subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The property is maintained in a manner that is
consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



      (2)   A separate drop-off and pick-up area shall be provided
adjacent to the main building entrance, located off a public street and the
parking access lane, and shall be of sufficient size so as to not create
congestion on the site or within a public roadway.



      (3)   Where outdoor activity areas are provided, they shall be
enclosed by a fence that is at least four (4) feet in height but no higher
than six (6) feet.



• Section 6.03  Housing for the Elderly and Nursing Homes/Convalescent
Centers.



   (a)   Housing for the elderly shall comply with the following
conditions: 



      (1)   All housing for the elderly shall provide for the
following:



         A.   Independent Living for the Elderly.  Dwellings may
be provided for as one-family detached, two-family or multiple family
units.  The minimum site area requirements for purpose of calculating
density shall be as follows:



DwellingUnit Size         Site Area/Unit (sq. ft.)



Efficiency/One Bedroom         2,000



Two Bedroom               4,000



Each additional bedroom         500



         B.   Assisted Living for the Elderly.  Where such
facilities contain individual dwelling units with kitchen facilities, the
density requirements set forth in Section 6.03(a) shall apply.  Where
facilities do not contain kitchen facilities within individual dwelling
units, the site area per bed shall be two hundred (200) square feet.



         C.   Both independent and assisted living facilities
shall be contained within a building which does not exceed two hundred and
fifty (250) feet in overall length, measured along the front line of
connecting units, inclusive of any architectural features which are attached
to or connect the parts of the building together.  The Planning Commission
may permit buildings of greater length when it can be demonstrated that
architectural design and natural and topographic features ensure that the
building is in scale with the site and surrounding areas.



         D.   Building setbacks shall comply with the following:



            i.   Perimeter setbacks shall be no less than
seventy-five (75) feet from the front property line and fifty (50) feet from
all other property lines.



            ii.   Internal setbacks for one and two-family
dwellings located on an individual lot shall be as follows:



Front                  25 feet



Rear                  35 feet



Least Side               7.5 feet



Total Side/Between Buildings         20 feet



            iii.   Internal setbacks for one and two-family
dwellings not located on an individual lot shall be as follows:



                  Multiple   One/Two-



                  Family      Family



Internal Drives/Streets         25      25



Side/Side Orientation            30      20



Side/Front, Side/Rear            30      35



Front/Front, Front/Rear, Rear/Rear      50      50



         E.   Minimum Floor Area.  Each dwelling unit shall
comply with the following minimum floorarea requirements, excluding basements:



Dwelling Type                  Floor Area (sq. ft.)



               Assisted Living Unit   Independent Living
Unit



Efficiency            400         500



One Bedroom            550         650



Two Bedroom            700         800



Additional bedroom         150 per      150 per



         F.   BuildingHeight.  The maximum height of a building
is two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.  The Planning Commission may at
its discretion, permit up to three (3) stories only if the following
conditions are met:



            i.   The site contains significant natural
resources such as slopes or wetlands.



            ii.   No increase in density shall be allowed.



            iii.   Approval by the Fire Department is required.



            iv.   An increased front, rear and side yard
setback distance and spacing requirements between buildings.  The extent of
increase, if any, for each setback measurement shall be established as part
of the approval of the Planning Commission.



            v.   In no event shall the maximum height of any
such building exceed thirty-five (35) feet as calculated in accordance with
the terms of this Ordinance.



         G.   Open Space/Recreation.  Open space and recreation
shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:



            i.   Total open space required shall be a minimum
of fifteen (15) percent of the site.



            ii.   Recreation facilities shall be appropriate
and designed to meet the needs of the resident population.  Active
recreation shall be located conveniently in relation to the majority of
dwellingunits intended to be served.



         H.   AccessoryUses.  Support uses offered solely to
residents may be permitted provided they are contained within the principal
building and are strictly accessory to the principal use as an elderly
residential facility.  Such support may include: congregate dining; health
care; personal services; and social, recreational, and educational facilities
and programs.



   (b)   Nursing homes and convalescent centers shall comply with the
following conditions: 



      (1)   Minimum lot size shall be based upon no less than two
thousand (2,000) square feet per bed.



      (2)   The site shall be so developed as to create a
land-to-building ratio on the lot or parcel whereby for each bed in the
nursing homes/convalescent centers there shall be provided not less than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of open space.  Such space shall
provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading
space, yard requirements, employee facilities and any space required for
accessory uses.  The one thousand five hundred (1,500) square foot
requirement is over and above the building coverage area requirement. 



      (3)   No building shall be closer than forty (40) feet from a
property line.



      (4)   The lot location shall be such that at least one (1)
property line abuts a collectorstreet, secondary thoroughfare, or primary
thoroughfare.  More than one (1) point of vehicle ingress and egress shall
be provided directly from said thoroughfare.



      (5)   Area for access of emergency vehicles shall be provided
for each primary building entrance.



• Section 6.04  Child and Adult Foster Care Facilities.



   (a)   Intent.  It is the intent of this section to establish
standards for child and adult foster care facilities that will insure
compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the
neighborhood.



   (b)   Child Foster Care Facilities. 



      (1)   Foster family homes serving less than four (4) children
shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all
residential districts.  Such facilities shall provide no less than forty
(40) square feet of sleeping room per child with all other requirements
provided in accordance with the applicable State standards.



      (2)   Foster family group homes serving between four (4) and
eight (8) children under the age of seventeen (17), no more than two (2) of
which may be under the age of one (1), shall be considered as a special land
use subject to the requirements and standards of Section 3.03 and the
following standards:



         A.   The proposed use of the residence for foster family
care shall not change the essential character of the surrounding residential
area, and shall not create a nuisance of the surrounding residential area,
and shall not create a nuisance relating to vehicular parking, noise, or
additional congestion in excess of residential uses in the district.



         B.   There shall be an outdoor play area of at least one
thousand (1,000) square feet provided on the premises.  Said play area shall
not be located within the front yard.  This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Commission if a public play area is available within five hundred
(500) feet from the subject parcel.



         C.   All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a fence
that is designed to discourage climbing, and is at least four (4) feet in
height, but no higher than six (6) feet.



         D.   Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan
shall be maintained.



   (c)   Adult Foster Care Facilities. 



      (1)   Application of Regulations.



         A.   A State licensed adult foster caresmallgrouphome
serving six (6) persons or less and adult foster care family home shall be
considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all
residential districts.



         B.   The City may, by issuance of a special land use
permit, authorize the establishment of adult foster care small group homes
serving more than six (6) persons and adult foster care large group homes.



         C.   The City may, by issuance of a special use permit,
authorize the establishment of a adult foster care congregate facility.



      (2)   Adult foster care small group homes serving between
seven (7) and twelve (12) adults and adult foster care large group homes
serving between thirteen (13) and twenty (20) adults, shall be considered as
a special land use subject to the requirements and standards of Section 3.03
and the following additional standards:



         A.   The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there
is a minimum site area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per
adult, excluding employees and/or care givers.



         B.   The property is maintained in a manner that is
consistent with the character of the neighborhood.



         C.   Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan
shall be maintained.



      (3)   Adult foster care congregate facilities shall be
considered as a special land use subject to the requirements and standards of
Section 3.03 and the following standards:



         A.   The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lotarea
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there
is a minimum site area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per
adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers.



         B.   Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan
shall be maintained.



• Section 6.05  Self-Storage Facilities.



   Self-storage facilities are subject to the following conditions:



   (a)   No activity other than rental of storage units shall be
allowed.  No commercial, retail, industrial or other business use shall be
operated from the facility.  Examples of prohibited activities (commercial
or personal) include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Auctions, retail sales and/or miscellaneous or garage
sales.



      (2)   The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, furniture, machinery or other
similar property.



      (3)   The operation of power tools, painting equipment,
compressors, welding equipment or similar tools and equipment.



      (4)   The storage of any toxic, explosive, corrosive,
flammable or hazardous material is prohibited.  Fuel tanks on any motor
vehicle, boat, lawn mower or similar property will be drained or removed
prior to storage.  Batteries will be removed from vehicles before storage
and shall not be stored within units under any circumstances.



      (5)   The storage of goods needed or used on a regular basis
as part of a business and/or the storage of perishable materials, unless
otherwise permitted by the Planning Commission as a special land use subject
to the standards of this subsection and Section 3.03.



   (b)   All storage shall be contained within a building.



   (c)   No structure may exceed one (1) story in height.



   (d)   Exterior walls of all storage units that abut a residentially
zoned area shall be of masonry construction.



   (e)   The total lot coverage by structures shall be limited to fifty
(50) percent of the total lot area.



   (f)   Drives and loading areas shall be designed as follows:



      (1)   The distance between storage unit buildings shall be a
minimum of twenty-four (24) feet.



      (2)   All storage units must be accessible by a safe circular
drive clearly marked to distinguish direction.  Furthermore, the applicant
must demonstrate that fire and emergency vehicles and other vehicles that
would typically utilize such a facility can access and circulate through the
site adequately.  Sufficient area and turning radii shall be provided
between and at the end of storage units to accommodate large fire vehicles
and trucks requiring access to and circulation within the site.



   (g)   Where a self-storage facility abuts a residentially zoned or
used property, all buildings and drives for ingress to and egress from the
facility shall have a setback of a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the
property line.  The setback area shall be landscaped and meet the minimum
screening requirements set forth in Section 5.10.



• Section 6.06  Outdoor Sales of Automobile or Vehicles.



   (a)   Outdoor sales of new and used automobiles shall be subject to
the following requirements:



      (1)   Separation shall be made between the internal pedestrian
sidewalk and internal vehicular parking and maneuvering areas with the use of
curbs, wheel stops, or traffic islands.



      (2)   All activities related to vehicle washing, service and
repair equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building. All such
activities shall only be permitted on vehicles yet to be sold.



      (3)   Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and
volume of vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner which is
compatible with uses located adjacent to and across from the site.



      (4)   Inoperative or unlicensed vehicles or discarded or
salvaged materials shall not be stored outside.



      (5)   Vehicle sales shall not be permitted on the premises of
any automobile service station, automotive wash or automobile or vehicle
repair garage.



      (6)   No banners or flags are permitted except as permitted in
Article 7, Section 7.08.



      (7)   A landscaped greenbelt measuring a minimum of twenty
(20) feet in width shall be provided along all parcel perimeters.  No
vehicles or merchandise shall be displayed within the required greenbelt.



      (8)   There shall be no broadcast of continuous music and/or
announcements over any loudspeaker or public address system.



      (9)   The automobile sales agency must be located on a site
having frontage of no less than two hundred and fifty (250) contiguous feet
and area of no less than one (1) acre.



      (10)   All such uses shall be screened along the public road
frontage through the use of a decorative three (3) foot wall and/or berm.
These provisions are in addition to the greenbelt planting requirements in
Section 5.10.



   (b)   Outdoor sales of new and used boats, manufactured homes,
recreational equipment, commercial lawn care, construction machinery and
other similar vehicles, shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Separation shall be made between the internal pedestrian
sidewalk and internal vehicular parking and maneuvering areas with the use of
curbs, wheel stops, or traffic islands.



      (2)   No vehicle washing, service and/or repair may be
completed on site.



      (3)   Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and
volume of vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner which is
compatible with uses located adjacent to and across from the site.



      (4)   Inoperative equipment, discarded or salvaged materials
shall not be stored on site.



      (5)   No banners or flags are permitted except as permitted in
Article 7, Section 7.08.



      (6)   A landscaped greenbelt measuring a minimum of thirty
(30) feet in width shall be provided along all non-road perimeters while
twenty (20) foot greenbelt is required along all road perimeters. No vehicles
or merchandise shall be displayed within the required greenbelt.



      (7)   There shall be no broadcast of continuous music and/or
announcements over any loudspeaker or public address system.



      (8)   The sales agency must be located on a site having
frontage of no less than two hundred fifty (250) contiguous feet and area of
no less than one and a half (1.5) acres.



      (9)   All such uses shall be screened along the public road
frontage through the use of a decorative three (3) foot wall and/or berm,
along with no less than six (6) foot tall large species evergreen (i.e.,
spruce, fir, pine) planted in a staggered pattern no less than fifteen (15)
feet on center.



• Section 6.07  Public, Parochial and Private Schools.



   Public, parochial and private schools are subject to the following
conditions:



   (a)   Buildings of greater than the maximum permitted height of the
zoning district may be allowed, provided that front, side and rearyards are
increased above the minimum requirements by one (1) foot for each foot of
building that exceeds the maximum height allowed.



   (b)   The proposed site shall have direct access and egress only to
or from an existing or planned major thoroughfare or collectorstreet.



   (c)   All such buildings located within a subdivision shall be
designed to be compatibility with the character of the neighborhood.



   (d)   Where school grounds adjoin public parks, playgrounds or
playfields, the minimum area and width requirements may be reduced by no more
than half provided the public park, playground or playfield is an adjoining
parcel and not separated by a public street.



   (e)   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate
both staff, students and visitors to ensure that no on-street parking is
required.  Therefore a portion of the site shall be dedicated as a parking
easement in the event that insufficient spaces are provided on-site.



   (f)   All sites shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 5.10
and screened from adjoining residential uses.



   (g)   Additional conditions for private and parochial schools
located in HL-1 District:



      (1)   The school shall not generate the need for more parking
than an office of similar size based on square feet of floor area.



      (2)   The school shall not generate more trips (based on the
International Traffic Engineer's trip generation standards) than a similarly
sized office use.



      (3)   A pick up and drop off area shall be provided adjacent
to the main entrance of sufficient size and with sufficient stacking so to
avoid creating congestion on any adjacent public street.



      (4)   Vehicular access to the school shall be provided solely
from Grand River or Michigan Ave.



      (5)   Recreation facilities, such as playgrounds or
playfields, shall be screened from neighboring residential properties in
accordance with Sec. 5.10(d).



      (6)   All outdoor activities shall be held no earlier than 7am
and no later than 10pm.



      (7)   Exterior lighting shall meet the standards set forth in
Sec. 8.05.



• Section 6.08  Municipal Office Buildings.



   Municipal office buildings are subject to the following conditions:



   (a)   All structures shall be in character with the neighborhood.



   (b)   Direct access and egress only to and from an existing or
planned major thoroughfare or collectorstreet.



• Section 6.09  Churches and Other Incidental Facilities.



   Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto are subject
to the following conditions:



   (a)   Direct access and egress only to and from an existing or
planned major thoroughfare or collectorstreet.



   (b)   Existing churches and church lands purchased before the
effective date of this Ordinance and not meeting these requirements shall not
be prevented from constructing and/or expanding their facilities and, for the
purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, shall not be considered nonconforming. 



   (c)   The principal buildings on the site shall be setback from
abutting properties zoned for residential use not less than twenty-five (25)
feet. 



   (d)   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in the
zoning district may be allowed, provided that front, side and rearyards are
increased above the minimum requirements by one (1) foot for each foot of
building that exceeds the maximum height allowed.



• Section 6.10  Utilities and Public Service Buildings and Uses.



   All utility and public service buildings and uses (excluding
transformers, phone and cable boxes) are subject to the following conditions:



   (a)   Storage yards are permitted provided they are screened in
accordance with Section 5.10.



   (b)   All buildings or structures shall comply with the setback
provisions identified in the applicable zoning district.



• Section 6.11  Golf Courses, Country Clubs, Recreation Centers and Swim
Clubs.



   Golf courses, country clubs, recreation centers and swim clubs, are
subject to the following conditions:



   (a)   All ingress to and egress from such site shall be directly by
an existing or planned major thoroughfare or collector street.



   (b)   Front, side and rear yards shall be at least eighty (80) feet
wide, except on those sides adjacent to residential districts, when all
structures shall be setback no less than two hundred (200) feet from the lot
line of the adjacent residential land. 



   (c)   Golf courses may include accessory clubhouses, driving ranges,
pro shops and maintenance buildings, while country clubs, recreation centers
and swim clubs may include accessory clubhouses and maintenance buildings,
provided all such buildings shall not exceed one (1) story in height.



   (d)   All pool areas shall be screened in accordance with the
Building Code.



   (e)   All outdoor sound systems shall be specifically reviewed by
the Planning Commission to ensure that it does not impact adjacent land
uses.  In no case shall such speakers be directed towards residentially
zoned or used property.



   (f)   The Planning Commission may impose additional restriction or
requirement so as to ensure that contiguous residential areas will be
adequately protected.



• Section 6.12  Public and Private Colleges, Universities and Other Such
Institutions of Higher Learning.



   All colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher
learning, public and private, are subject to the following conditions: 



   (a)   All sites shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 5.10
and screened from adjacent residential uses.



   (b)   The proposed site shall have a minimum of two hundred (200)
feet of frontage on an existing or planned major thoroughfare.  All ingress
and egress from such site shall be directly from an existing or planned major
thoroughfare. 



   (c)   All structures shall be setback no less than seventy-five (75)
feet from the property line, but no less than two hundred (200) feet from the
lot line of any adjacent residential land.



   (d)   Buildings of greater than the maximum permitted height of the
zoning district may be allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are
increased above the minimum requirements by one (1) foot for each foot of
building that exceeds the maximum height allowed.



• Section 6.13  Cemeteries.



   Cemeteries are subject to the following conditions: 



   (a)   A cemetery shall consist of no less than five (5) acres of
land.



   (b)   Accessory buildings, which includes but is not limited to
mausoleums, crematoriums, columbariums, maintenance buildings and care
tenders homes, shall be setback no less than three hundred (300) feet from
all perimeter parcel lines.



   (c)   Grave sites shall be setback no less than fifty (50) feet from
all perimeter parcel lines.



   (d)   All access shall be provided only from an existing or planned
major thoroughfare or collectorstreet. 



• Section 6.14  Bed and Breakfast Accommodations.



   Bed and breakfast accommodations are subject to the following
conditions:



   (a)   Each premises must be occupied and operated by its owner.



   (b)   The proposed use shall not cause a nuisance to adjoining
residences due to noise, odor, lighting or traffic.



   (c)   No bed and breakfast sleeping room shall be permitted that
does not comply with the Building Code.



   (d)   There shall be no separate cooking facilities used for bed and
breakfast stay.



   (e)   Bed and breakfast bedrooms shall be a minimum of one hundred
and twenty (120) square feet for the first two (2) occupants and an
additional thirty (30) square feet for each additional occupant.



   (f)   The stay of bed and breakfast occupants shall be no more than
fourteen (14) consecutive days and not more than thirty (30) days in any one
(1) calendar year.



   (g)   The operator of each facility shall keep a list of the names
of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast, which list shall be
available for inspection by the Building Inspector.



   (h)   One (1) bathroom for every three (3) sleeping rooms shall be
provided, with a minimum of two (2) bathrooms.



   (i)   Every bed and breakfast bedroom shall contain a functional
smoke detector, and an approved fire extinguisher shall be located on each
floor on which such sleeping room is located.



   (j)   The Planning Commission may increase or decrease required
parking in order to meet the purposes of this section and protect the public
health and safety.



• Section 6.15  GeneralHospitals.



   Generalhospitals are subject to the following conditions:



   (a)   Such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of
at least ten (10) acres in area.



   (b)   All access to and egress from the site shall be through a
major thoroughfare or street.



   (c)   The minimum distance of any building from a residentially
zoned or occupied parcel shall be one hundred (100) feet for front, rear and
side yards, including parcels separated by a public street. 



   (d)   Mobile units, ambulances and delivery areas shall be located
in the side and rear yards and shall be screened in accordance with Section
5.08 of this Zoning Ordinance.



   (e)   All parking areas of greater than five (5) spaces shall be
setback from residential zoned or occupied parcel by no less than twenty-five
(25) feet for rear and side yards.



   (f)   The location of all helipads shall be subject to Planning
Commission review, based upon the applicant demonstrating the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The location will be located to provide the least
possible disturbance to adjacent property owners.



      (2)   The location will not be a safety hazard due to physical
and natural features within the immediate area.



• Section 6.16  Motels and Hotels.



   Motels and hotels are subject to the following conditions:



   (a)   A site shall contain no less than two (2) acres of land, and
no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area shall be available
per guest unit.



   (b)   Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred and fifty
(250) square feet of heated/air-conditioned floor area per guest unit.



   (c)   All buildings shall be setback no less than fifty (50) feet
from all perimeter parcel lines, while one hundred (100) feet is required
when adjacent to a residential zoning district.



   (d)   Accessoryuses may include, but not be limited to meeting
rooms, ballrooms, restaurants, bars, recreational uses, and gift shops.



   (e)   Cooking and/or kitchen facilities may be provided in new
motels upon demonstration by the applicant that the provisions of all
applicable fire prevention and Building Code requirements have been satisfied.



   (f)   No existing motel units shall be converted for use of cooking
and/or a kitchen facilities unless the owner first obtains a building permit,
complies with all applicable fire prevention and buildingcodes and obtains a
certificate of occupancy for each unit prior to renting it.



• Section 6.17  Automobile Filling Stations, Automobile Repair Garages,
Automobile Service Stations, Automobile Washes, and Automobile Dealerships.



   Automobile filling stations, repair garages, service stations, and
washes shall comply with the following conditions:



   (a)   The curb cuts for ingress to and egress from a filling or
service station are not permitted at such locations as will create traffic
hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be not
less than thirty (30) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road
right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. No more than one (1)
curb opening shall be permitted for each fifty (50) feet of frontage or major
fraction thereof along any street. No driveway or curb opening shall be
located nearer than ten (10) feet to any corner or exterior lot line. No
driveway shall be located nearer than thirty (30) feet to any other driveway
serving the site. When considering new applications under this Section, the
Planning Commission may base approval of the Site Plan or Special Land Use on
the removal of curb cuts that are non-compliant with these standards.



   (b)   The minimum lotarea shall be ten thousand (10,000) square
feet, so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are
required to wait.



   (c)   Separation shall be made between the pedestrian sidewalk and
vehicular parking and maneuvering areas with the use of    curbs, wheel
stops, greenbelts or traffic islands.



   (d)   All activities related to vehicle washing, service and repair
equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building located not less than
forty (40) feet from any streetlot line, and not less than ten (10) feet from
any side lot line.



   (e)   Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and volume
of vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner which is
compatible with uses located adjacent to and across from the site.



   (f)   Inoperative or unlicensed vehicles shall not be stored outside
for more than seven (7) days.  Such storage shall not occur in front of the
building.



   (g)   Vehicle sales shall not be permitted on the premises of any
automobilefillingstation, automobilerepair garage, automobile service
station, and automobile wash.



   (h)   All coverings of the service or fillingstation gasoline pumps
shall be no taller than the principal structure and constructed of compatible
materials.  Such canopies shall not be lit internally for signage
purposes.  All proposed lighting shall be fully recessed.



   (i)   Gasoline pumps shall be located not less than twenty (20) feet
from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles do not park
upon or overhang any public sidewalk, street or right-of- way while waiting
for or receiving fuel service.



   (j)   A filling or servicestation shall have no more than eight (8)
gasoline pumps and two (2) enclosed stalls for servicing, lubricating,
greasing and/or washing motor vehicles.  An additional two (2) gasoline
pumps and/or one enclosed stall may be included for each additional two
thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area above the minimum area set forth in
subsection (b).



   (k)   Where the filling or servicestation site abuts any
residentially zoned district, the requirements for protective screening shall
be provided as specified in Section 5.10.  All masonry walls shall be
protected by a fixed curb or barrier to prevent vehicles from contacting the
wall.



   (l)   All exterior lighting, including illuminated signs, shall be
erected and hooded or shielded so as to be deflected away from adjacent and
neighboring property and comply with Section 8.05.



   (m)   All combustible waste and rubbish, including crankcase
drainings, shall be kept in metal receptacles fitted with a tight cover until
removed from the premises.  Sawdust shall not be kept in any gasoline
servicestation or place of storage therein, and sawdust or other combustible
material shall not be used to absorb oil, grease or gasoline.



   (n)   No advertising signs may be placed on-site other than the
permitted maximum wall and/or ground sign area per Article 7.  The
prohibited signs include banners and flags.



• Section 6.18  Outdoor Displays of Materials Intended for Retail Sale or
Rental.



   The outdoor display of products or materials intended for retail sale
or rental may be permitted only in CBD, MXD, B-1 and B-2 Districts, subject
to the following conditions:



   (a)   General Standards.



      (1)   An outdoor display shall be considered as an accessory
use to the principal use conducted on the premises.



      (2)   The exterior of the premises shall be kept clean,
orderly and maintained.



      (3)   The City shall not be held liable or responsible for any
type of damage, theft or personal injury that may occur as a result of an
outdoor display.



      (4)   In the administration of these provisions, the Zoning
Administrator shall be permitted to refer a request to the Planning
Commission for review and approval where site conditions may create
difficulty in adherence to the standards contained herein.



      (5)   For any outdoor display that requires a tent, a Building
Permit shall be required to be obtained prior to installing the tent and the
Fire Marshal shall inspect the tent prior to use.



   (b)   Standards Within CBD Districts.



      (1)   An outdoor display shall be located directly adjacent to
the establishment. An outdoor display that extends beyond the property lines
of the applicant shall require the permission of the affected property owners.



      (2)   If an outdoor display is located on a public sidewalk, a
minimum of five (5) feet of unobstructed, pedestrian access along the
sidewalk shall be maintained.  Sufficient room shall also be provided to
allow car doors to open along the curbside.  An outdoor display on a public
sidewalk shall be confined to normal business hours.



   (c)   Standards Within MXD, B-1 and B-2 Districts.



      (1)   An outdoor display may be located within any required
yard but shall not be located within any public road right-of-way.



      (2)   An outdoor display shall not occupy or obstruct the use
of any fire lane, required off-street parking or landscaped area required to
meet the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.



   (d)   Building Materials, Nursery Stock and Garden Supplies.



      (1)   Outdoor sales areas shall not be located within the
required frontsetback, except for sales of living nursery stock.  Ornamental
displays associated with the sale of nursery stock shall be permitted;
however, in no case shall the outdoor storage or sale of bulk materials, such
as topsoil, mulch or gravel, whether packaged or not, be permitted within the
front yardsetback.



      (2)   Outdoor sale and display areas that abut residentially
zoned or used property shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.10.



• Section 6.19  Seasonal and Transient Display of Products or Materials
Intended for Sale.



   The sale of seasonal items such as Christmas trees, flowers and plants,
pumpkins and other such seasonal items and the sale of any other merchandise
by persons other than the owner or tenant of the premises, shall require a
license from the Howell City Clerk pursuant to Chapter 873 of the Howell City
Code, subject to the following standards and conditions:



   (a)   Transient or seasonal sales may be located within any required
yard provided a ten (10) foot landscaped greenbelt meeting the requirements
of Section 5.10 is provided between any outdoor display and any public road
right-of-way.  Where outdoor displays abut the residentially zoned property,
landscape screening in accordance with Section 5.10 shall also be provided.



   (b)   Transient or seasonal sales shall not occupy or obstruct the
use of any fire lane, required off-street parking or landscaped area required
to meet the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, or create a traffic or
safety hazard.



   (c)   Such sales shall be permitted only in the CBD, B-1 and B-2
Districts.



   (d)   All such sales shall be conducted in a manner so as not to
create a traffic hazard or a nuisance to neighboring properties.



   (e)   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
Article 10 along with adequate ingress and egress to the site.



   (f)   Upon discontinuance of the seasonal use, any temporary
structure shall be removed.



   (g)   Signs shall be temporary and shall comply with the provisions
of Section 7.08.



• Section 6.20  SidewalkCafé Service.



   A sidewalkcafé service operated by a restaurant or other food
establishment that sells food for immediate consumption may be permitted in
the CBD, Central Business District, subject to the following conditions:



   (a)   An application in accordance with Section 3.08 and this
Section shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. 



   (b)   A permit shall remain in effect for a period of one year or
the operation of the café fails to meet the standards contained herein.
Permits may be renewed annually by the City upon written request of the owner
or operator of the sidewalk café.



   (c)   A sidewalkcafé may be located in front of or adjacent to the
establishment.  A sidewalkcafé that extends beyond the property lines of
the applicant shall require the permission of the affected property owners.



   (d)   If a sidewalkcafé is located on a public sidewalk, a minimum
of five (5) feet of unobstructed, pedestrian access along the    sidewalk
shall be maintained.



   (e)   A sidewalkcafé shall be allowed during normal operating hours
of the establishment.



   (f)   The exterior of the premises, including the sidewalks, shall
be kept clean, orderly and maintained or the permit may be revoked.  All
food preparation shall be inside of the premises.



   (g)   The City shall not be held liable or responsible for any type
of damage, theft or personal injury that may occur as a result of a
sidewalkcafé operation.



   (h)   All sidewalkcafes shall comply with applicable regulations of
the County Health Department and the State. 



   (i)   Sidewalk cafes shall be permitted between April 1st and
October 31st.



   (j)   Outside of the permitted dates, all tables, chairs, and
barriers used for a sidewalk café shall be stored indoors.



• Section 6.21  Wireless Communication Facilities.



   (a)   Purpose and Intent.  It is the general purpose and intent of
the City to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing
communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. 
However, it is the further purpose and intent of the City to provide for such
authorization in a manner that will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and
the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at
large.  In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section,
attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing interests.



   Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate
wireless communication services and coverage, it is the further purpose and
intent of this section to:



      (1)   Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for
wirelesscommunicationfacilities and ensure that wireless communication
facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other
land uses, structures and buildings.



      (2)   Establish predetermined districts or zones of the
number, shape, and in the location considered best for the establishment of
wireless communication facilities, subject to applicable standards and
conditions.



      (3)   Recognize that operation of a wireless communication
system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not within
the predetermined districts or zones.



      (4)   Minimize the adverse impacts of technological
obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused
and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner.



      (5)   Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless
communication facilities on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historic
sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of- way.



      (6)   Require all wireless communication facilities to
collocate on an existing tower or provide for no less than three (3)
additional carriers on a new facility.



   (b)   Authorization as a Permitted Use. Subject to the standards and
conditions set forth herein, wireless communication facilities shall be
permitted uses in the following circumstances, and in the following districts:



      (1)   In all zoning districts, a proposal to establish a new
wireless communication facility shall be deemed a permitted use in the
following circumstances:



         A.   An existing structure which will serve as an
attachedwirelesscommunicationfacility within a nonresidential zoning
district, where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the
Planning Commission, proposed to be either materially altered or materially
changed in appearance.



         B.   A proposed collocation upon an attached wireless
communication facility that had been preapproved for such collocation as part
of an earlier approval by the City.



         C.   An existing structure which will serve as an
attached wireless communication facility consisting of a utility pole or
structure located within a right-of-way, where the existing pole is not
proposed to be modified in a manner which, in the discretion of the Planning
Commission, would materially alter the structure.



      (2)   Wireless communication facilities shall also be a
permitted use in the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts.



   (c)   Authorization as a Special Land Use.  If it is demonstrated
by an applicant that a wirelesscommunication facility is required to be
established outside of a district identified in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2)
above, in order to operate such wireless communication facility, may be
permitted elsewhere in the community as a special land use, subject to the
requirements set forth herein, standards set forth in Section 3.03 and the
following:



      (1)   At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall
demonstrate that a location within the areas identified in paragraphs (b)(1)
and (2) above cannot reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity needs of
the applicant.



      (2)   Locations outside of the districts identified in
paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) above, shall be permitted on the following sites,
subject to application of all other standards contained in this section:



         A.   Municipally owned site.



         B.   Other governmentally owned site.



         C.   Public school site.



   (d)   General Regulations Applicable to All Facilities.  All
applications for wireless communication facilities, whether a permitted or
special land use, shall be reviewed, constructed and maintained in accordance
with the following standards and conditions.  In addition, if the facility
is approved, it shall be constructed and maintained with any additional
conditions imposed by the City in its discretion:



      (1)   Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to
neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare.



      (2)   Facilities shall be located and designed to be
harmonious with the surrounding areas.



      (3)   Facilities shall comply with applicable Federal and
State standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions.



      (4)   The following additional standards shall be met:



         A.   The maximum height of the new or modified support
structure and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be
necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant and by other entities
to collocate on the structure.  Applicants shall demonstrate a justification
for the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative
designs that might result in lower heights.



         B.   The accessory building contemplated to enclose
switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory
structures within the respective district.



         C.   The setback of a proposed new support structure
from any residential district and/or any existing or proposed public street
rights-of-way shall be no less than the height of the structure.  Where a
proposed new support structure abuts a parcel of land zoned for a use other
than residential, the minimum setback of the structure from all property
lines shall be equal to one-half the height of the structure.



         D.   Where an existing structure will serve as an
attached wireless communication facility, setbacks of the existing structure
shall not be materially changed or altered, based upon a determination by the
Planning Commission.



         E.   There shall be an unobstructed paved access drive
to the support structure for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection
purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement.  This access
drive shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet in width.



         F.   The division of property for the purpose of
locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning
requirements and conditions are met.



         G.   Where an attached wireless communication facility
is proposed on the roof of a building, any equipment enclosure shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to be architecturally compatible with or
enclosed within the principal building.



         H.   The City shall review and approve the color of the
support structure and all accessorybuildings so as to minimize distraction,
reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance and ensure compatibility
with surroundings.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition.



         I.   The support system shall be constructed in
accordance with all applicable buildingcodes and shall include the submission
of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of
Michigan.  This soils report shall include soil borings and statements
indicating the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use.  The
requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications
Commission and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted.



         J.   A maintenance plan and any applicable maintenance
agreement shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the
proposed facility.  Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term,
continuous maintenance to a reasonable prudent standard.



   (e)   Standards and Conditions Applicable to Special Land Use
Facilities.  Applications for wirelesscommunication facilities under the
special land use requirements shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
and if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
standards and conditions in subsection (d) and the following standards:



      (1)   The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the
proposed facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of one
(1) or more of the following factors:



         A.   Proximity to a major thoroughfare.



         B.   Areas of population concentration.



         C.   Concentrations of commercial, industrial and/or
other businesscenters.



         D.   Areas where signal interference has occurred due to
tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions.



         E.   Topography of the proposed facility location in
relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate.



         F.   Other specifically identified reasons creating
facility need.



      (2)   The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the
collocation requirements of this section.



      (3)   Wireless communication facilities shall be of a design
that is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site,
neighborhood and general area as approved by the City.



   (f)   Application Requirements Applicable to All Facilities.



      (1)   A site plan prepared in accordance with Section 3.04.



      (2)   The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping
plan illustrating screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base,
accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the
plan fencing which is required for protection of the support structure and
security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities.



      (3)   The application shall include a signed certification by
a State of Michigan licensed professional engineer with regard to any
potential structural failures, which certification will be utilized along
with other criteria, such as applicable regulations for the district in
question in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the
structure and other facilities.



      (4)   The application shall include a description of security
to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to
ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer
needed, as provided in subsection (h) below. In this regard, the security
shall be in the form approved by the City Attorney and recordable at the
office of the Register of Deeds establishing a promise of the applicant and
owner of the property to timely remove the facility as required under this
section, with the further provision that the applicant and owner shall be
responsible for the payment of any costs and attorney fees incurred by the
City in securing removal.



      (5)   The application shall include a map showing existing and
known proposed wirelesscommunicationfacilities within the City and further
showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within
areas surrounding the borders of the City which are relevant in terms of
potential collocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed
facility.  If and to the extent the information in question is on file with
the community, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any
proprietary information may be submitted with a request for confidentiality.



      (6)   The application shall include the name, address and
phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other
notice purposes.  This information shall be updated annually by the owner
during all times the facility is on the premises.



      (7)   The applicant shall provide proof of feasibility for
collocation when a new tower is to be constructed.



      (8)   As deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, the
applicant shall pay to have a certified engineer of the City's choosing to
review the proposed wirelesscommunicationfacility plans and application
material.



   (g)   Collocation.



      (1)   Statement of Policy.  It is the policy of the City to
minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless
communication facilities and encourage the use of existing structures.



      (2)   Feasibility of Collocation.  Collocation shall be
deemed to be "feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the
following are met:



         A.   The wireless communication provider entity under
consideration for collocation will undertake to pay market rent or other
market compensation for collocation.



         B.   The site on which collocation is being considered,
taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a
facility, is able to provide structural support.



         C.   The collocation being considered is technologically
reasonable, e.g., the collocation will not result in unreasonable
interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to
the structure, antennas and the like.



         D.   The height of the structure necessary for
collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by
the City, taking into consideration the standards set forth in this section.



      (3)   Requirements for Collocation.



         A.   Approval for the construction and use of a new
wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the
applicant demonstrates that a feasible collocation is not available for the
coverage area and capacity needs.



         B.   All new and modified wireless communication
facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate no less
than three (3) additional collocators.



         C.   If a party who owns or otherwise controls a
facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a
proposed and otherwise feasible collocation, such facility shall thereupon
and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconformingstructure and use and shall not
be altered, expanded or extended in any respect.



   (h)   Removal.



      (1)   The City reserves the right to request evidence of
ongoing operation at any time after the construction of an approved wireless
communication facility.



      (2)   A condition of every approval of a wireless
communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part
of the facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the
following events:



         A.   When the facility has not been used for one hundred
and eighty (180) days or more, for purposes of this section, the removal of
antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations
(transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the
beginning of a period of non-use.



         B.   Six (6) months after new technology is available at
reasonable cost as determined by the City, which permits the operation of the
communication system without the requirement of the support structure.



      (3)   The situation in which removal of a facility is required
may be applied and limited to portions of a facility.



      (4)   Upon the occurrence of one (1) or more of the events
requiring removal, the property owner or persons who had used the facility
shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition
or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the
demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as
reasonably determined by the Building Official and Zoning Administrator.



      (5)   If the required removal of a facility or a portion
thereof has not been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the
applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the
City may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions
thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be
drawn or collected from the security posted at the time application was made
for establishing the facility.



• Section 6.22  Mixed Use District Development Regulations.



   Uses located within the Mixed Use (MXD) District are subject to the
following development procedures and regulations, in addition to standards
set forth above, and shall be applicable to all uses within the District.



   (a)   Review Procedures.  All developments within the MXD District
shall consist of no less than ten (10) net acres unless located within the
Central Business District, and shall be subject to all applicable preliminary
site plan, final site plan and special land use review procedures. 



      (1)   Preliminary.  As part of the preliminary site plan
review phase, the applicant shall submit a concept plan for comment from the
Planning Commission.  The concept plan shall include the following
information:



         A.   Evidence of ownership; location and description of
site; dimensions and area;



         B.   General topography and natural features;



         C.   Scale, north arrow, date of plan;



         D.   Existing zoning and land use of the site and
adjacent parcels; location of existing building, drives and streets on the
site;



         E.   Location, type and land area of each proposed land
use; dwellingunit density per net acre;



         F.   Estimated location, size and uses of open space;



         G.   General form of ownership and maintenance;



         H.   General landscape concept, including existing
features to be maintained;



         I.   General description of existing and proposed
utilities;



         J.   Conceptual road layout;



         K.   Development phases, if applicable; and



         L.   Examples of typical building materials and styles.



      (2)   Final.  Following concept plan review by the Planning
Commission, all developments shall be subject the site plan review
requirements outlined in Section 3.04, Site Plan Review.  Non one- family
and two-familyuses shall also be subject to the requirements outlined in
Section 3.03, Special Land Uses.



   (b)   Building Dimensions, Area Requirements, Density, and
Setbacks.  Requirements of MXD District relating to the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by land use, the maximum
density permitted and minimum yardsetbacks, are contained in Section 4.07,
and detailed below:



      (1)   One-Family Uses.



         A.   Lot Area and Width.  The intent of the MXD
District is to provide a variety of housing styles on a variety of parcel
sizes, not just within the development, but on a per block basis as well. 
Therefore, the lots shall range in size between 5,500 and 7,700 square feet,
and between fifty (50) and seventy (70) feet in width.  The actual mix shall
be approved by the Planning Commission.  Additionally, the area and width of
irregular shaped lots as a result of site limitations, shall be approved by
the Planning Commission.



         B.   Front Yard.  There shall be a front yard of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the front lot line, but
porches may encroach up to eight (8) feet inside of the required
frontsetback.  However, the Planning Commission may consider a modified
setback through the special land use procedures outlined in Section 3.03, and
providing the modification does not result in an increased density.



         C.   Side Yard.  The side yard shall be a minimum of
four (4) feet on one side, with a total of twenty (20) feet for both sides. 
There shall also be no less than twenty (20) feet between homes on abutting
parcels, unless the Building Code requires a greater setback for fire
separation.



         D.   Rear Yards.  There shall be a rear yard setback of
not less than thirty (30) feet, but a garage may encroach fifteen (15) feet
inside of the required setback.



         E.   State Highway Setback.  A fifty (50) foot setback
shall be required for all parcels abutting a State Highway.



         F.   Height Regulations.  No building or structure
shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet.



      (2)   Two-FamilyUses.



         A.   Lot area and Width. No lot shall have a minimum
area of less than 6,600 square feet and a minimum width of no less than sixty
(60) feet.



         B.   Front, Side and Rear Yards. 



            i.   Individual Lots:  All setbacks shall comply
with those for one-family uses. 



            ii.   Regular Condominiums:



               •   Front Yards.  Twenty-five (25) feet
as measured from the frontlotline, but porches may encroach up to eight (8)
feet inside of the required front setback.  However, the Planning Commission
may consider a modified setback through the special land use procedures
outlined in Section 3.03, and providing the modification does not result in
an increased density.



               •   Minimum Distance Between Buildings. 
Twenty (20) feet when side to side, forty (40) feet in all other cases,
unless the Building Code requires a greater setback for fire separation.



         C.   State Highway Setback.  A fifty (50) foot setback
shall be required for all parcels abutting a State Highway.



         D.   Height Regulations.  No building or structure
shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet.



      (3)   Multiple Family Uses.



         A.   Maximum Density.  The intent of the MXD District,
is to provide a variety of housing unit sizes within each development. 
Therefore, the maximum density shall be computed as follows, and shall be
calculated exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either an
interior or adjacent street:



            i.   Efficiency or one (1) bedroom units shall not
exceed ten (10) dwelling units per net acre or 4,356 square feet of site area
for each dwelling unit. 



            ii.   Two (2) bedroomunits shall not exceed eight
(8) dwelling units per net acre or 5,445 square feet of site area for each
dwelling unit.



            iii.   Three (3) bedroomunits shall not exceed six
(6) dwelling units per net acre or 7,260 square feet of site area for each
dwelling unit.



The actual mix shall be approved by the Planning Commission.



         B.   Front Yard.  There shall be a front yard of not
less than ten (10) feet as measured from the front lot line.  However, the
Planning Commission may consider a modified setback providing the
modification does not result in an increased density.



         C.   Side Yard.  The side yard shall be a minimum of
eight (8) feet unless adjacent to a one (1) or two (2) family residential use
for which a minimum of a sixteen (16) foot setback is required. 



         D.   Distance Between Buildings.  The minimum distance
between two (2) multiple family dwelling building shall be twenty-five (25)
feet for a two (2) story building and thirty (30) feet for a three story
building, unless the Building Code requires a greater setback for fire
separation.



         E.   Perimeter Setback.  Up to a one hundred (100) foot
setback shall be required along the perimeter of the development, unless
modified or waived by Planning Commission.



         F.   State Highway Setback.  A fifty (50) foot setback
shall be required for all parcels abutting a State Highway.



         G.   Height Regulations.  No building or structure
shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet.



      (4)   Mixed Use, Commercial (excluding retail), Office, Other
Non-Commercial Uses.



         A.   Front Yard.  There shall be a front yard of not
less than ten (10) feet as measured from the front lot line.  However, the
Planning Commission may consider a modified setback providing the
modification does not result in an increased density.



         B.   Side Yard.  The side yard shall be a minimum of
five (5) feet unless adjacent to a one (1) or two(2) family residential use
for which a minimum of a twenty (20) foot setback is required.



         C.   Distance Between Buildings.  The minimum distance
between two (2) mixed usebuildings which include multiple family dwellings
shall be twenty-five (25) feet for a two (2) storybuilding and thirty (30)
feet for a three (3) storybuilding, unless the BuildingCode requires a
greater setback for fire separation.



         D.   Rear Yards.  There shall be a rear yard setback of
not less than twenty (20) feet, but a garage with access off a rear alley may
be setback a minimum of five (5) feet.



         E.   Perimeter Setback.  A one hundred (100) foot
setback shall be required along the perimeter of the development, unless
modified or waived by Planning Commission.



         F.   State Highway Setback.  A fifty (50) foot setback
shall be required for all parcels abutting a State Highway.



         G.   Height Regulations.  No building or structure
shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet for a single tenant
use, or three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet for a multi-tenant use.



      (5)   Retail Uses. 



         A.   No larger than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square
feet; however, the Planning Commission, at its sole discretion, may consider
retail buildings greater in size, providing the following criteria are
satisfied:



            i.   No more than twenty (20) percent of the
parking is provided in front of the building, the remaining eighty (80)
percent may be divided between the rear and side yards. However, the ratio
may be modified at the sole discretion of the Planning Commission based upon
satisfying at least one (1) of the following criteria:



               a.   A solid wall, landscaping, or a
combination thereof, in excess of the requirements for Section 5.10(d) is
provided around the perimeter of the parking lot. Architectural
features/focal points may be included to complement the landscaping.



               b.   Multiple smaller buildings are provided
adjacent to the perimeter public road to screen the internal parking area.



               c.   A combination of a. and b.



            ii.   The architectural style shall be consistent
with the adjacent structures (including residences) and shall not vary
between the front, rear and side facades, with the exception of the
loading/unloading areas.



            iii.   Horizontal masses shall not exceed a
height:width ratio of 1:3 without substantial variation in massing that
includes a change in height with projecting or recessed elements.



            iv.   No more than two (2) direct access drives
shall be provided from the adjacent arterial or collector street.  Access to
other portions of the building shall be provided via internal and/or service
drives.



            v.   All buildings shall have a roof pitch of no
less than four (4) inches of rise (vertical) to twelve (12) inches of run
(horizontal). However, larger buildings for which this is demonstrated not to
be practical, shall provide an alternate solution to be reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission (i.e. extended parapet, mansard roof, etc.).



            vi.   The exterior of the building shall appear to
be an abundance of individual uses through the inclusion of windows and
varying architectural treatments, while the interior may consist of one (1)
individual use.



   (c)   Minimum FloorArea.  The minimum floor area of dwelling units
shall be as follows:



Type of Dwelling            Total Usable Floor Area (sq. ft.)



One Family                     900



Two Family, per dwelling unit            800



Multiple Family:



   Efficiency unit               450



   One-bedroom unit               600



   Two-bedroom unit               750



   Three bedroom unit               900



   (d)   Open Space Requirement and Computation.



      (1)   Residential Uses. An active and passive recreation/open
space plan shall be submitted to Planning Commission for consideration.  The
plan shall demonstrate that at least fifteen (15) percent of the gross land
area is maintained for recreation/open space amenities which accurately
reflect the intended demographics of the development.



      (2)   All Non-Residential Uses.  Each non-residential use
shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public
spaces by providing at least two (2) of the following: patio/seating area,
pedestrian plaza with benches, transportation center, window shopping
walkway, outdoor playground area, kiosk area, water feature, clock tower or
other such deliberately shaped area, focal feature or amenity that, in the
judgment of the City, adequately enhances such community public spaces.  Any
such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and such
features shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the
principal materials of the building and landscape.  Two (2) adjacent
occupants may provide combined open/public space amenities where the
resulting space is more beneficial to the City due to size and location.



   (e)   Site Access.  Access to pubic roads for both pedestrians and
vehicles shall be controlled in the interest of public safety.  Each
building or group of buildings and its parking or service area, shall be
subject to the following restrictions:



      (1)   Provisions for circulation between adjacent parcels are
required through coordinated or joint parking systems.



      (2)   Driveway placement must be such that loading and
unloading activities will not hinder vehicle ingress or egress.



      (3)   When applicable, the primary access point into a site
may be permitted to be via a rear access drive/alley to be shared by all
adjoining uses.  The drive shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide
within a forty (40) foot easement.



   (f)   Parking/Loading.  All off-street parking areas shall conform
to Article 10 unless a stricter provision is provided below: 



      (1)   Off-street parking for non-residential uses shall be
located predominantly within the side or rearyard areas.  Up to twenty (20)
percent of the off-street parking may be permitted within the frontyards when
abutting a public right-of-way.  All parking areas shall be setback a
minimum of ten (10) feet from any public road right-of-way, a minimum of
fifteen (15) feet from the property line of any residential use, and a
minimum of five (5) feet from the property line of any nonresidential use,
unless the lots contain shared parking areas.



      (2)   All loading areas for non-residential uses shall be
located within rear yard areas.



   (g)   Pedestrian Pathways and Sidewalks.  Vehicular access and
circulation shall be planned to ensure safe pedestrian movement within the
development.  Pedestrian systems shall provide safe, all-weather surface,
efficient, and aesthetically pleasing means of on-site movement and shall be
an integral part of the overall site design concept.  Pedestrian pathway
connections to parking areas, buildings, other amenities and between on-site
and perimeter pedestrian systems shall be planned and installed wherever
feasible.  All paths and sidewalks shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet when
abutting a parking lot, all others shall be five (5) feet in width, and each
shall be constructed of concrete or decorative pavers.  Sidewalks are
required along all roadways.



   (h)   Signage.  All signs permitted within this district shall be
subject to the provisions of Article 7, Signs, unless a stricter provision is
provided below.  The intent of this section is to ensure that signs shall be
compatible in size, design, appearance and material, and subject to the
following requirements and standards. 



      (1)   Billboards are strictly prohibited.



      (2)   No signs shall be attached to exterior glass, nor
contain exposed neon tubing.



      (3)   All signs shall be designed so as to be integral and
compatible with the architecture and landscaping component of the development.



      (4)   Conceptual sign designs shall be submitted with the site
plan and the Planning Commission shall review these conceptual plans together
with the site plan.



      (5)   Wall Signs for Non-Residential Uses.



         A.   Multi-tenant buildings with a shared entrance may
have one (1) wall sign that measures 1.5 times the total area permitted for a
wall sign.



         B.   Multi-tenant buildings with separate entrances may
each have one (1) wall sign per tenant that complies with the sign area
permitted in this subsection.



         C.   Corner tenants may have two (2) signs, one (1) on
the face of each facade facing a public road, driveway or parking lot. The
second sign may measure up to seventy-five (75) percent of the area permitted
for the principal wall sign.



         D.   The face of each wall sign shall measure no larger
than thirty (30) square feet, forty-five (45) square feet for multi-tenant
buildings with a shared entrance. However, an additional ten (10) square feet
may be approved by the Planning Commission when the following criteria are
met:



            i.   The building is located more than one hundred
(100) feet from the edge of the public road right-of-way.



            ii.   The tenant occupies a proportionately larger
portion of the building than the remaining tenants.



            iii.   The sign is proportionate to the mass and
scale of the building.



         Wall signs exceeding the permitted area noted above will be
subject to the special land use criteria of Section 7.04(c).



         E.   All walls signs, if illuminated, shall be
illuminated in a manner that is not intermittent, nor causing a hazard to
others.



         F.   Mixed use/commercial/office/other non-residential
uses may substitute a projectingsign for a wall sign based upon the following
considerations:



            i.   The size, shape and topography of the
property.



            ii.   The relationship of the sign to neighboring
properties and signs.



            iii.   The relationship to and visibility from the
public street where the property is located.



      (6)   Ground (Free-Standing) Signs for Non-Residential Uses.



         A.   Only one (1) free-standing sign is permitted on any
premise; however, the Planning Commission may permit a second sign which is
not to exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the first sign area when having
frontage on two (2) streets.



         B.   All ground signs shall be setback a minimum of ten
(10) feet from the public right-of-way, ten (10) feet from the edge of the
pavement of any driveway and ten (10) feet from the public sidewalk.



         C.   No ground sign shall be within one hundred (100)
feet of another ground sign.



         D.   All ground signs, if illuminated, shall be
illuminated in a manner that is not intermittent, nor causing a hazard to
others.



         E.   All ground signs shall be no taller than six (6)
feet above grade, unless Planning Commission deems there to be a demonstrated
need for increased height based upon the special land use criteria of Section
7.04(c).



         F.   No ground sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet per side, or sixty-four (64) square feet total. The ground sign shall
also only identify the name of the center.



   (i)   Lighting.  All lighting shall conform to the requirements of
Section 8.05, in order to maintain vehicle and pedestrian safety, site
security, and accentuate architectural details. 



      (1)   All street lighting shall be installed in accordance
with City standards.



      (2)   Architectural lighting, which is strongly recommended,
shall articulate the particular building design, as well as provide the
required functional lighting for safety of pedestrian movement.



      (3)   Pedestrian walk lighting shall clearly identify the
pedestrian walkway and direction of travel.



   (j)   Landscaping/Greenbelts/Buffers/Screening Elements.  All
landscape features of the site shall conform to the requirements detailed in
Section 5.10, in order to ensure that the image of the City is promoted by
the organization, unification and character of the District.



   (k)   General Site Design/Architectural Guidelines for
Non-Residential Uses.  It is the intent of the District to provide an
environment of high quality and complementary building architecture and site
design.  Special emphasis shall be placed upon methods that tend to reduce
the large-scale visual impact of buildings, to encourage tasteful,
imaginative design for individual buildings, and to create a complex of
buildings compatible with the streetscape.



      (1)   Miscellaneous Design Criteria.



         A.   Building entries shall be readily identifiable and
accessible, with at least one (1) main entrance facing and open directly onto
a connecting walkway with pedestrian frontage.



         B.   Architecture will be evaluated based upon its
compatibility and relationships to the landscape, and vice versa.



      (2)   Building Massing and Form.



         A.   Architectural interest shall be provided through
the use of repetitious patterns of color, texture and material modules, at
least one (1) of which shall repeat horizontally.  Each module should repeat
at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet.



         B.   Building facades greater than one hundred (100)
feet in length shall incorporate recesses, projections, or spandrel windows
along at least twenty (20) percent of the length of the facade.  Windows,
awnings, and arcades must total at least sixty (60) percent of a facade
length abutting a public street or connecting pedestrian frontage.



         C.   Primary building entrances shall be clearly defined
and recessed or framed by a sheltering element such as an awning, arcade or
portico in order to provide shelter from the summer sun and winter weather.



      (3)   Materials.



         A.   Low maintenance shall be a major consideration.



         B.   Materials shall blend with those existing on
adjacent properties.



         C.   One (1) dominant material shall be selected, with a
preference towards masonry and stone.



      (4)   Building Roofs.



         A.   In instances where roof vents, roof-mounted
mechanical equipment, pipes, etc., can be viewed from above, they shall be
grouped together, painted to match roof color to reduce their appearance, and
screened from view.



         B.   In instances where flat roof areas can be viewed
from below, all roof vents, roof-mounted mechanical equipment, pipes, etc.,
shall be screened from view.



         C.   Sloped and pitched roof treatments are preferred.



         D.   There shall be variations in roof lines to reduce
the massive scale of the structure and add visual interest.



      (5)   Color and Texture.



         A.   Simple and uniform texture patterns are encouraged.



         B.   Variations in color shall be kept to a minimum.



         C.   Colors shall be subdued in tone, of a low
reflectance and of neutral or earth tone colors.



         D.   Accent colors may be used to express corporate
identify, however, neon tubing is prohibited.



   (l)   Screening of Exterior Electrical Equipment and Transformers.



      (1)   Transformers that may be visible from any primary visual
exposure area shall be screened with either plantings or a durable non
combustible enclosure which are unified and harmonious with the overall
architectural theme.



      (2)   Exterior-mounted electrical equipment shall be mounted
on the interior of a building wherever possible, or shall be located where it
is substantially screened from public view.  Such equipment shall never be
located on the street side or primary exposure side of any building.



   (m)   Utilities and Communication Devices.



      (1)   All exterior on-site utilities, including but not
limited to drainage systems, sewers, gas lines, water lines, and electrical,
telephone, and communications wires and equipment, shall be installed and
maintained underground whenever possible.



      (2)   On-site underground utilities shall be designed and
installed to minimize disruption of off-site utilities, paving, and landscape
during construction and maintenance.



      (3)   Satellite dish and antennas shall comply with the
standards set forth in Section 6.23.



   (n)   Cross-Parcel Coordination.  The intent of the MXD District is
to provide a continuous development pattern which flows between uses and
developments.  Therefore, a developer shall show proof that an attempt has
been made to coordinate all elements of a development with existing adjacent
developments and property owners to ensure a coordinated development pattern
within the area.



• Section 6.23  Historic Overlay District Regulations.



   Any resident, or group of residents, residing within the City of
Howell, may petition the Planning Commission for Historic Overlay District
designation.  Upon receiving the designation, all future construction,
reconstruction, alteration, moving or demolition shall comply with the
regulations of this section.



   (a)   Regulations for All Structures.  The following standards
apply to all structures and uses in the HL-1 and HL-2 districts:



      (1)   Standards for Approval.  The following standards shall
apply to all proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, moving or
demolition:



         A.   Submit a site plan for consideration by the
Planning Commission.



         B.   Where the Planning Commission deems it necessary,
it may hold a public hearing concerning the application.



         C.   The Planning Commission shall consider the
following:



            1.   The historical or architectural value and
significance of the structure and its relationship to the historical value of
the surrounding area;



            2.   The relationship of the exterior
architectural features of the structure to the rest of the structure and the
surrounding area;



            3.   The general compatibility of exterior design,
arrangement texture and materials proposed to be used; and



            4.   Other factors, including aesthetic value,
which the Planning Commission considers pertinent.



         D.   If the Planning Commission determines that the
proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, moving or demolition is
appropriate, it shall approve the application.



         E.   If the Planning Commission determines that the site
plan is not appropriate, the minutes shall reflect the reasons for such
determination.



      (2)   Permitted Repairs and Restorations.



         A.   Original Appearance.  Repairs may be made to the
exterior of any significant or contributing historic structure, or
noncontributing structure, if the repairs will not change the appearance and
type of materials of any part of the structure.  A change in the appearance
of such structures by repair or replacement will be permitted if the result
is the restoration of the structure to a documented earlier or original
condition.



         B.   Mortar Repair.  Repointing of defective mortar
shall match the original mortar in color, profile and texture.



         C.   Roofs.  Except for roofs made of slate, metal or
terra cotta, roofing materials may be replaced.



         D.   Surface Covering.  Surfaces that are currently
painted or stained may be repainted or restained.  Surfaces which are
currently covered with wood, vinyl or aluminum siding may be repaired with
the same materials as currently exist.



         E.   Awnings, Windows and Doors.  Existing awnings may
be repaired and replaced.  Windows, storm windows and doors may be repaired
and replaced, provided that the size of the opening does not change and that
all frames are painted.



         F.   Porches, Trim and Architectural Features. 
Porches, trim and architectural features may be repaired or replaced with
materials of the same type, style and texture as the original.



         G.   Emergency Repairs.  This section shall not be
deemed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration
or demolition of any feature that the Zoning Administrator or a similar
official certifies is required because of a threat to the public safety due
to an unsafe or dangerous condition.



      (3)   Demolition.  The following standards shall apply to all
structures within the District:



         A.   No person shall demolish or move a significant,
contributing or noncontributing structure, unless such demolition or move is
approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may approve such
demolition or move if it receives satisfactory evidence that the structure in
question will be replaced by a structure having a design that is consistent
with the historic architecture of the District.



         B.   Deliberate or irresponsible neglect of a building
or structure resulting in any of the following conditions shall constitute
demolition by neglect and shall be a violation of this section.



            1.   The deterioration of exterior walls or other
vertical supports;



            2.   The deterioration of roofs or other
horizontal members;



            3.   The deterioration or crumbling of exterior
plaster or mortar;



            4.   The deterioration of exterior chimneys;



            5.   The ineffective waterproofing of exterior
walls, roofs and foundations, including broken windows and doors; or



            6.   The deterioration of any exterior
architectural feature so as to create or permit the creation of a hazardous
or unsafe condition which, in the judgment of the Planning Commission,
produces a detrimental effect upon the character of the structure.



      (4)   Standards.  The following standards shall apply to all
structures within the District:



         A.   Air Conditioning Units. Air conditioning machinery
for central units shall be screened from view on all sides, and window air
conditioning units may only be used where such units are not visible from the
street, either by locating such units in windows hidden from street view or
by screening them as aforesaid. Window air conditioning units in rooms used
for residential purposes only are exempt from this subsection.



         B.   Fences.  Chain link or similar security-type wire
fencing is prohibited on corner lots and within fifty (50) feet of the front
lot line for all other properties.  Other types of fencing shall be subject
to Section 5.11.



         C.   Vegetation.  Natural trees, shrubs, vines and
other vegetation may be installed, removed, trimmed and otherwise maintained,
except that trees having a trunk diameter greater than twelve (12) inches at
fifty-four (54) inches above grade level may be removed only after permission
is granted by the Zoning Administrator upon a determination that the tree is
diseased, dead or dangerous.



         D.   Skylights.  Skylights and dormers may be installed
on roofs not facing a street.  Except on rear-facing or flat roofs,
skylights must have glazing which is parallel to the roof surface.  Flanges
of skylights shall not extend more than six (6) inches above the roof surface.



         E.   Openings.  The addition of new openings, such as
windows and doors, or enlargement of existing openings, may be made to
facades not facing a street.  The addition of new openings or enlargement of
existing openings may be made to facades facing a street only when such
change adds to the historical or architectural value and significance of the
structure.



         F.   Additions.  Additions may be made to building
facades not facing a street.  Additions may be made to building facades
facing a street only when such addition adds to the historical or
architectural value and significance of the structure.



         G.   Surface Covering.  Unpainted brick, terra cotta or
stone shall not be painted or otherwise covered.  Otherwise, new materials
of any kind may be applied to existing wall surfaces, provided that:



            1.   The width of all new materials covering
wooden or clapboard siding, window and door frames, eaves, fascia, corners
and skirt or drip boards shall be within one (1) inch of the original.



            2.   Resurfacing materials applied to the exterior
of any existing building shall not conceal or require the removal of any
original architectural detail associated with barge boards, brackets,
ornamental shingle work or other similar features.



      (5)   Recommended Restoration.  The following restoration
practices are encouraged to allow all buildings within the District to
conform more closely to their original appearance.



         A.   Replacement of excessively deteriorated details
with new material that is visually identical to the original;



         B.   Uncovering of original wooden shingles, clapboard,
board and batten siding;



         C.   Changes in exterior siding and in the form of
windows and doors, porches, trim and ornamentation where evidence of the
original appearance is available;



         D.   Preservation of original glass in windows and doors;



         E.   Replacement of concrete steps and metal banisters
with wood where such replacement is in keeping with the architectural
character of the building;



         F.   Location or relocation of air conditioners, meter
boxes and similar mechanical equipment so as not to be visible from the
street;



         G.   Removal of non original materials from front and
side facades, especially plastic, fiberglass, imitation stone or aluminum; and



         H.   Maintenance of original interior woodwork,
including windows, doors, frames, banisters, staircases, open stairwells,
original light fixtures, ornamental plaster work, hardware, marble bathroom
fixtures, fireplaces, mantelpieces and hearths.



         I.   Unpainted woodwork should not be painted.



   (b)   Regulations for Non-Residential Structures in the HL-1
District.



      (1)   Standards.



         A.   Barrier-Free Ramps.  Barrier-free ramps conforming
to the architectural style of a building in the District may be used, if
required by State authority, or at the discretion of the property owner, to
provide access to the building. Any variances from barrier-free building
requirements must be obtained from the State.



         B.   Fire Escapes.  No person shall install a fire
escape on the street facade of a building in the District.  Fire escapes on
side facades may be installed only with the prior approval of the Planning
Commission.



      (2)   Parking.  Parking requirements for uses permitted in
the underlying zoning district are provided in Article 10.  In addition, the
following standards shall apply:



         A.   The Planning Commission may increase or decrease
required parking in order to meet the purposes of this section and protect
the public health and safety.



         B.   Parking shall not be permitted in a front or side
yard.



         C.   Parking areas shall have appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street as well as maneuvering areas. No driveway or
curb cut shall exceed thirty (30) feet in width, and detailed plans shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for approval before a permit may be
obtained therefore. Such parking areas shall be paved with an asphaltic or
concrete surfacing, afford adequate drainage and have bumper guards where
needed.



         D.   Parking areas shall be used only for automobile,
light truck and bicycle parking for the business invitees, employees,
proprietors and residents of a building.



         E.   If lighting is provided, it shall be arranged to
reflect away from the residential area and from any public street or highway.



         F.   Additional screening of parking areas by a hedge or
sightly fence or wall, not less than five (5) feet high nor more than seven
(7) feet high, located in back of the setback building lines, may be required
to conceal such parking areas from the street, from the sides and from the
rear.



      (3)   Signs.  Requirements of the District relating to signs
are provided in Article 7.



   (c)   Variances and Appeals.  Persons aggrieved by any decision of
the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission in the enforcement of
this section may appeal such decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Applications for variances from the strict application of this section may
also be made to the Board.



• Section 6.24  Mobile Home Park Requirements. 



   The Mobile Home Code, as established by the Mobile Home Commission and
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Rules under the authority of
1987 P.A. 96, as amended, regulates development of mobile home parks.  All
mobile home parks must be constructed according to the standards of the
Code.  In addition to the rules and standards of the State of Michigan, the
City of Howell imposes the following conditions:



   (a)   Mobile home parks shall be constructed, licensed, operated,
and managed in accordance with the provisions of the Mobile Home Commission
Act, 1987 P.A. 96, as amendment, and subsequently adopted rules and
regulations governing mobile home parks.



   (b)   Mobile home parks shall not be permitted on parcels less than
ten (10) acres in size.



   (c)   Individual mobile home sites within a mobile home park shall
have a minimum lot size of 5,500 square feet per mobile home being served. 
This 5,500 square foot minimum may be reduced by twenty (20) percent,
provided that the individual site shall be equal to at least 4,400 square
feet.  For each square foot of land gained through this reduction of the
site below 5,500 square feet, an equal amount of land shall be dedicated as
open space.  In no case shall the open space requirements be less than that
required under R125.1946, Rule 946 of the Michigan Administrative Code.



   (d)   The on-site storage of boat trailers, boats, camping units,
horse trailers and similar recreationalequipment shall be prohibited on
mobile home sites and in designated open space areas.  The mobile home park
may provide, within the confines of the park, a common outdoor storage area
for the storage of the above mentioned equipment.



   (e)   The minimum setback for mobile home parks shall be fifty (50)
feet from a public right-of-way.  Mobile home parks shall be landscaped as
follows:



      (1)   If the mobile home park abuts an existing residential
development, the park shall be required to provide screening along the park
boundary abutting the residential development.



      (2)   If the park abuts a non-residential development, the
park need not provide screening.



      (3)   In all cases, however, a park shall provide screening
along the park boundary abutting a public right-of-way.



   (f)   The landscaping shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs of
minimum three (3) feet in height that is spaced so they provide a continuous
screen at maturity.  Alternative screening devices may be utilized if they
conceal the mobile home park as effectively as the required landscaping
described above.



   (g)   Mobile home parks shall be subject to preliminary plan review
requirements in accordance with 1987 P.A. 96, as amended.



   (h)   A permit shall not be required for the construction or
erection of canopies or awnings that are open on three (3) sides.  A
building permit shall be required, however, before the construction of
erection of any screened, glassed-in, or otherwise enclosed awning or canopy.



• Section 6.25  Sexually Oriented Businesses.



   (a)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of this Section
is to regulate the location and operation of sexually oriented businesses and
to minimize their negative secondary effects. Based upon studies undertaken
and reported by numerous other communities, it is recognized that the adult
businesses, identified in this ordinance because of their very nature, have
serious objectionable operational characteristics that cause negative
secondary effects upon nearby residential, educational, religious, and other
similar public and private uses. The regulation of sexually oriented
businesses is necessary to ensure that their negative secondary effects will
not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of surrounding areas and will
not negatively impact the health, safety, and general welfare of residents.



The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to offend the guarantees of
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, or to deny adults
access to sexually oriented businesses and their products, or to deny
sexually oriented businesses access to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent of this Ordinance to legitimatize activities which are prohibited
by City ordinance or state or federal law. The regulations in Section 6.25
are for the purpose of locating these uses in areas where the adverse impact
of their operations may be minimized by the separation of such uses from one
another and places of public congregation.



Prior to adopting these regulations, the City reviewed studies prepared on
these uses, reviewed ordinances and regulations prepared by other
municipalities, and reviewed applicable federal and state case law. Based on
evidence of the adverse effects of adult uses presented in reports made
available to the City Council and on findings incorporated in the cases of
Pap's AM v City of Erie, 529 US 277 (2000), Deja Vu of Nashville v
Metropolitan Government of Nashville & Davidson County, 466 G3d 391 (6th Cir
2006), Sensations, Inc. v City of Grand Rapids, 2006 WL 2504388 (WD MI 2006),
Van Buren Township v Garter Belt, 258 Mich App 594; 673 NW2d 111 (2003),
Bronco's Entertainment v Charter Township of Van Buren, 421 F3d 440 (6th Cir
2005), Thomas v Chicago Park District, 122 S Ct 775 (2002), City of Renton v
Playtime Theatres Inc, 475 US 41 (1986), Young v American Mini Theatres, 426
US 50 (1976), Barnes v Glen Theatre Inc, 501 US 560 (1991); California v
LaRue, 409 US 109 (1972); DLS Inc v City of Chattanooga, 107 F3d 403 (6th Cir
1997); East Brooks Books Inc v City of Memphis, 48 F3d 2200 (6th Cir 1995),
Broadway Books v Roberts, 642 F Supp 4867 (ED Tenn 1986); Bright Lights Inc v
City of Newport, 830 F Supp 378 (ED Ky 1993); Richland Bookmart v Nichols,
137 F3d 435 (6th Cir 1998), Richland Bookmart v Nichols, 278 F3d 570 (6th Cir
2002); Déjà vu of Cincinnati v Union Township Board of Trustees, 411 F3d
777 (6th Cir 2005); Déjà vu of Nashville v Metropolitan Government of
Nashville, 274 F3d 377 (6th Cir 2001); Bamon Corp v City of Dayton, 7923 F2d
470 (6th Cir 1991); Threesome Entertainment v Strittmather, 4 F Supp 2d 710
(ND Ohio 1998); JL Spoons Inc v City of Brunswick, 49 F Supp 2d 1032 (ND Ohio
1999); Triplett Grille Inc v City of Akron, 40 F3d 129 (6th Cir 1994);
Nightclubs Inc v City of Paducah, 202 F3d 884 (6th Cir 2000); O'Connor v City
and County of Denver, 894 F2d 1210 (10th Cir 1990); Deja Vu of Nashville Inc
et al v Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, 2001 USA
App LEXIS 26007 (6th Cir Dec 6. 2001); ZJ Gifts D-2 LLC v City of Aurora, 136
F3d 683 (10th Cir 1998); Connection Distribution Co v Reno, 154 F3d 281 (6th
Cir 1998); Sundance Associates v Reno, 139 F3d 804 (10th Cir 1998); American
Library Association v Reno, 33 F3d 78 (DC Cir 1994); American Target
Advertising Inc v Giani, 199 F3d 1241 (10th Cir 2000); ZJ Gifts D-2LLC v City
of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir 1998); ILQ Investments Inc v City of
Rochester, 25 F3d 1413 (8th Cir 1994); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales
Inc v Montgomery County, 2002 US Dist LEXIS 1896 (D Md Feb 6 2002); Currence
v Cincinnati, 2002 US App LEXIS 1258 (3rd Cir Jan 24, 2002); and other cases;
and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong Rec S 8987; 135 Cong Rec S 14519;
135 Cong Rec S 5636; 134 Cong Rec E 3750; and reports of secondary effects
occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Houston,
Texas - 1997; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles,
California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986;
Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio -
and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue,
Washington - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square 1993;
Bellevue, Washington - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times
Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98; and also on findings from
the paper entitled "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace
Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice
Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from "Sexually
Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the
Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan 12, 2000, and
the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On the Regulation of
Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the City
Council finds that sexually oriented businesses as a category of
establishments are correlated with harmful secondary effects, and that the
foregoing reports are reasonably believed to be relevant to the problems that
Howell is seeking to abate and prevent in the future. Due to the potential
for harmful secondary effects, the City Council further determines that it is
in the best interests of the City that the decision on any application for a
special use approval for a sexually oriented business be made by the City
Council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. The
primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a
concentration of these uses in any one (1) area (i.e., not more than two (2)
such uses within a specified distance of each other which would create such
adverse effect(s). Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows.



      1.   adult arcades;



      2.   adult bookstores or adult video stores;



      3.   adult cabarets;



      4.   adult massage parlors;



      5.   adult motels;



      6.   adult motion picture theaters;



      7.   adult theaters;



      8.   adult nudity or retail stores;



      9.   escort and escort agencies;



      10.   nude model studios; and



      11.   sexual encounter centers.



   (b)   Location. Sexually oriented business uses, as defined herein,
shall be permitted within the B-2 (General Business), I-1 (Industrial 1) and
I-2 (Industrial 2) Districts as a use subject to special approval, and
further subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   No sexually oriented business as defined herein shall be
permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing sexually oriented
business. Measurement of the 1,000 feet shall be made in a straight line
without regard to intervening structures or objects from the closest exterior
wall of each business.



      (2)   No sexually oriented business as defined herein shall be
permitted within five hundred (500) feet of a residentially zoned or used
parcel, school, library, public park, playground, licensed group day-care
home or center, or religious institution. Measurement of the five hundred
(500) feet shall be made without regard to intervening structures or objects
from the nearest point of the property line of the premises where the
sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest point of the property
line of those uses mentioned above.



      (3)   A sexually oriented business site shall not be located
closer than five hundred (500) feet to the right-of-way of Interstate 96 as
well as all principal and/or minor arterial roads within the City of Howell,
as designated by the City's Master Plan.



      (4)   A person is in violation of this Ordinance if he/she
causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or
transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one
thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business.



      (5)   A person is in violation of this Ordinance if he/she
causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than
one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion
thereof or the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in
any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.



      (6)   For the purposes of measuring the required distances and
separations in Sub-Section (1) and (2) above, access easements or portions of
the parcel that are exclusively used to provide access to the site of the
sexually oriented business shall be excluded from the parcel boundary in
determining whether the site complies with the required separation. The
intent of this exclusion is to allow sexually oriented businesses to comply
with the separation requirement from major thoroughfares by means of an
access easement or access strip of land from the site to the thoroughfare.



   (c)   Review.  Any application for special use approval for a
sexually oriented business shall proceed before the Planning Commission for
recommendation, and the City Council for final decision.  In reviewing an
application for special use approval, the Planning Commission and City
Council shall apply the standards contained in Section 3.03 of this
Ordinance.  Further, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider
the following additional standards with respect to the sexually oriented
business:



      (1)   That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public
interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of
this Section will be observed.



      (2)   That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the
development of an area in which the homeless, unemployed, transients or
others may loiter or congregate for no gainful purpose.



      (3)   That the establishment of any additional sexually
oriented business use in the area will not be contrary to any program of
neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any plans for future
development of the area according to the City's Master Plan.



      (4)   That all applicable regulations of this Ordinance will
be observed.



   (d)   Time limits for review. The following time limits shall apply
to the review of an application by the Planning Commission and City Council
for special approval of a sexually oriented business as regulated by this
Section.



      (1)   The Planning Commission will publish notice and hold a
public hearing as required for special land use approval review within sixty
(60) days of receiving a complete and technically compliant special approval
and site plan application as required by Section 3.03(b) of the Zoning
Ordinance for a sexually oriented business.



      (2)   The Planning Commission will make its recommendation
regarding the special approval application for a sexually oriented business
at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission following
the public hearing held to review the application, unless additional
information is required from the applicant. If additional information is
required, the Planning Commission will make its recommendation at the next
regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the requested additional
information, provided the additional information is received no later than
fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting.



      (3)   The recommendation of the Planning Commission will be
forwarded to the City Council within sixty (60) days of the meeting at which
Planning Commission issues its recommendation. The City Council will render
its decision to grant or deny special approval of the sexually oriented
business or to grant approval with conditions, as stipulated by the Zoning
Ordinance at this meeting.



      (4)   Failure of the City to act within the above specified
time limits shall not be deemed to constitute the grant of special approval
to the sexually oriented business.



      (5)   The Planning Commission may recommend that the City
Council impose such conditions or limitations upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance or operation of the sexually oriented
business, as shall, in its judgment, be necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety, welfare and interest, except that any conditions
imposed on a sexually oriented business as defined in this Section shall be
limited to those conditions necessary to assure compliance with the standards
and requirements in this Section. Likewise, the City Council may impose
conditions or limitations as deemed necessary. Any evidence and guarantee may
be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection with the
establishment, maintenance and operation of a sexually oriented business
shall be fulfilled.



   (e)   Effect of denial. No applicant for a regulated use which has
been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1)
year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of changed conditions.



   (f)   Revocation.  In any case where a building permit for a
regulated use is required and has not been obtained within six (6) months
after the granting of the special approval by the City Council, the grant of
special approval shall become null and void.



   (g)   Miscellaneous requirements and conditions.



      (1)   No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside
in the premises of a sexually oriented business.



      (2)   Such uses shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, and local licensing regulations. Initial and annual proof of such
compliance shall be a condition for continuance of licensure by the City.



      (3)   Nothing contained in this Section shall relieve the
operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with other
requirements of this Ordinance as it may be amended from time to time, or any
subsequently enacted Ordinances.



      (4)   All off-street parking areas and entry door areas of a
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk until the closing
time of the business with a lighting system which provides an average
maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on all parking
surfaces and/or walkways. This requirement is to ensure the personal safety
of patrons and employees, and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and other
criminal conduct.



      (5)   The landscaping requirements of Section 5.10 shall apply
to all such uses with the following exceptions:



         (a)   No shrub/hedge shall be taller than three (3) feet
within the required front yard of the building and when grouped shall
maintain an opacity of no greater than 80% (as defined in Section 5.10(d)).



         (b)   All trees shall be limbed up (removal of all lower
limbs) to ensure a clear zone of no less than four (4) feet from grade.



      (6)   Where a fence/wall is required it shall be no taller
than six (6) feet in all locations with the exception of the required front
yard where three (3) feet shall prevail.



      (7)   Any business now classified as sexually oriented
business lawfully operating on the date of adoption of the Ordinance, that is
in violation of Sub-Sections (b)(1), (2) or (3) above shall be deemed a
nonconforming use.



   (h)   Nude entertainment prohibited in alcoholic commercial
establishment.  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform in any
alcoholic commercial establishment, to knowingly permit or allow to be
performed therein, any of the following acts or conduct:



      (1)   The public performance of acts or simulated acts of
sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellations, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;



      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling
on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals in public; or



      (3)   The actual or simulated public displaying of the pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, agent or
employee of an alcoholic commercial establishment to allow any female to
appear in an alcoholic commercial establishment so costumed or dressed that
one or both breasts are wholly or substantially exposed to public view.
Topless or bottomless or totally uncovered waitresses, bartenders or
barmaids, entertainers including dancers, impersonators, lingerie shows, or
any other form for the attraction or entertainment of customers, is strictly
prohibited. "Wholly or substantially exposed to public view" as it pertains
to breasts shall mean the showing of the female breast in an alcoholic
commercial establishment with less than a fully opaque covering of all
portions of the areola and nipple, and the prohibition shall also extend to
such events similar to wet t-shirt contests, lingerie shows or bikini shows.



   (i)   Exterior display and signs.  A sexually oriented business is
in violation of this Section if:



      (1)   The merchandise or activities of the establishment are
visible from any point outside the establishment; or



      (2)   The exterior portions of the establishment or signs have
any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawing or pictorial
representatives of any specified anatomical area or sexually explicit
activity as defined in this Ordinance.



   (j)   Advertising.



      (1)   The building and premises shall be designed and
constructed so the material depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas cannot be observed by
pedestrians or from vehicles on any public right-of-way. This provision shall
apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. This
prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of
such sexually oriented business.



      (2)   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the
interior premises to be visible from outside the premises.



      (3)   Pursuant to Article 7, each conforming sexually oriented
business shall be permitted both wall and freestanding signs which announce
the names of the business. No off-premise or portable signs shall be
permitted.



   (k)   Parking/Lighting.



      (1)   All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the
sexually oriented business shall meet the requirements for parking under
Article 10 of this Ordinance.



      (2)   Premise entries and parking areas shall be illuminated
from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system that complies
with Article 8, Section 8.05(a), Exterior Lighting from Direct Sources. The
lighting shall be shown on the required site plan.



   (l)   Hours of Operation. No sexually oriented business, except for
an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 A.M.
and 8:00 A.M., on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 A.M. and 12:00 P.M. on
Sundays.



   (m)   License required to operate a sexually oriented business.
Special approval and site plan approval shall be granted on the condition
that the operator or owner of a sexually oriented business obtains a license
to operate the business as required by Chapter 810 of the Howell City Code.



   (n)   Nonconforming use.  Any sexually oriented business lawfully
operating on the effective date of this Section that is in violation of this
Section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall
not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be
changed to conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses
are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at the particular location is the
conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming.
Nothing in this Section shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or
rebuilding and continued use of any non-conforming building or structure,
which is damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, provided that
the expense of such reconstruction does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
reconstruction cost of the building or structure at the time such damage
occurred. Where the reconstruction repair or rebuilding exceeds the
above-stated fifty (50%) percent, the reestablishment of the use shall be
subject to all provisions of this Ordinance.



   (o)   Enforcement. A violation of the provisions of this Section
shall result, in addition to the remedies provided herein, possible criminal
violations consisting of a fine of five hundred ($500.00) dollars or a jail
term of ninety (90) days, or both.



   (p)   Injunction. In addition to the provisions of this Section, the
City, at its option, may commence proceedings in the circuit court under the
appropriate court rule or statute to enjoin any activity conducted by a
sexually oriented business that is deemed to be in violation of these
provisions.



• Section 6.26  Private Clubs, Lodges and Reception Halls.



   (a)   Private Club or Lodge.  A private club or lodge includes
buildings and grounds used for and operated by a non-profit organization,
whose membership is by invitation and election according to qualifications in
the club's charter or bylaws.  The use of the facilities is primarily
restricted to members and their guests.  Private clubs and lodges may be
allowed subject to the following:



      (1)   A minimum lot area of sixteen thousand (16,000) square
feet.



      (2)   A minimum front, rear and side yard of twenty-five (25)
feet.



      (3)   No  person shall reside in or permit any person to
reside in the premises.



      (4)   All such uses shall be screened per Section 5.10, but
when located adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel, shall be
screened per Section 5.10(d)(2).



   (b)   Reception Hall.  A reception hall is used for and operated by
a for profit organization, and is not associated with a motel, hotel, school,
private club or lodge.  All such facilities may be allowed subject to the
following:



      (1)   A minimum lot area of sixteen thousand (16,000) square
feet.



      (2)   A minimum front, rear and side yard of twenty-five (25)
feet.



      (3)   All such uses shall be screened per Section 5.10, but
when located adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel, shall be
screened per Section 5.10(d)(2).



• Section 6.27  Transitional Housing Facility



Transitional housing is subject to the following standards:



   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to allow reasonable
consideration of accommodating transitional housing needs and to ensure that
the approval of such housing shall not alter the fundamental nature of the
zoning district or neighborhood in which such housing is located.
Transitional housing shall be planned, designed, and located in a manner such
as public health, safety, and welfare are protected.



   (b)   Location Standards.



      (1)   A transitional housing facility shall be located no
closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from another transitional housing
facility.



      (2)   A transitional housing facility shall be located no
closer than five hundred (500) feet from a public or private school, child
care facility, or park.



   (c)   Management Plan.  A proposed transitional housing facility
shall be required to submit a management plan in conjunction with the
applicant.



      (1)   The Management Plan shall at a minimum address the
following issues:



         (a)   Number of residents served.



         (b)   Resident services to be provided, and anticipated
length of stay.



         (c)   Staffing and duties performed.



      (2)   The Planning Commission may request additional
information to make a determination that the standards set forth in this
Ordinance are met.



   (d)   Use and Design Standards.



      (1)   The density of the facility shall not exceed the maximum
permissible density of the RM District.



      (2)   Taking into consideration the size, location, and
character of the proposed use, the proposed facility shall be established in
such a manner to be compatible and harmonious with surrounding uses.



      (3)   The proposed facility shall be designed to ensure that
vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be no more hazardous than is normal
for the district involved.



      (4)   The proposed facility shall be designed, located,
planned, and operated in such a manner that the public health, safety, and
welfare will be protected.



• Section 6.28  Kennels



   Kennels shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   No property used for the purposes of a kennel shall be
adjacent to a residentially zoned or used property.



      (2)   The business shall be located entirely within a
building, with the exception of outdoor exercise areas, which may be located
adjacent to the building and screened from surrounding properties.



      (3)   No animals may be housed outdoors.



ARTICLE 7
SIGNS



• Section 7.01  Intent.



   The intent of this article is to regulate the location, size,
construction, design and architectural compatibility with the surrounding
areas and manner of display of signs and outdoor advertising in order to
minimize their harmful effects on the public health, safety and welfare. 
While this article recognizes that signs and outdoor advertising are
necessary to promote commerce and public information, failure to regulate
them may lead to poor identification of individual businesses, deterioration
and blight of business and residential areas of the City, conflicts between
different types of land use, and reduction in traffic safety to pedestrians
and motorists.  To achieve its intended purpose, this article has the
following objectives:



   (a)   To prevent the placement of signs in a manner that will
conceal or obscure signs or adjacent businesses;



   (b)   To keep the number of signs and sign messages from exceeding
the level reasonably necessary to identify a business and its products;



   (c)   To keep signs within a reasonable scale with respect to the
buildings they identify and are located upon or near;



   (d)   To reduce visual distraction and obstructions to motorists
traveling along, entering or leaving streets;



   (e)   To promote a quality manner of display which enhances the
character of the City;



   (f)   To prevent the proliferation of temporary signs which might
promote visual blight; and



   (g)   To insure that the design, construction material and
architecture of signs is harmonious with the buildings and structures in the
immediate area in order to avoid visual blight.



• Section 7.02  General Conditions.



   (a)   Location.  All signs must advertise a business or service on
the premises upon which the sign is located and to which the sign is
accessory, unless otherwise specified herein. 



   (b)   Illumination.



      (1)   The City, in its sole discretion, shall approve the
method of sign illumination to ensure that the standards contained herein are
met.



      (2)   No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical
means.



      (3)   The intensity and direction of light from an illuminated
sign shall not interfere with vehicular traffic or the use and enjoyment of
adjacent or nearby properties.  Particular attention shall be paid to the
effect of illuminated signs on neighboring residential uses.



   (c)   Safety.



      (1)   All signs shall be erected and maintained in compliance
with all applicable building codes, and other applicable ordinances governing
construction within the City of Howell.  In the event of conflict between
this article and other laws, the most restrictive shall govern.



      (2)   All signs shall be placed so as to not interfere with
the visibility or effectiveness of any official traffic sign or signal,
motorist or pedestrian.



      (3)   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as
to obstruct fire fighting or prevent free access to any door, window or fire
escape.



   (d)   Preservation of Community Landscape. In the application of
this article, it is the intent to protect the public welfare and to enhance
the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing that signs
comply with the following:



      (1)   Do not interfere with scenic views;



      (2)   Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public
right-of-way;



      (3)   Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent
and contiguous property by their brightness, size, height, or movement;



      (4)   Are not detrimental to surrounding property values;



      (5)   Contribute to the special character and historical
significance of particular areas or districts in the City; and



      (6)   Are compatible in design, architecture, construction
material and manner of lighting with the buildings in the area in which the
signs are located.



   (e)   Signs Prohibited in All Districts.



      (1)   Roof signs. 



      (2)   Signs containing flashing, scrolling, blinking,
intermittent or moving lights, digital/electronic signs, or signs with moving
or revolving parts.  Exceptions to this restriction may be permitted by the
Planning Commission based upon good justification, for example, the
historical significance of signage.  Digital/electronic signs may be
considered for the display of gas prices at automobile filling stations
located outside of the Central Business District but only as a special land
use. A portion of a drive-in/drive-through restaurant menuboard may also
incorporate a digital/electronic sign pursuant to Section 7.09(d)(7).



      (3)   Signs affixed to trees, rocks, shrubs or similar natural
features, but not when an integral part of or carved out of such features.



      (4)   Signs that imitate traffic signals, traffic direction
signs, or similar traffic control devices.



      (5)   Temporary signs mounted upon trucks, vans, or other
wheeled devices.  Signs permanently painted on, or otherwise permanently
displayed upon a vehicle, licensed and operating on the public streets and
highways, identifying the owner's occupation or livelihood, shall be
permitted.



      (6)   Permanent signs other than those erected by a public
agency that are located within or overhang the public right-of-way or on
public property.



      (7)   Any sign or sign structure which:



         A.   Is structurally unsafe; or



         B.   Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment; or



         C.   Is not kept in good repair; or



         D.   Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons
likely to come in contact with it.



      (8)   Signs that make use of words such as "Stop", "Look",
"Danger" or any other words, phrases symbols or characters, in such manner as
to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.



      (9)   Any sign or other advertising structure containing any
obscene, indecent or immoral matter.



      (10)   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.



      (11)   Abandoned signs.



   (f)   Signs Permitted in All Districts.



      (1)   Nameplates not exceeding two (2) square feet in size. 



      (2)   Political signs shall be erected on private property
only and not within any public right-of-way. All political signs shall be
removed within five (5) days following the day of each election. Political
signs shall not be erected or displayed less than one hundred (100) feet from
any entrance to a building in which a polling place is located. 



      (3)   On-premises directional signs that indicate direction of
traffic flow shall be permitted, subject to the following:



         A.   On-premise directional signs that are intended to
direct traffic flow into a site from a public street are permitted in all
districts.  Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and
four (4) feet in height, shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any
property line and shall be positioned in a manner which will not obstruct the
vision of motorists and/or pedestrians.



         B.   On-premise directional signs which are intended to
direct traffic flow within a site shall be permitted in all districts for the
following permitted and special uses: schools, hospitals, offices, parks,
governmental facilities and other similar uses.  Such signs shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height, shall be located
a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line and shall be positioned
in a manner which will not obstruct the vision of motorists and/or
pedestrians.



         C.   On-premise directional signs may be illuminated and
shall contain no advertising, but may include corporate identification.



         D.   The Planning Commission may vary the size and
location of an on-premises directional sign in order to facilitate traffic
flow and safety.



      (4)   Signs denoting a site of historic significance shall be
permitted in all districts.  However, location, size, structure, etc., shall
be approved by the Planning Commission.



      (5)   Restaurant menu signs not to exceed three square feet in
size. Such signs are limited to one per restaurant and the menu sign shall
not count against the amount of wall sign permitted for the restaurant.



      (6)   Building directory signs for multi-tenant buildings,
listing the tenants of the building. Such signs are limited to one per
building and shall not exceed six square feet.



      (7)   Construction signs advertising an upcoming or ongoing
project, subject to the following provisions:



      a.   The maximum size of a construction sign shall not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in a residential district and sixty-four (64)
square feet in a non-residential district.



      b.   The maximum height of a construction sign shall not
exceed eight (8) feet.



      c.   Corner lots shall be permitted two (2) signs, one on each
road frontage.



      d.   Construction signs shall be removed thirty (30) days
after the certificate of occupancy is issued for the project.



      e.   No construction sign shall remain on premises if the
project has not commenced after six (6) months of the sign's installation or
if construction has ceased for a period of six (6) months.



      (8)   Promotional banner for civic or charitable activity may
be authorized by the Zoning Administrator after a Permit application is
submitted, showing the banner to be installed and the location.



• Section 7.03  Permitted FreestandingSigns. 



   Freestandingsigns shall be permitted in the following districts in
accordance with the regulations herein.



   (a)   General Requirements.



      (1)   Only one (1) freestanding sign shall be located on any
premises; however, the Planning Commission may permit a second sign which is
not to exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the first sign area when having
building frontage on two (2) public rights-of-way.



      (2)   A freestanding sign shall be located no closer than ten
(10) feet from the public right-of-way.



   (b)   Height and Area Requirements.  Freestanding signs shall be
permitted in accordance with the following requirements:



 




 
Height (ft.)
 
Area (sq. ft.)


CBD District
 

 



All permitted and special land uses, not located within a business center.
 
12
 
32 per side, not to exceed a total of 64


B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts
 

 



All permitted and special land uses, not located within a business center.
 
12
 
50 per side, not to exceed a total of 100


O-1 Districts
 

 



All permitted and special land uses, not located within a business center.
 
6
 
32 per side, not to exceed a total of 64


R-1, R-2, R-T and R-M Districts
 

 



Applicable to the following uses:  libraries, parks and recreational
facilities; public and private schools; Municipal office buildings; churches;
golf courses, country clubs and cemeteries; convalescenthomes; bed and
breakfast operations, and funeral homes or mortuaries.
 
6
 
32 per side, not to exceed a total of 64


Applicable to the following uses:  colleges, universities and other such
institutions of higher learning; general hospitals; and other uses of a
community-wide or regional nature.
 
12
 
50 per side, not to exceed a total of 100


R-1, R-2, R-T and R-M Districts
 

 



All one-family, multiple family or mobile home park developments.
 
6
 
32 per side, not to exceed a total of 64


HL Districts(Only one (1) sign per building, either a freestanding sign or a
wall sign in this district)
 

 



All special land uses:
 
5
 
8 per side, not to exceed a total of 16


Business Center (Each sign shall state only the name of the business center
and the tenants located therein.  Individual tenants shall not have separate
freestanding identification signs, except non-residential platted subdivision
or site condominium business center.)
 

 



All business center developments.
 
Same as the district in which located
 
50 per side, not to exceed a total of 100




 



   (c)   Freestanding Signs Requiring Special Land Use Approval.  The
Planning Commission may consider a sign that is greater than the maximum
height and area requirements or less than the minimum setback requirements as
a special land use. 



   In review of a special land use, the Planning Commission shall consider
the standards set forth in Section 3.03 and the following:



      (1)   The standards set forth in Sections 7.02 and 7.07;



      (2)   The size, shape and topography of the property;



      (3)   The relationship of the sign to neighboring properties
and signs; and



      (4)   The relationship to and visibility from the public
street where the property is located.



• Section 7.04  Permitted Wall Signs. 



   The following wall signs shall be permitted in the following districts
in accordance with the regulations herein.



   (a)   General Requirements.



      (1)   No wall sign shall be erected to extend above the top of
the wall to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the ends of the wall to
which it is attached. Signs erected on the vertical portion of a mansard roof
are considered to be wall signs.



      (2)   All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to
the building by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws.  In no
case shall any wall sign be secured with wire, straps of wood or nails.



      (3)   For wall signs that are oriented horizontally, the
vertical dimension of the sign shall not be in excess of six (6) feet. For
wall signs that are oriented vertically, the horizontal dimension of the sign
shall not be in excess of six (6) feet.



      (4)   For buildings with distinct and separate uses, separate
wall signs shall be permitted for each such use. Corner tenants, and/or
tenants with front and rear street frontage, may have two (2) signs, one (1)
on the face of each building frontage facing a public right-of-way. In
multi-tenant buildings, the total allowable square footage of all signs shall
not exceed 1.5 times the maximum allowable square footage specified for each
district. A single tenant may not exceed the maximum square footage
specified, without the multi-tenant bonus noted above.



      (5)   For purposes of this article, signage incorporated as
part of a canopy sign shall be regulated in the same manner as wall signs.



   (b)   Area Requirements.  Wall signs shall be permitted in
accordance with the following requirements:



 




 
Area Per One Foot of BuildingFrontage (sq. ft.)
 
Maximum Area (sq. ft.)


CBD District
 

 



All permitted and special land uses.
 
2
 
100


B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts
 

 



All permitted and special land uses.
 
2
 
100


O-1 Districts
 

 



All permitted and special land uses.
 
1
 
50


R-1, R-2, R-T and R-M Districts
 

 



Applicable to the following uses:  libraries, parks and recreational
facilities; public and private schools; Municipal office buildings; churches;
golf courses, country clubs and cemeteries; convalescent homes; bed and
breakfast operations, funeral homes or mortuaries.
 
2
 
30


Applicable to the following uses:  colleges, universities and other such
institutions of higher learning; general hospitals; and other uses of
community-wide or regional nature.
 
2
 
50


R-M Districts
 

 



All multiple family developments.
 
1
 
30


HL Districts(Only one (1) sign per building, either freestanding or wall, is
permits in this district.)
 

 



All special land uses.
 
1
 
6


Business Center (Each sign shall state only the name of the business center
and the tenants located therein.)
 

 



All business center developments.
 
2
 
100




 



   (c)   Wall Signs Requiring Special Land Use Approval.  The Planning
Commission may consider a sign that is greater than the maximum height and
area requirements as a special land use.



   In review of a special land use the Planning Commission shall consider
the standards set forth in Section 3.03 and the following:



      (1)   The standards set forth in Sections 7.02 and 7.07;



      (2)   The size, shape and topography of the property;



      (3)   The relationship of the sign to neighboring properties
and signs; and



      (4)   The relationship to and visibility from the public
street where the property is located.



• Section 7.05  Permitted Projecting Signs.



   (a)   General Requirements.



      (1)   Projecting and suspended signs shall be permitted in
B-1, B-2, and CBD, Districts.



      (2)   The maximum area of a projecting or suspendedsign shall
not exceed twenty (20) square feet on each side or a total of forty (40)
square feet.  The total square feet of signage (both sides) shall be
subtracted from the total allowable wall signage square footage for the
district.



      (3)   The bottom of the projecting or suspended sign shall be
a minimum of seven (7) feet above the surface of the sidewalk or ground area,
or otherwise be located so as not to interfere with pedestrian traffic.



      (4)   The City shall approve the lighting of all signs.



   (b)   Projecting or Suspended Signs Requiring Special Land Use
Approval.  The Planning Commission may consider a sign that is greater than
the maximum area requirements as a special land use.  The Planning
Commission may also consider more than one (1) projecting sign per premises
as a special land use.



   In review of a special land use, the Planning Commission shall consider
the standards set forth in Section 3.03 and the following:



      (1)   The standards set forth in Section 7.02 and Section 7.07;



      (2)   The size, shape and topography of the property;



      (3)   The relationship of the sign to neighboring properties
and signs; and



      (4)   The relationship to and visibility from the public
street where the property is located.



• Section 7.06  Interior Window Signs.



   Interior window signs shall be permitted in the CBD Central Business
District, B-1 Local Business District, and B-2 General Business District.
Interior window signs shall be permitted for each use on each floor level but
in total shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window area of each
building face on each floor level, and no more than fifty (50) percent
coverage per window.



• Section 7.07  Permitted Portable Signs.



   The following temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
regulations herein.



   (a)   Permitted Real Estate Signs (On-Site).



      (1)   In all zoning districts one (1) non-illuminated
freestanding sign shall be permitted to advertise individual lots, land or
buildings for rent, lease or sale, (including weekend open house signs),
provided that such signs are located on the property intended to be rented,
leased or sold. Corner lots are permitted to have two (2) signs. Such signs
shall not exceed an area of six (6) square feet and a height of four (4) feet
in all residential districts, and an area of twenty (20) square feet and a
height of eight (8) feet in all other districts.



      (2)   For all residential projects involving the sale of
individual lots and/or dwelling units, one (1) non-illuminated freestanding
sign shall be permitted per each entrance to the project advertising the sale
of such lots and/or dwelling units (including weekend open house signs). Such
signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and a height of twelve
(12) feet.



      (3)   For all residential projects involving the rental or
leasing of dwelling units, one (1) non-illuminated freestanding sign shall be
permitted per each entrance to the project advertising the rental or leasing
of such units (including weekend open house signs). Such signs shall not
exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and a height of eight (8) feet.



      (4)   All signs advertising the rental, lease or sale of a
property or dwelling unit shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours
after the property is no longer available for rent or lease, closing on the
sale or completion of construction work.



      (5)   All weekend open house signs may be posted no more than
twenty-four (24) hours before the open house and shall be removed within four
(4) hours following the open house.



      (6)   All signs shall be located outside of the public road
right-of-way.



      (7)   All permitted real estate signs shall otherwise comply
with all other standards for freestanding signs set forth in this article.



   (b)   Permitted Weekend Open House Real Estate Signs (off-site).



      (1)   For a residential dwelling within an established
neighborhood in the City of Howell, no more than two (2) freestanding signs
shall be permitted.



      (2)   For a new development in the City of Howell with
multiple dwellings being listed for sale, no more than three (3) freestanding
signs shall be permitted. However, additional freestanding signs may be
permitted by the Zoning Administrator when circumstances exist that are
unique to the property and not self-created. Approval for the additional
signs shall be for up to six (6) months at which time another permit would
have to be sought.



      (3)   Such signs shall not exceed an area of four (4) square
feet and a height of three (3) feet.



      (4)   The sign may be located within the City's public road
right-of-way but shall not interfere with the free passage of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and shall not be a hazard to the public safety. Signs
located within a State trunkline right-of-way are also subject to the
applicable MDOT regulations.



      (5)   All such signs may be posted no more than twenty-four
(24) hours before the open house and shall be removed within four (4) hours
following the open house.



      (6)   All permitted weekend open house real estate signs shall
otherwise comply with all other standards for freestanding signs set forth in
this article.



   (c)   Permitted Portable Signs.



   (1)   Intent.  It is the intent of this ordinance to provide
opportunities for businesses to provide pedestrian-scale advertising to
customers near the entrances to their businesses while preventing sign
clutter along the City's thoroughfares.



   (2)   General Standards.



      A.   One (1) portable sign shall be permitted per building in
the CBD, B-1, B-2, O-1, and MXD Districts. Buildings with frontage on two
streets are permitted to have one sign on each street.



      B.   In all districts, except the CBD, a portable sign shall
be located on the premises of the business it is intended to advertise, but
not within the public right-of-way.



      C.   All sandwich board signs shall be located within 10 feet
of the building containing the business it is advertising. In the CBD, a
portable sign may be located on the sidewalk in the public right-of-way
either in front of or adjacent to the business it is intended to advertise.



      D.   All portable signs may only be displayed during regular
business hours.



      E.   A portable sign shall not occupy or obstruct the use of
any fire lane or required off-street parking.  Any sign that creates a
visual or safety hazard may be ordered to be removed by the Zoning
Administrator.



      F.   A portable sign shall not exceed nine (9) square feet per
side or a total of eighteen (18) square feet.  The height shall not exceed
four and one-half (4.5) feet.



   (3)   Additional Standards in the CBD District.  If a portable sign
is located on a public sidewalk, a minimum of five (5) feet of unobstructed
pedestrian access shall be maintained.  Sufficient room shall also be
provided to allow car doors to open.



• Section 7.08  Permitted Temporary Signs and PromotionalBanners.



   (a)   Within all non-residential zoning districts, one (1)
promotional banner is permitted per premise at any given time, but in no case
shall it remain in place for more than two (2) non-consecutive thirty (30)
day periods per calendar year.



   (b)   Promotional banners shall be permitted to be thirty (30)
square feet in size and mounted no more than six (6) feet high and ten (10)
feet in length.



   (c)   Temporary promotional banners shall not be located in a public
right-of-way, must be affixed to the principal building of the business or
freestanding, removable poles and shall be located and designed to avoid
interference with or distraction to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



   (d)   All promotional banners that are not properly maintained shall
be removed at the order of the Zoning Administrator.



   (e)   All other promotional banners are strictly prohibited.



• Section 7.09  Miscellaneous Signs.



   (a)   Signs for BedandBreakfast Accommodations. 



      (1)   The Planning Commission, in its sole discretion, may
approve one (1) of the following types of signs: ground, wall, projecting or
suspended.



      (2)   A ground sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height
and six (6) square feet in area per side, nor to exceed a total of twelve
(12) square feet in area.



      (3)   A wall sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area.



      (4)   A projecting or suspended sign shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in area per side, not to exceed a total of twelve (12) square
feet in area.  A projecting or suspendedsign shall provide a minimum of
eight (8) feet of ground clearance or otherwise be located so as to not
interfere with pedestrian traffic.



      (5)   The Planning Commission shall approve the lighting of
all signs.



   (b)   Signs for Outdoor Sales of Automobiles or Vehicles.  No
advertising signs may be placed on-site other than the permitted maximum wall
and/or ground signs as per this article. The prohibited signs include
banners, flags and digital/electronic signs.



   (c)   Signs for Automobile Filling Stations, Automobile Repair
Garage, Automobile Service Stations , Automobile Washes, and Automobile
Dealerships.  No advertising signs may be placed on-site other than the
permitted maximum wall and/or ground signs as per this article. The
prohibited signs include banners and flags. Digital/electronic signs for the
display of gas prices may be permitted under the following circumstances:



The Planning Commission may consider a digital/electronic sign for automobile
filling stations as a special land use. In review of the application for a
special land use, the Commission shall consider the standards set forth in
Section 3.03 and the following:



      (1)   The digital/electronic sign shall be exclusively for the
display of gas prices.



      (2)   The sign message and background shall each be a single
contrasting color and shall not include flashing, scrolling, blinking,
intermittent or moving lights.



      (3)   The foot-candles shall comply with the requirements of
Section 8.05.



      (4)   The size of the electronic/digital sign message area
shall not exceed 50% of the total sign surface area.



   (d)   Menuboard Signs for Drive-In and Drive-Through Businesses.



      (1)   The Planning Commission, in its sole discretion, may
approve up to two (2) menuboards upon determination that it is integral to
the nature of the business.



      (2)   Each menuboard shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height.



      (3)   One (1) menuboard (in stacking lane) shall not exceed
sixteen (16) square feet and the other (at the speaker) shall not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area.



      (4)   The area of the menuboard is exclusive of the structures
framing.



      (5)   All menuboards shall be single sided.



      (6)   No menuboard may be located within the front yard.



      (7)   The menuboard may include digital/electronic signage not
to exceed four (4) square feet.



      (8)   The Planning Commission may consider a modified sign
area, subject to the following:



         A.   Only one (1) of the menuboards may be increased in
area.



         B.   The menuboard is completely screened from the
roadway.



         C.   Under no circumstances shall the menuboard exceed
forty-eight (48) square feet in area.



• Section 7.10  Administration. 



   This article shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator or his
or her designated representative.



   (a)   Review and Approval of Signs by the Administration.  All new
or replacement signs for existing structures or uses that are not subject to
Planning Commission review, including temporary signs and banners, shall be
reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator or his or her designated
representative.  In any case, the Zoning Administrator reserves the right to
refer a sign application to the Planning Commission for a recommendation.



   (b)   Review and Approval of Signs by Planning Commission.  Signs
subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission are as follows:



      (1)   All new signs subject to the provisions of this article,
whether for existing or new structures and uses that are subject to site plan
review.



      (2)   Signs requiring special land use approval as set forth
in Sections 7.03(c) and 7.04(c), and 7.05(b).



      (3)   Signs designating sites of historical significance as
set forth in Section 7.02(f)(4).



      (4)   Signs for bed and breakfast accommodations as set forth
in Section 7.09(a).



   The application shall also describe the colors, construction materials
and method of lighting of all such signs.



   (c)   Review Standards.  The Zoning Administrator or the Planning
Commission, depending upon the review authority set forth in subsections (a)
and (b) hereof, shall review the sign plan for conformity with the objectives
and standards of this article, specifically Section 7.02, and including the
following:



      (1)   Prevention of the placement of signs in a manner that
will conceal or obscure signs or adjacent businesses;



      (2)   Keeping the number of signs and sign messages from
exceeding the level reasonably necessary to identify a business and its
products;



      (3)   Keeping signs within a reasonable scale with respect to
the buildings they identify and are located upon or near;



      (4)   Reduction of visual distraction and obstructions to
motorists traveling along, entering or leaving streets;



      (5)   Promotion of a quality manner of display which enhances
the character of the City; and



      (6)   Insuring that the design, construction material,
architecture and method of lighting of signs are harmonious with the
buildings and structures in the immediate area in order to avoid visual
blight.



   (d)   Permits Required.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to display, erect, relocate or
alter any sign without obtaining a sign permit.  Signs meeting the
provisions of Section 7.02(f) shall not require a permit.



      (2)   Sign permits shall be issued for signs in compliance
with the standards of this article.  When a sign permit has been issued by
the City, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate
from the terms or conditions of said permit without first amending the permit
or applying for a new permit.



      (3)   The application for a sign permit shall be made by the
owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be located, his or
her authorized agent, or a sign contractor.  Such application shall be made
in writing on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator  and shall be
signed by the applicant.



      (4)   The application for a sign permit, whether reviewed by
the Administrator or the Planning Commission, shall be accompanied by the
following information:



         A.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner
or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or
erector.



         B.   The location by street address of the proposed sign
structure.



         C.   Complete information as required on application
forms, including a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign,
caption of the proposed sign, and such other data as are pertinent to the
application, including the locations of the proposed sign(s) on the property
and/or buildings as well as any other existing signs located upon the
property and buildings on the site, the dimensions of the proposed sign and
all existing signs, and a drawing of such sign(s) showing the shape and
details of all names, messages, logos, symbols and other material to be
displayed upon such sign(s).  The application shall also describe the
colors, construction materials and method of lighting of all such sign(s).



         D.   Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of
the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines,
supports and footings, and materials to be used.



         E.   Application for, and required information for such
application, and an electrical permit for all electrical signs if the person
building the sign is to make the electrical connection.



         F.   A statement of valuation.



   (e)   Removal of Abandoned Signs.



      (1)    The owner's intent to abandon or no longer continue the
use of the sign shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence
before the zoning administrator.  Such evidence may include, but not be
limited to, any factor involving the use (or lack thereof) or the condition
of the sign or the business it advertises, and may include, by way of
example, such considerations as:



         A.   Whether utilities have been disconnected to the
premises to which the sign relates.



         B.   Whether any fixtures within and outside the
premises to which the sign relates have been removed.



         C.   Whether the premise to which the sign relates have
fallen into disrepair or is considered "blighted."



         D.   Whether U.S. Mail delivery for the business to
which the sign relates has been terminated or mail is forwarded to another
address.



         E.   Whether the classification of the property for tax
purposes has been changed to reflect another use.



         F.   Whether any license associated with the use of the
premises to which the sign relates has expired.



         G.   Any other evidence indicating that the business or
activity to which the sign relates is no longer operating from the advertised
premises.



      (2)   Exceptions to this restriction may be permitted by the
Planning Commission based upon the historical significance of signage.  In
determining historical significance of a sign, the Planning Commission shall
use the following guidelines:



         A.   Whether or not the sign is located on an
historically significant or contributing structure, as defined in this
ordinance.



         B.   The historical or architectural value and
significance of the sign and its relationship to the historical value of the
surrounding area;



         C.   The relationship of the exterior architectural
features of the sign to the rest of the structure and the surrounding area;



         D.   The general compatibility of exterior design,
arrangement, texture and materials of the sign; and



         E.   Other factors, including aesthetic value, which the
Planning Commission considers pertinent.



      (3)   A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the
premises upon which the sign is located within 30 days after the business
which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises.  The zoning
administrator or designee shall order the removal of any sign, including the
sign structure, erected or maintained in violation of this ordinance. 
Notice in writing shall be given to the owner of such sign or of the
building, structure, or premises on which such sign is located, to remove the
sign or bring it into compliance with the ordinance.  Notice in writing
shall be delivered in person or sent certified, return receipt requested,
within 5 days of discovery of the violation.



      (4)   If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, then
the City may remove the sign by issuance of a Municipal Civil Infraction to
the owner or by applying to a court of competent jurisdiction seeking an
order requiring removal of the sign.  Any cost of removal incurred by the
city shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is
located and may be collected in the manner of ordinance debt or in the manner
of taxes and such charge shall be a lien on the property.



      (5)   The city shall also remove the sign immediately and
without notice if it reasonably appears that the condition of the sign is
such as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public, with the
cost of removal assessed against the owner as set forth herein.



ARTICLE 8
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS



• Section 8.01  Intent.



   No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within a district that does
not conform to the standards of use, occupancy and operation provided in this
article, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements
to be maintained within such district.



• Section 8.02  Airborne Emissions, Noxious Fumes and Odors.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the
emission of any smoke or air contaminant in violation of applicable air
quality standards adopted by the Federal Clean Air Act and the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality.



   (a)   Smoke.  No person shall permit the emission of smoke from any
source to a density greater than that density described as No. 1 on the
Ringelmann Chart, except for smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal
to, but not darker than, No. 2 of the Ringelmann Chart for a period or
periods aggregating four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minutes.



   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart,
as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, and which is
hereby made a part of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be the standard. 
However, the Umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when
correlated with the Ringelmann Chart.



   (b)   Other Air Pollutants.  No person shall operate or maintain,
or cause to be operated or maintained, any process, furnace or combustion
device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without
maintaining and operating (while using such process, furnace or combustion
device) recognized and approved equipment, means, methods, devices or
contrivances to reduce the quantity of gas-borne or air-borne solids or fumes
emitted into the open air.  Such equipment, means, methods, devices or
contrivances shall be operated in conjunction with such process, furnace or
combustion device so that the quantity of gas-borne or air-borne solids does
not exceed twenty (20) grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a
temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.



   For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such equipment, means,
methods, devices or contrivances, such conditions shall be met when the
percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed fifty (50) percent at
full load.  This requirement shall be measured by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers Test Code for dust-separating apparatus.  All other
forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as
escape or emission into the open air is concerned.  The ZoningAdministrator
may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate
and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and
fly ash have been made.



   (c)   Odors.  Any condition or operation which results in the
creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the
health and welfare of the public or which interferes unreasonably with the
comfort of the public shall be removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove
the odor.  Such odors shall be prohibited when perceptible at any point
along the property line.



• Section 8.03  Noise and Vibration.



   (a)   Noise that is objectionable as determined by the City due to
volume, frequency, or beat shall be muffled, attenuated, or otherwise
controlled, subject to the following:



      (1)   Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature, or
sounds characterized by high frequencies, shall be controlled so as not to
become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 



      (2)   Sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
purposes are exempt from this requirement.  Noise resulting from temporary
construction activity shall also be exempt from this requirement.



      (3)   Noise levels shall not exceed seventy five (75) decibels
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall not exceed sixty (60)
decibels between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and must comply with
the levels set forth in the following table:



 

Sound Levels in Decibels at Property Lines


Octave Band Cycles per Second
 
Adjacent to All Residential Uses
 
Adjacent to All Commercial, Office & Industrial Uses





 

 



0 to 75
 
58
 
73


75 to 150
 
54
 
69


150 to 300
 
50
 
65


300 to 600
 
46
 
61


600 to 1200
 
40
 
55


1200 to 2400
 
33
 
43


2400 to 4800
 
26
 
41


over 4800
 
20
 
35




 



   (c)   No use shall generate any ground transmitted vibration in
excess of the limits set forth below.  Vibration shall be measured at the
nearest adjacent lot line.  The vibration maximums set forth below are
stated in terms of particle velocity, which may be measured directly with
suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and
frequency.  When computed, the following standards shall apply:



 

Particle Velocity, Inches-Per Second


Frequency in Cycles per Second
 
Displacement in Inches





 



0 to 10
 
0.0010


10 to 20
 
0.0008


20 to 30
 
0.0005


30 to 40
 
0.0004


40 and over
 
0.0003




 



   If requested by the Zoning Administrator, the petitioner shall provide
evidence of compliance with the above noted vibration calculations.



   (d)   Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.



• Section 8.04  Electrical Disturbance, Electromagnetic, or Radio
Frequency Interference.



   No use shall create an electrical disturbance that adversely affects
any operations or equipment other than those of the creator of such
disturbance, or cause, create, or contribute to the interference with
electronic signals (including television and radio broadcasting transmission)
to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of
such disturbance is adversely affected.  Radioactive materials and wastes,
including electromagnetic radiation such as x-ray machine operation, shall
not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of
Standards, when measured at the property line.



• Section 8.05  Glare and Exterior Lighting.



   (a)   Intent.  The intent of this Section is to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public by recognizing that buildings and sites
need to be illuminated for safety, security, and visibility for pedestrians
and motorists.  To do so, this Section provides standards for various forms
of lighting that will: minimize light pollution and light trespass (i.e. "sky
glow"), minimize the intrusion of excess lighting levels into residential
neighborhoods, conserve electrical energy, and curtail the degradation of the
nighttime visual environment.



   (b)   Exterior Lighting From Direct Sources.  Subject to the
provisions set forth herein, all parking areas, walkways, driveways, building
entryways, off-street parking and loading areas and building complexes with
common areas, shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of
property and the safety of persons using such public or common areas. 
Additionally, the following standards shall apply:



      (1)   Only non-glare, color-corrected lighting (such as metal
halide fixtures) shall be permitted to maintain a unified lighting standard
throughout the City and prevent "sky glow".



      (2)   Lighting shall utilize full cut-off shielding to prevent
the lamp from extending beyond the light fixture, and the illumination shall
be downward directed to prevent off-site glare.







 



      (3)   Light intensity shall not exceed one (1) foot- candle
when measured at the property line and five (5) feet above grade.  However,
light intensity shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles when measured at the
property line and five (5) feet above grade if the property abuts a
residentially zoned and/or used parcel.



      (4)   Running, chasing or otherwise intermittent lighting
shall be prohibited.  However, this shall not be considered to include LED
type lighting when permitted as a part of a sign (see Article 7).



      (5)   Lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of
twenty-five (25) feet or twenty (20) feet when adjacent to areas zoned and/or
used for residential purposes.  However, the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Administrator may consider increased height when all other ordinance
provisions are satisfied.



      (6)   All lighting, including ornamental lighting, shall be
shown on site plans in sufficient detail to allow determination of the
effects of such lighting upon adjacent properties and traffic safety.



      (7)   The Planning Commission may require decorative light
fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures where it will be compatible
with the traditional City character of the surrounding area.  In this case,
it must be proven that there will be no offsite glare.



      (8)   All outdoor lighting installed and maintained upon
private property within any non-residential district shall be turned off
between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise.  However, for uses that continue after 11:00
p.m., the lights shall be dimmed to a level necessary for security purposes
only.  The modified level shall be at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator while input may be sought from the Planning Commission.



   (c)   Light and Glare From Indirect Sources.



      (1)   Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc
welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays
shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond
the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot
lines.



      (2)   The design and/or screening of the development shall
ensure that glare from automobile and commercial or industrial vehicle
headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property, particularly
residential property.



      (3)   Exterior doors shall be located, operated and maintained
so as to prevent any glare and light from creating a nuisance or safety
hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and neighboring land uses.



   (d)   Prohibited Lighting Elements.



      (1)   The internal illumination of translucent
building-mounted canopies/awnings.



      (2)   Indirect illumination of buildings and signs that
utilize halogen bulbs in excess of 120-watts (1800 lumens) or compact
fluorescent bulbs in excess of 42 watts (3200 lumens).



      (3)   The use of laser light sources, searchlights, or any
similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment.



      (4)   Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting.



   (e)   Exemptions.  The following are exempt from the lighting
requirements of this Section, except that the Zoning Administrator may take
steps to eliminate the impact of the exempted items when deemed necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public:



      (1)   Holiday decorations



      (2)   Window displays without glare



      (3)   Shielded pedestrian walkway lighting



      (4)   Residential lighting with no off-site glare



   (f)   Submittal Requirements.  The following information must be
included for all site plan submissions and where site plan approval is not
required, some or all of the items may be required at the discretion of the
Zoning Administrator prior to lighting installation:



      (1)   Location of all freestanding, building-mounted, and
canopy light fixtures on the site plan and building elevations.



      (2)   Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan
indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in foot-candles).



      (3)   Specifications and details for the type of fixture being
proposed, including the total lumen output, type of lamp, and method of
shielding.



      (4)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator to determine compliance with provisions of this Article.



• Section 8.06  Use, Storage and Handling of Hazardous Substance; Storage
and Disposal of Solid, Liquid, and Sanitary Waste.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or
other legal entity to pollute, impair or destroy the air, water, soils or
other natural resources within the City of Howell through the use, storage
and handling of hazardous substances and/or waste or the storage and disposal
of solid, liquid, gaseous and/or sanitary waste.



   (b)   Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating
a business or conducting an activity which uses, stores or generates
hazardous substances shall obtain the necessary permits and/or licenses from
the appropriate Federal, State or local authority having jurisdiction.  The
City shall be informed of any and all inspections conducted by a Federal,
State or local authority in connection with a permit and/or license.



   (c)   Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating
a business or conducting an activity which uses, stores or generates
hazardous substances shall complete and file a Hazardous Chemicals Survey on
a form supplied by the City in conjunction with the following:



      (1)   Upon submission of a site plan.



      (2)   Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or
premise.



      (3)   Upon any change of the manner in which such substances
are used, handled, or stored, and/or in the event of a change in the type of
substances to be used, handled, or stored.



   (d)   All businesses and facilities which use, store, or generate
hazardous substances in quantities greater than one hundred (100) kilograms
per month (equal to or greater than twenty five (25) gallons or two
hundred-twenty (220) pounds) shall comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Above-Ground Storage, Use and Handling Areas for
Hazardous Substances.



         A.   Secondary containment of hazardous substances and
polluting materials shall be provided.  Secondary containment shall be
sufficiently impervious to contain the substance for the maximum anticipated
period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance.



         B.   Outdoor storage of hazardous substances and
polluting materials shall be prohibited except in product-tight containers
that are protected from weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism. 
Containers shall not be stacked more than two (2) high, shall be orderly, not
less than thirty (30) feet from the lot line, and shall not obstruct ingress
or egress.



         C.   Secondary containment structures such as
out-buildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns shall not have floor
drains.  Materials shall be kept in an orderly fashion, shall not be stacked
within four (4) feet of the ceiling and stored in a manner that shall not
obstruct access.



         D.   Areas and facilities for loading/unloading of
hazardous substances and polluting materials, as well as areas where such
materials are stored, handled and used, shall be designed and constructed to
prevent discharge or runoff.



      (2)   Underground Storage Tanks.  Existing and new
underground storage tanks shall be registered, installed, operated,
maintained, and removed in accordance with requirements of the appropriate
Federal, State or local authority having jurisdiction and shall not
contaminate the sanitary sewer system, storm drains, surface water,
groundwater, or soils.



      (3)   Loading and Unloading Areas.  Areas used for the
loading and unloading of hazardous substances shall be designed and
constructed to prevent the harmful release to the environment of hazardous
materials that may be spilled, leaked, or vented.



   (e)   All site plans for businesses or facilities which use, store
or generate hazardous substances shall be reviewed by the Fire Department,
City Engineer and any other appropriate experts as determined necessary by
the Planning Commission prior to approval by the Planning Commission.



• Section 8.07  Fire Hazard.



   The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum
gases and explosives shall comply with all applicable State rules and
regulations.



• Section 8.08  Safety.



   Existing or potential hazards and nuisances, such as construction
sites, junk yards, demolition sites, unused basements, abandoned wells or
cisterns are to be enclosed by suitable fencing or barriers so as not to
endanger public health, safety and welfare.  Compliance is required with all
applicable State rules and regulations.



• Section 8.09  Open Storage Enclosures.



   The Planning Commission, in its sole discretion, may require the
screening of open storage of industrial equipment, vehicles and materials
that are visible from any adjacent property and/or public street.  When
considering the requirement for screening, the Planning Commission shall
consider the visual effect of open storage on any adjacent residentially
zoned or used properties.  Screening of all visible portions of open storage
shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 5.10.



ARTICLE 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)



• Section 9.01  Intent.



   Planned unit development (PUD) regulations are intended to provide for
various types of land uses planned in a manner which shall encourage the use
of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; conserve natural
resources and energy; encourage innovation in land use planning; provide
enhanced housing, employment, shopping and recreational opportunities;
improve traffic and pedestrian circulation; and bring about a greater
compatibility of design and use.



   The provisions of this article provide enabling authority and standards
for the submission, review and approval of applications for planned unit
developments.



• Section 9.02  Regulations.



   (a)   A planned unit development (PUD) may be applied for in any
zoning district. The granting of a PUD application shall require a rezoning
by way of an amendment to this Zoning Ordinance upon the recommendation of
the Planning Commission and approval of the City Council.  Therefore, the
procedures set forth in Article 13, including a public hearing to be held by
the Planning Commission, shall apply.



   (b)   Any land use authorized in this Zoning Ordinance may be
included in a PUD, subject to adequate protection of the public health,
safety and welfare and the compatibility of various land uses both within and
outside the development.



   (c)   The applicant for a PUD must demonstrate all of the following
as a condition to being entitled to PUD treatment:



      (1)   Granting of the PUD will result in one (1) of the
following:



         A.   A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate
users of the project and to the community, where such benefit would otherwise
be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of the PUD
regulations; or



         B.   Long-term protection and preservation of natural
resources and natural features of a significant quantity and/or quality,
where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved
without application of the PUD regulations; or



         C.   A nonconforming use shall, to a material extent. be
rendered more conforming, or less offensive, to the zoning district in which
it is situated.



      (2)   The proposed type and density of use shall not result in
an unreasonable increase in the need for or burden upon public services,
facilities, roads and utilities.



      (3)   The proposed development shall be consistent with the
public health, safety and welfare of the City.



      (4)   The proposed development shall not result in an
unreasonable negative environmental impact on the subject site or surrounding
land.



      (5)   The proposed development shall not result in an
unreasonable negative economic impact upon surrounding properties.



• Section 9.03  Procedure for Review.



   (a)   Pre-application Conference.  Prior to the submission of an
application for planned unit development (PUD) approval, the applicant shall
meet with the Zoning Administrator, together with any City staff and
consultants the Administrator deems appropriate.  The applicant shall
present at such conference or conferences, at least a sketch plan of the
proposed PUD as well as the following information: total number of acres in
the project; a statement of the number of residential units, if any; the
number and type of nonresidential units and the number of acres to be
occupied by each type of use; the known deviations from the Ordinance
regulations which are to be sought; the number of acres to be preserved as
open or recreational space; and all known natural resources and natural
features to be preserved.



   (b)   Preliminary Plan.  Following the pre-application conference,
the applicant shall submit to the Building Department a preliminary site plan
of the proposed PUD in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section
3.04 and conforming with this section.  The Planning Commission shall review
the preliminary site plan and shall provide the applicant with written
comments, which shall be part of the official minutes of the Planning
Commission.  Review and comment upon a preliminary plan by the Planning
Commission shall not bind the City to approval of a final PUD plan.



   The preliminary site plan for a PUD shall contain at a minimum the
following information:



      (1)   Evidence of ownership; location and description of site;
dimensions and areas;



      (2)   General topography and soil information;



      (3)   Scale, north arrow, date of plan;



      (4)   Existing zoning of site; existing land use and zoning of
adjacent parcels; location of existing buildings, drives and streets on the
site and within 100 feet of the site;



      (5)   Location, type and land area of each proposed land use;
dwelling unit density (dwelling units per acre);



      (6)   Location, size and uses of open space;



      (7)   General description of the organization to be utilized
to own and maintain common areas and facilities;



      (8)   General landscape concept showing tree masses to be
preserved or added, buffer areas and similar features;



      (9)   General description of proposed water, sanitary and
storm drainage systems;



      (10)   Existing natural and man-made features to be preserved
or removed; location of existing structures, streets and drives; location,
width and purpose of existing easements;



      (11)   General location, function, surface width and rights of
way of proposed public and private streets;



      (12)   General location of proposed parking areas and
approximate number of spaces to be provided in each area; and



      (13)   Location and area of each development phase.



   (c)   Final Plan.  Within six (6) months following receipt of the
Planning Commission comments on the preliminary PUD plan, the applicant shall
submit a final PUD plan to the Building Department in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section 3.04 and conforming with this section.  If a
final PUD plan is not submitted by the applicant for approval within six (6)
months following receipt of Planning Commission comments, the preliminary PUD
plan approval becomes null and void.



   The final PUD plan shall constitute an application to amend this Zoning
Ordinance, and shall be noticed for public hearing before the Planning
Commission, and otherwise acted upon by the Planning Commission and the City
Council, as provided by law (see Article 13)  The Planning Commission shall,
to the extent it deems appropriate, submit detailed recommendations relative
to the PUD project, including, without limitation, recommendations with
respect to matters on which the City Council must exercise discretion. 
Final PUD plans shall include the following:



      (1)   A site plan meeting all requirements of Section 3.04;



      (2)   A separate narrative that provides specific details
regarding all deviations from this Zoning Ordinance that would otherwise be
applicable in the absence of this PUD article;



      (3)   A specific schedule of the intended development and
construction details, including phasing or timing;



      (4)   A specific schedule of the general improvements to
constitute a part of the development, including, without limitation,
lighting, signage, the mechanisms designed to reduce noise, utilities and
visual screening features;



      (5)   A specification of the exterior building materials and
architecture with respect to the structures proposed in the project; and



      (6)   Signatures of all parties having an interest in the
property.



• Section 9.04  Project Design Standards.



   (a)   Residential Design Standards.



      (1)   Residential uses shall be permitted with the following
maximum densities, based upon the zoning district in which the property is
situated immediately prior to classification under this article.  Land area
under water, public road rights-of-way and private road easements shall not
be included in the gross density calculation.



                        Maximum Density Permitted



      District               Dwellingunits/Gross Acres



      R-2                     3.5



      R-1                      4.0



      R-T                     8.0



      R-M                     9.0



      O-1                     9.0



      CBD                     9.0



      B-1                     9.0



      B-2                     9.0



      I-1                     9.0



      I-2                     9.0



      (2)   Where a planned unit development (PUD) contains both
residential and non-residential land uses, residential density shall be
calculated on the basis of the area devoted to residential land use only.



      (3)   Additional density greater than that specified in (a)
(1) hereof for residential uses may be allowed in the discretion of the City
Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and based upon a
demonstration by the applicant of planning and design excellence resulting in
a material benefit to the City, adjacent land uses and/or the ultimate users
of the project, including, without limitation, innovative design producing
significant energy efficiency, pedestrian or vehicular safety, long-term
aesthetic beauty, and protection and preservation of natural resources and
features.



   (b)   Nonresidential Design Standards.



      (1)   Nonresidential uses may be permitted in combination with
other nonresidential uses or as part of a common development with residential
uses.



      (2)   Nonresidential uses, including parking and drives, shall
be separated and buffered from residential units.



   (c)   General Design Standards.



      (1)   All regulations applicable to setbacks, parking and
loading, general provisions and other requirements shall be met in relation
to each respective land use in the development based upon the zoning district
in which the use is listed as a permitted or specially permitted use. In all
cases, the strictest provisions shall apply.



   Notwithstanding the immediately preceding paragraph, deviations with
respect to such regulations may be granted as part of the overall approval of
the PUD, provided there are features or elements designed into the project
plan for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this article.



      (2)   To the maximum extent feasible, the development shall be
designed so as to preserve natural resources and natural features.



      (3)   There shall be a perimeter setback and berming, for the
purpose of buffering the development in relation to surrounding properties.
Such perimeter setback shall be established with a dimension from the
property line of up to one hundred (100) feet in the discretion of the City
Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, taking into
consideration the use or uses in and adjacent to the development.  The
setback distance need not be uniform at all points on the perimeter of the
development.



      (4)   Thoroughfare, drainage and utility design shall meet or
exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the
respective types of uses served.



      (5)   There shall be underground installation of utilities,
including cable, electricity and telephone, as found necessary by the City.



      (6)   Signage, lighting, landscaping, building architecture
and materials, and other features of the project, and shall be designed to
achieve an integrated and controlled development, consistent with the
character of the community, surrounding development or developments, and
natural features of the area.



      (7)   Where nonresidential uses adjoin residentially zoned
property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms, such as landscape
berms and/or decorative walls, shall be employed.



      (8)   The City Council, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, shall resolve all ambiguities as to applicable
regulations using the Zoning Ordinance, Master Plan and other City standards
or policies as a guide.



• Section 9.05  Conditions.



   (a)   Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of a
planned unit development (PUD), to the extent authorized by law, for the
purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a
proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased
service and facility loads caused by the land use, protecting the natural
environment and natural resources, ensuring compatibility with adjacent land
uses, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable
manner.



   (b)   Conditions imposed shall be designed as follows: to protect
natural resources and the public health, safety and welfare of individuals in
the project, those immediately adjacent and the community as a whole; to meet
the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance; and to ensure compliance
with the standards of this Zoning Ordinance. All conditions imposed shall be
made a part of the record of the approved PUD.



• Section 9.06  Phasing and Commencement of Construction.



   (a)   Phasing.  Where a project is proposed for construction in
phases, each phase, upon completion, shall be capable of standing on its own
in terms of services, facilities and open space, and shall contain the
necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the
health, safety and welfare of the users of the planned unit development (PUD)
and the residents of the surrounding area.  In addition, in developments
which include residential and nonresidential uses, the relative mix of uses
and the scheduled completion of construction for each phase shall be
disclosed and determined to be reasonable in the discretion of the City
Council after recommendation from the Planning Commission.



   (b)   Commencement and Completion of Construction.  Construction
shall be commenced within one (1) year following final approval of a PUD. 
Each phase of the project shall be commenced within one (1) year of the
schedule established for the same in the application submitted.  If
construction is not commenced within such time, any approval of a site plan
on the project shall expire and be null and void.  However, an extension for
a specified period may be granted by the City Council upon good cause shown
if such request is made prior to the expiration of the initial period. 
Moreover, in the event a site plan has expired, the City shall be authorized
to rezone the property in any reasonable manner, and, if the property remains
classified as PUD, a new application shall be required and shall be reviewed
in light of then existing and applicable law and ordinance provisions.



• Section 9.07  Performance Guarantees.



   In the interest of ensuring compliance with this article and protecting
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City, the Planning
Commission, as a condition of final approval of the site plan, shall require
the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee as set forth in Section 3.09
for the completion of improvements associated with the proposed use.



• Section 9.08  Effect of Approval. 



   When approved, the planned unit development (PUD) amendment, with all
conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use authorization for
the property, and all improvement and use shall be in conformity with such
amendment.



• Section 9.09  Modification of an Approval Final Plan.



   (a)   Approved final plans for a planned unit development (PUD) may
be modified in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 9.03(c).



   (b)   Minor changes may be permitted by the Planning Commission,
following normal site plan review procedures outlined in Section 3.04,
subject to its finding that:



      (1)   Such changes will not adversely or substantially affect
the initial basis for granting approval; and



      (2)   Such minor changes will not adversely or substantially
affect the overall PUD in light of intent and purpose of such development as
set forth in Section 9.01.



ARTICLE 10
OFF-STREETPARKING AND LOADING



• Section 10.01  Intent.



   The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of off-street
parking facilities that are sufficient in number, adequately sized and
properly designed to meet the range of parking needs and demands that are
associated with land uses now in place in the City or with land uses allowed
by this Ordinance.



• Section 10.02  General Provisions.



   Off-street parking facilities that are sufficient in number, adequately
sized and properly designed to meet the range of parking needs and demands
that are associated with the land uses allowed by this Zoning Ordinance shall
be required in all districts, subject to the provisions of this article.



   (a)   Where Required.  In all zoning districts, off-street parking
facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for
the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the buildings hereafter
erected, altered, or extended after the effective data of this Ordinance,
shall be provided as herein prescribed.  Such space shall be maintained and
shall not be encroached upon so long as said mainbuilding or structure
remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in
conformance with this Ordinance.



   (b)   Existing Off-Street Parking at Effective Date of Ordinance. 
Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Ordinance which
serve an existing building or use, shall not be reduced in size to less than
that required under the terms of this Ordinance.



   (c)   Required Greenbelt and Setbacks.  Off-street parking,
including maneuvering lanes, shall not be located within the required front
setback and screened in accordance with Section 5.10.  Off-street parking
shall be permitted within the required side or rear yard setbacks, provided a
minimum five (5) foot setback is maintained between off-street parking and
the side and rear lot lines of all adjoining properties.  At the discretion
of the Planning Commission, existing platted lots of record with equal to or
less than sixty- six (66) feet of frontage may be exempt from the greenbelt
and setback requirements.



   (d)   Parking Duration.  Except when land is used as storage space
in connection with the business (including a repossession lot), or a repair
or service garage, a twenty-four (24) hour time limit for parking in
non-residential off-street parking areas shall prevail, it being the purpose
and intention of the foregoing that the requirement of maintaining vehicle
storage or parking space is to provide for the public safety in keeping
parked cars off the streets, but such requirement is not designed to or
intended to provide, and it shall be unlawful to permit, the storage or
prolonged parking on any such parking area in any such district wrecked or
junked cars, or for creating a junk yard or a nuisance in such areas.



   (e)   Units and Methods of Measurement.  For the purpose of
determining off-street parking requirements, the following units of
measurement shall apply:



      (1)   FloorArea.  Where floorarea is the unit for determining
the required number of off-streetparkingspaces, said unit shall mean
floorarea, as defined in Section 2.02.



      (2)   Employees.  For requirements stated in terms of
employees, the calculation shall be based upon the maximum number of
employees likely to be on the premises during the largest shift.



      (3)   Places of Assembly.  In stadiums, sports arenas,
churches and other places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy
benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, seating space required by
the Building Code adopted by the City shall be counted as one (1) seat.  In
cases where a place of assembly has both fixed seats and an open assembly
area, requirements shall be computed separately for each type and added
together.



      (4)   Fractional Requirements.  When units or measurements
determining the number of required parking spaces result in a fractional
space, any fraction shall require one (1) parking space.



   (f)   General Restrictions.



      (1)   All Districts.



         A.   The sale or repair of motor vehicles not owned by
the occupant of the premises shall be prohibited in an off-street parking
area, lot, or driveway.



         B.   The outdoor display of products and materials
intended for retail sale and rental within off- streetparking areas shall
comply with the standards set forth in Section 6.18.



         C.   The storage of products, materials or equipment in
semi-trailers shall be prohibited in any zoning district except the I-1 and
I-2 Districts.  The requirements of Section 5.13 shall apply to all such
uses.



   (g)   Location of Parking.



      (1)   One and Two-Family Dwellings.  Off-street parking shall
be located on the same lot or parcel of the dwelling it is intended to serve,
shall not be considered a parking lot under the provisions of this article,
and is subject to the following:



         A.   Off-street parking serving one and
two-familydwellings shall not be permitted in the required front yard except
on the driveway or within a carport or garage.



         B.   Driveways and parking spaces serving dwellings
constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be located a
minimum of two (2) feet from a side or rear lot line.



         C.   Single family residential dwellings shall have a
maximum of one driveway, unless located on a corner lot.



         D.   Additional residential driveways and parking spaces
may be permitted by the Planning Commission as a Special Land Use. 
Standards for additional drives within a front yard are as follows:



            a.   Only one additional driveway (for a maximum
of two) may be considered in any front yard.



            b.   Driveways and parking shall not occupy more
than fifty (50) percent of the required front yard and fifty (50) percent of
any additional area of the front yard located outside of the required front
yard. These requirements shall apply to all yards that abut a public street.



            c.   The maximum width for an additional circular
drive proposed in any front yard shall be 12 feet.



            d.   The maximum width for any additional
non-circular drive proposed in any front yard shall be the width of the
door(s) and/or man doors serving the garage or 24 feet, whichever is larger.



      (2)   Multi-family residential uses within Single-family (R-1
and R-2) residential districts.



         A.   Driveways and parking for multi-family residential
homes located in the R-1 or R-2 zoning districts must comply with the one and
two-family dwelling standards in (1).



         B.   Additional driveways and parking spaces may be
permitted by the Planning Commission as a Special Land Use.  No additional
driveways or parking spaces shall be considered in the front yard.  A
maximum of 50% of the total area of the rear and side yard may be considered
for parking spaces or driveways.



      (3)   Multiple Family Residential within the RM Zoning
District.  The off-street parking facilities for multiple familydwellings
shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the dwellings they are intended
to serve, and shall consist of a parking lot as set forth in this article. 
In no event shall any parking space be located within ten (10) feet to any
mainbuilding.



      (4)   All Other Uses.  Off-street parking for all other uses,
other than those listed in paragraph (g)(1) and (g)(2) hereof, shall be
located on the same lot or parcel of the building or buildings they are
intended to serve and are subject to the following conditions:



         a.   Special land use approval may be granted for
off-street parking areas located within five hundred (500) feet of the
permitted use requiring such off-streetparking.



         b.   Parking is permitted in the front yard in the RM,
O-1, CBD, B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts with a minimum ten (10) foot
setback from the street right-of-way provided.



         c.   The parking plan layout, points of access and
screening shall be approved by the Planning Commission.



         d.   Screening shall be provided in accordance with
Section 5.10.



         e.   Off-street parking shall be permitted within the
required side or rear yard setbacks.



      (5)   Restriction of Parking on Private Property.  It shall
be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park any motor vehicle on
any private property without the authorization of the owner or agent of such
property.



• Section 10.03  Off-Street Parking Requirements.



   (a)   The amount of required off-street parking spaces for new uses
or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings shall be
determined in accordance with the table set forth in Section 10.04, no more
or less may be approved except under the flexibility provisions found in
Section 10.03(e) below.  Parking requirements listed in Section 10.04 shall
not include off-street stacking spaces for drive-through facilities that are
listed in Section 10.07.



   (b)   Similar Uses and Requirements.  When a use is not
specifically mentioned, the requirements of off- streetparking for a similar
use shall apply.



   (c)   Collective Provisions.  Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parkingfacilities
for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided such facilities collectively
shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual
uses computed separately in accordance with Section 10.04 of this article.



   (d)   Parking Exemption.  As of the effective date of this
Ordinance, buildings and uses located within the CBD, Central Business
District shall be exempt from providing off-streetparking, with the exception
of new residential construction.  Additionally, all existing off-street
parking areas constructed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall
remain.



   (e)   Flexibility in Application.  The City recognizes that, due to
the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of
the parking standards set forth in Section 10.04 may result in development
with inadequate parking or parking far in excess of that which is needed. 
The former situation may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized parking
on adjacent streets or neighboring sites.  The latter situation may result
in excessive paving and storm water runoff and a waste of space that could be
left as open space.



   The Planning Commission may permit deviations from the requirements of
Section 10.04 and may require more or less parking based upon a finding that
such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking
spaces to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. 
The Planning Commission may also grant deviations in the instance where two
(2) or more buildings or uses collectively provide the required off-street
parking.  In the case where collective parking may be permitted, the
Planning Commission shall consider the hours of operation of the respective
uses.  The Planning Commission may attach conditions to the approval of a
deviation from the requirement of Section 10.04 that bind such approval to
the specific use in question.  Where a deviation results in a reduction of
parking, the planning Commission may further impose conditions which ensure
that adequate reserve area is set aside for future parking, if needed. Where
an area is set aside for reserve parking, it shall be easily developed, not
devoted to a use other than open space, and shall be designed to accommodate
attendant facilities such as maneuvering lanes and drainage.



   Where a deviation results in a reduction of parking, the Planning
Commission may require that an adequate usable reserve area is set aside for
future parking.  Where an area is set aside for reserve parking, it shall be
easily developed, not devoted to a use other than open space and be designed
to accommodate attendant facilities such as maneuveringlanes and drainage.



• Section 10.04  Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements. 



   The amount of required off-street parkingspace for new uses or
buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings shall be
determined in accordance with the following table:



 

Use
 
Number of Parking Spaces Required per Unit of Measure




A.   Residential Uses.
 



   1)   One or Two-Family Dwellings
 
2 Per each dwellingunit


   2)   Multiple Family Dwellings
 
2 Per each dwelling, plus



 
1 Per each ten (10) dwellingunits


   3)   Mobile Home Parks
 
2 Per each trailer site, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   4)   Bed and Breakfast Establishments
 
1 Per each bedroom


B.   Institutional Uses.
 



   1)   Churches
 
1 Per each three (3) seats based upon maximum seating capacity in the main
place of assembly therein


   2)   Private Clubs and Lodges
 
1 Per each three (3) individual members allowed within the maximum occupancy
load as established by  fire and/or buildingcodes


   3)   Hospitals
 
1 Per each four (4) beds, plus



 
1 Per staff doctor, plus



 
1 Per each employee @ peak shift


   4)   Nursing Homes/Convalescent Centers, Adult Foster Care and
Congregate Facilities
 
1 Per each five (5) beds, plus



 
1 Per each staff doctor, plus



 
1 Per each employee @ peak shift


   5)   Housing for the Elderly
 



   Independent Living Facilities
 
1 Per each dwellingunit, plus



 
1 Per each employee @ peak shift


   Assisted Living Facilities
 
1 Per each two (2) dwellingunits, plus



 
1 Per each employee @ peak shift


   6)   Child Foster Family Group Homes
 
1 Per each family member, plus



 
1   Per each two (2) children


   7)   Adult Foster Care Small Group Homes
 
1 Per each employee/caregiver


   8)   Child/Adult Group Day Care Homes
 
1 Per each employee @ peak shift


   9)   Child/Adult Day Care Centers
 
1 Per each employee @ peak shift, plus



 
1 Per each five (5) persons enrolled


   10)   High Schools, Trade Schools, Colleges and Universities
 
1 Per each teacher, plus



 
1 Per each ten (10) students, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   11)   Elementary and Intermediate Schools
 
1 Per each teacher, plus



 
1 Per each twenty-five (25) students, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   12)   Stadiums, Sports Arenas and Auditoriums
 
1 Per each four (4) seats based upon maximum seating capacity


   13)   Publicly Owned Buildings
 
1 Per each 250 sq. ft. of floorarea


   14)   Libraries and Museums
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of floorarea, excluding areas devoted to bookshelves


   15)   Spouse Abuse/Domestic Violence Shelters
 
1 Per each bedroom, plus



 
1 Per each employee


C.   General Commercial Uses.
 



   1)   Retail Stores, except as otherwise specified herein
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   2)   Supermarkets, Drugstores, and other self-serve retail
establishments
 
1 Per each 250 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   3)   Convenience Stores
 
1 Per each 150 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   4)   Video Stores
 
1 Per each 100 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   5)   Department Stores
 
1 Per each 250 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   6)   Furniture, Appliances, Hardware, Electronics, and Household
Equipment Sales
 
1 Per each 400 sq. ft. of usablefloorarea, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   7)   Appliance Repair Shops
 
1 Per each 800 sq. ft. of usablefloorarea, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   8)   Motels and Hotels
 
1 Per each guest bedroom, plus



 
1 Per each employee, plus amount required for accessoryuses, such as a
restaurant or cocktail lounge


   9)   Drive-in, Drive-through and Fast Food Restaurants
 
1 Per each 125 sq. ft. of usable floorarea, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   10)   Sit-Down Restaurants
 
1 Per each three (3) seats, based upon maximum seating capacity, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   11)   Taverns/Bars
 
1 Per each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as
established by fire and/or building codes, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   12)   Sidewalk Cafes
 
1 Per each three (3) seats


   13)   Garden Stores, Building Material Sales
 
1 Per each 800 sq. ft. of lotarea used for said business provided for herein


   14)   Movie Theaters
 
1 Per each four (4) seats based on the maximum seating capacity, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   15)   Self Service Laundry
 
1  Per each two (2) machines


   16)   Dry Cleaners
 
1 Per each 250 sq. ft. of usable floor area


   17)   Reception Halls
 
1 Per each three (3) individuals allowed within the maximum occupancy load as
established by  fire and/or buildingcodes


   18)   Bus Terminal Stations
 
1 Per each three (3) individuals, allowed within the maximum capacity load as
established by the fire and/or buildingcodes


   19)   Shops of Interior Decorators, Plumbers Electricians,
Exterminators and Similar Services and Trades
 
1 Per each 800 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   20)   Wholesale Stores/Clubs
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of usablefloorarea, plus



 
1 Per each three (3) employees


   21)   Funeral Home and Mortuaries
 
1 Per each 50 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   22)   Florist Shops
 
1 Per each 250 sq. ft. of usablefloorarea, plus



 
1 Per each employee


D.   Automotive Uses.
 



   1)   Automobile Dealerships
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of showroom floorarea, plus



 
1 Per each employee, plus



 
1 Per each service stall


   2)   Automobile Repair Garages
 
2 Per each service stall, plus



 
1 Per each employee, plus



 
1 Per each service vehicle


   3)   Automobile Filling Stations without a Convenience Store
 
1 Per each pump unit, plus



 
2 Per each service stall, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   4)   Automobile Filling Stations with a Convenience Store
 
1 Per each pump unit, plus



 
2 Per each service stall, plus



 
1 Per each employee, plus



 
1 Per each 100 sq. ft. of usablefloorarea devoted to retail sales and
customer service


   5)   Automobile Washes (self-serve)
 
1 Per each wash stall, plus



 
1 Per each vacuum station, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   6)   Automobile Washes (Automatic)
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of usablefloorarea of customer waiting and service
areas, plus



 
1 Per each vacuum station, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   7)   Collision or Bump Shops, and other similar uses
 
2 Per each stall or service area, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   8)   Outdoor Sale of Automobiles
 
1 Per each 400 square feet of outdoor display area, plus



 
1 Per each employee


E.    Office and Service Uses.
 



   1)   Medical and Dental Offices
 
1 Per each 150 sq. ft. of usable floor area


   2)   Executive, Administrative and Professional Offices
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   3)   Banks
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   4)   Barber and Beauty Shops
 
3 Per each chair


   5)   Photography Studios
 
1 Per each 200 square feet of usable floor area, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   6)   Pharmacies
 
1 Per each 100 square feet of usable floor area, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   7)   Veterinary Offices and Hospitals
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   8)   Data Processing and Computer Centers
 
1 Per each 250 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


   9)   Personal Service Establishments
 
1 Per each 100 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


F.   Recreational Uses.
 



   1)   Bowling Alleys
 
4 Per each bowling lane, plus



 
1 Per each employee, plus



 
Amount required for accessoryuses such as a restaurant or tavern


   2)   Private Tennis, Swim or Golf Clubs, or other similar uses
 
1 Per each two (2) members, plus



 
Amount required for accessoryuses such as a restaurant or tavern


   3)   Golf Courses, except Miniature or "Par 3" Courses
 
5 Per each hole, plus



 
1 Per each employee, plus



 
Amount required for accessoryuses such as a restaurant or tavern


   4)   Dance Halls, Pool or Billiard Parlors, Roller or Skating Rinks,
Exhibition Halls and Assembly Halls without fixed seats
 
1 Per each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as
established by local or County fire, building or health codes


   5)   Miniature or "Par 3" Golf Courses, Amusement Parks and Carnivals
 
3 Per each hole, plus



 
1  Per each employee


   6)   Music, Dance and Artistic Studios
 
1 Per each 100 sq. ft. of usable floorarea


G.   Industrial Uses.
 



   1)   Manufacturing, Research, Design, Processing, Assembly, Testing
and Repair Center
 
1 Per each employee, or



 
1 Per each 800 sq. ft. of usable floor area (whichever is greater)


   2)   Self-storage Facilities
 
1 Per each 150 storage spaces or fraction thereof, with no less than three
(3) for office use


   3)   Warehouses and Storage Buildings
 
1 Per each employee, or



 
1 Per each 2,000 sq. ft. of usable floorarea (whichever is greater)


   4)   Contractors Offices
 
1 Per each employee


   5)   Wholesale Establishments and Mills
 
5 Total, plus



 
1 Per each employee @ peak shift, or



 
1 Per every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space (whichever is greater)


   6)   Metal Fabrication and Tool and Die Shops
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of office floor area, or



 
1 Per each 800 sq. ft. of usable floorarea (whichever is greater)


   7)   Newspaper Offices with or without Printing Presses
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of office floor area, plus



 
1 Per each employee


   8)   Industrial Automobile Washes
 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area of customer waiting and service
areas, plus



 
1 Per each employee




 



• Section 10.05  Handicapped Parking Requirements.



   In addition to the parking required for passenger vehicles as set forth
in Section 10.04, off-street barrier-free parking facilities shall be
designed in accordance with applicable State and/or Federal standards,
whichever is more restrictive.



• Section 10.06  Off-Street Parking Lot Design and Construction.



   The construction of any parking lot or driveway shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the provisions of this article and a certificate of
zoning compliance granted before use of the property and before a Certificate
of Occupancy is issued.  Unless incorporated into a site plan that is
prepared and approved in accordance withSection 3.04, plans for the
development of any parking lot must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.  The plans shall be prepared at a scale to be determined by
the Zoning Administrator and indicating existing and proposed grades,
drainage, pipe sizes, parking of all dimensions, type of curbing, drive and
aisle dimensions, lighting, adjacent, sidewalks, landscaping, surfacing and
base materials to be used and the layout of the proposed parking lot.



   (a)   No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit
therefore is issued by the ZoningAdministrator.  An application for such
permit shall be submitted in such form as may be determined by the
Administrator and shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans for the
development and construction of the parking lot showing that this article
will be fully complied with.



   (b)   All such parking lots, driveways, maneuvering lanes, or
loading areas shall be constructed with a paved surface area as required
under this article, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface
water which might accumulate within or upon such area, and shall be
completely constructed prior to final occupancy. Drainage for parking lots
and driveways shall meet the City's Engineering Design Standards and be
designed to preclude drainage of water onto adjoining properties or toward
buildings.



   (c)   All lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area
shall be so installed as to be confined within, and directed onto, the
parking area only, and shall meet with the standards set forth in Section
8.05.



   (d)   Parking lots shall be landscaped and screened in accordance
with the standards set forth in Section 5.10.  The standards are intended to
minimize noise, glare and other nuisance characteristics as well as to
improve the environment of the site and surrounding area.  Large parking
lots shall be broken down into sections as appropriate for the type and size
of the development.  Sections shall also be separated by landscaped dividing
strips, berms and similar elements.



   (e)   Adequate ingress and egress to and from the parking lot  by
means of clearly limited and defined drive or maneuvering lane, shall be
provided for all vehicles.  Such ingress and egress to and from a parking
lot lying in an area zoned for other than one-family residential use shall
not be across land zoned for one-family residential use.  The minimum width
of the drive or maneuveringlane shall be governed by subsection (g); however,
the Planning Commission may approve a narrower drive based upon unique and
non-owner created circumstances.  Backing directly onto a public or private
street is prohibited.



   (f)   Where necessary to prevent encroaching upon pedestrian
walkways or damaging required landscaping, wheel stops shall be provided. 
No portion of a parking space and/or maneuvering aisle shall obstruct or
encroach upon a public sidewalk.



   (g)   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be
in accordance with the following minimum regulations:



 




 

Maneuvering Lane Width

 

Entrance Drive Width

 



 






Parking Pattern

 

One-way

 

Two-way

 

One-Way

 

Two-way

 

Parking Space Width

 

Parking Space Length




0° Parallel

 

14 ft.

 

22 ft.

 

14 ft.

 

22 ft.

 

9 ft.

 

25 ft.




30° - 53°

 

16 ft.

 

22 ft.

 

14 ft.

 

22 ft.

 

9 ft.

 

20 ft.




54° - 74°

 

20 ft.

 

24 ft.

 

14 ft.

 

22 ft.

 

9 ft.

 

20 ft.




75° - 90°

 

20 ft.

 

24 ft.

 

14 ft.

 

22 ft.

 

9 ft.

 

20 ft.




 



   (h)   Each entrance and exit to and from an off-street parking lot
located in an area zoned for other than one-family residential use shall be
at least twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent property located in a
one-family residential district.



   (i)   Wherever a wall extends to an alley which is a means of
ingress and egress to and from an off-street parking area, it is permissible
to end the wall not more than ten (10) feet from such alley line in order to
permit a wider means of access to the parking area.



   (j)   Driveways serving one and two-family dwellings.



      (1)   Driveways constructed after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and constructed with a
paved surface area approved by the Zoning Administrator and installed within
one (1) year of occupancy of the dwelling.



      (2)   Driveways shall be no wider than the width of the
door(s) and/or man doors serving the garage or 24 feet, whichever is larger.



      (3)   Driveways may continue around the side of a garage to
provide an additional parking space in the side yard adjacent to the garage,
no wider than 10 feet and meeting the setbacks of Section 10.02(g)(1).



      (4)   Existing gravel driveways that are improved or expanded
shall consist of processed road gravel (22A or the equivalent), spread to a
depth of six (6) to eight (8) inches and compacted. Said gravel driveways
shall be contained through the use of landscape timbers or similar materials
to prevent the spread of gravel or expansion of the driveway.



      (5)   In all cases when an existing driveway is improved or
expanded, the driveway approach shall be paved to the sidewalk. In areas
where there is the concrete curb and gutter, the approach shall be concrete.
Where there is no sidewalk, the driveway approach shall be paved to the
property line. However, these provisions may be waived by the Zoning
Administrator where unusual drainage conditions exist.



   (k)   Driveway Approaches and Aprons.



      (1)   Concrete and/or asphalt driveway approaches and driveway
aprons serving any use within the City that exists prior to any local or
major street reconstruction shall be replaced during local and major street
reconstruction at no cost to the property owner. The City Engineering
Department shall determine the area of the driveway approach and/or driveway
apron area and whether concrete or asphalt is to be used, based upon the
project design of the local or major street reconstruction.



      (2)   Gravel driveway approaches and driveway aprons serving
any use within the City which exists prior to any local or major street
reconstruction shall be replaced during local and major street reconstruction
at no cost to the property owners. The City Engineering Department shall
determine the area of the driveway approach/driveway apron area and whether
concrete or asphalt is to be used, based upon the project design of the local
or major street reconstruction.



      (3)   The approach or apron shall be installed, where there is
an existing sidewalk, to the sidewalk, and where there is no sidewalk, the
approach shall be installed to the property line, or to a proposed sidewalk,
as determined by the City Engineering Department.



      (4)   The future cost to replace and/or repair the driveway
approach or apron after installation by the City shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner after expiration of the construction warranty.



• Section 10.07  Off-Street Loading Requirements.



   On the same premises with every building or structure, or part thereof,
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for
standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with the
public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as
follows:



   (a)   Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement
having an asphalt or concrete base so as to provide a permanent, durable and
dustless surface.



   (b)   Such loading and unloading space, unless completely and
adequately provided for within a building, shall be an area ten (10) feet
wide by fifty (50) feet long, with a fourteen (14) foot height clearance, and
shall be provided according to the following schedule:



Gross FloorArea of Building (sq. ft.)   Required Loading and Unloading
Spaces



0-2,000               None



2,000-20,000               One (1) space



20,000 – 100,000            One (1) space plus one (1) space
for each 20,000 sq. ft in excess of 20,000 sq. ft



100,000 – 500,000            Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space
for each 40,000 sq. ft in excess of 100,000 sq. ft



Over 500,000            Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) space
for each 80,000 sq. ft in excess of 500,000 sq. ft



   (c)   Required Greenbelt, Setbacks and Screening.



      (1)   Off-street loading areas, including maneuvering lanes,
shall not be located within the frontgreenbelt required in accordance with
Section 5.10.  However, off-street loading shall be permitted within the
required side or rear yard setbacks, provided a minimum ten (10) foot setback
is maintained between off-street loading and the abutting side and rear lot
lines.



      (2)   Off-street loading that abuts residentially zoned or
used property shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.10.



   (d)   Double Count.  Off-street loadingspace areas shall not be
construed as, or counted toward, the supplying of area required as off-street
parking spaces .



• Section 10.08  Off-Street Stacking Space for Drive-through Facilities.



   (a)   Drive-through Facilities.  In addition to meeting off-street
parking requirements, all uses that provide drive-through facilities for
serving customers within their automobiles shall provide adequate
off-streetstackingspace within a defined stacking lane that meets the
following requirements:



      (1)   Each stacking space shall be computed on the basis of
ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length.  Each stacking lane
shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide.



      (2)   Clear identification and delineation between the
drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be provided.  Drive-through
facilities shall be designed in a manner that promotes pedestrian and
vehicular safety.



      (3)   Each drive-through facility shall have an escape lane to
allow other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served.  The Planning
Commission may waive the requirement for an escape lane where it can be
demonstrated that such a waiver will not result in an adverse effect on
public safety or the convenience of the patrons of the facility.



      (4)   The number of stackingspaces per service lane shall be
provided for the uses listed below.  Each stacking space shall be computed
on the basis of twenty (20) feet in length.  When a use is not specifically
mentioned, the requirements for off-street stacking spaces for a similar use
shall apply.



 

Use
 

Stackingspaces Per Service Lane






 





   Banks
 

4



   Pharmacy
 

4



   Drycleaners
 

4



   Fast-food Restaurants
 

6



   Car Washes (Self-service)
 





     Entry
 

3



     Exit
 

1



   Car Washes (Automatic)
 





     Entry
 

6



     Exit
 

2





 



   (b)   Off-Street Waiting Spaces.  Uses such as day-cares, schools,
hospitals, nursinghomes and churches shall provide a safe and efficient means
for passengers to be dropped off and picked up.  Such off-street waiting
spaces shall be clearly delineated so as to ensure the safety of pedestrians
and motorists.



• Section 10.09  Storage and Parking of RecreationalEquipment.



   Storage and parking of recreationalequipment within all residentially
zoned districts shall comply with the following:



   (a)   Storage or parking shall not be permitted on vacant lots or
parcels, except as approved by the ZoningAdministrator.



   (b)   All such vehicles shall remain unoccupied and shall not be
connected to sanitary sewer facilities or have a fixed connection to
electricity, water or gas, except that the parking and occupancy of a
recreational vehicle on private property shall be permitted for a period not
to exceed two (2) weeks, and not to exceed four (4) times a year.



   (c)   Any recreationalequipment shall be parked or stored, unless
otherwise permitted hereafter, in the following manner:



      (1)   In an enclosed building, such as a garage; or



      (2)   In the rearyard, or the sideyard, subject to the
following limitations:



         A.   The recreationalequipment shall be parked or stored
no closer than three (3) feet from any window or door of any residential
building; and



         B.   The recreationalequipment shall be parked
completely within the boundaries of the lot and shall not block a public
sidewalk where such public sidewalk exists.



      (3)   Upon an established driveway in the frontyard, provided
parking or storage in an enclosed building is not possible, and there is no
parking or storage space available in the rear yard or side yard, or there is
no reasonable access to either the rear yard or side yard, subject to the
following limitations:



         A.   The recreational equipment shall be parked
completely within the boundaries of the lot or parcel and shall not block a
public sidewalk where such public sidewalk exists.



         B.   No more than two (2) items of recreational
equipment shall be permitted to be parked or stored upon any established
driveway at any one time.  For purposes of this limitation, recreational
equipment used in conjunction with other recreational equipment, such as a
boat mounted on a boat trailer, shall be considered as one (1) item of
recreationalequipment.



         C.   At no time shall any unmounted camper enclosure or
any boat not mounted on a boat trailer be permitted to be parked or stored in
the front yard or upon any established driveway.



         D.   Parking of recreational equipment in the driveway
shall not prevent the off-streetparking requirements set forth in Section
10.03 from being met.



   (d)   Other than in an enclosed building, no person shall park or
store more than two (2) items of recreational equipment upon any one-family
residential lot or parcel in a one-family residential area.



   (e)   Recreational and camping equipment may be parked anywhere on
the owner's premises for loading or unloading purposes for a period of not
more than forty-eight (48) hours.



   (f)   Recreationalequipment must be kept in good repair and carry a
prior or current year's license plate and/or registration.



   (g)   Where, by reason of exceptional shallowness or shape of a
specific lot, field, site or tract of land, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or
conditions of such particular property, a regulation enacted would  result
in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or undue hardship upon
the owner of recreationalequipment, the Board of Zoning Appeals may permit a
variance from the provisions of this article upon application of the owner.



   (h)   Recreationalequipment may not be stored or parked overnight on
any public highway, street or alley for a period in excess of forty-eight
(48) hours.



ARTICLE 11
NONCONFORMINGUSES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS



• Section 11.01  Intent.



   Certain existing lots, structures and uses of lots and structures were
lawful before this Ordinance was adopted, but have become nonconforming under
the terms of this Ordinance and its amendments.  It is the intent of this
Ordinance to permit such non-conformities to remain until they are
discontinued or removed, but not to encourage their survival or, where
discontinuance or removal is not feasible, to gradually upgrade such
non-conformities to conforming status.  Nonconforminguses or structures
shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended, except as provided herein, and
shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures and uses of lots and
structures which are prohibited.  Nonconforminguses, structures and lots are
declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with the structures and uses
permitted in the various districts.



• Section 11.02  Nonconforming Lots.



   (a)   In any district in which one-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance, a one-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record on the effective date of the adoption or
amendment of this Zoning Ordinance.  This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving the area or width, or both, of the lot, conform to
the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.



   (b)   If two (2) or more lots, or combinations of lots and portions
of lots, with continuous frontage in single ownership, are of record at the
time of passage or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, and if all or part of
the lots does not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established
by this Zoning Ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undividable parcel for the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, and no portion
of such parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet the lot width and
area requirements established by this Zoning Ordinance.  No division of the
parcel shall be made which leaves remaining any lot with a width or area
below the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 



• Section 11.03  Nonconforming Uses of Land.



   Where, on the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this
Zoning Ordinance, a lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible
under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, as enacted or amended, such use may
be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:



   (a)   No such nonconforminguse of land shall be enlarged or
increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied upon
the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance.



   (b)   No such nonconforminguse shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use upon the
effective date of the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance.



   (c)   If such nonconforminguse ceases, for any reason, for a period
of more than six (6) months, or a nonconforminguse of land which is seasonal
in nature is discontinued or does not open for business during a twelve (12)
month period, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations
specified in this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which such land is
located.



• Section 11.04  Nonconforming Structures.



   Where a lawful structure exists upon the effective date of the adoption
or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance that could not be built under this
Zoning Ordinance because of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards
or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions:



   (a)   No such structure shall be enlarged or altered in a way that
increases its nonconformity, but such structures may be enlarged or altered
in a way that does not increase its nonconformity. An alternation or
enlargement of a structure that would not increase the nonconformity could
include adding a bay window or other architectural features (i.e. dormer),
providing it does not increase the floor area of the use, and changing
exterior facade treatments. Consideration of other such changes shall be
within the purview of the Zoning Administrator in coordination with the
Building Official.  However, an unenclosed porch or portico may be added to
a legally nonconforming structure of greater than fifty (50) years in
accordance with the provisions of Section 4.05(d).



   (b)   Should such structure be destroyed, by any means, the same may
be reconstructed within one (1) year from the date of destruction, without
regard to conformity with this Zoning Ordinance, so long as the same type and
style of structure are rebuilt in the same location and area of the destroyed
structure.



   (c)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any
distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in
which it is located after it is moved.



• Section 11.05  Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land.



   If a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and land in
combination, exists upon the effective date of the adoption or amendment of
this Zoning Ordinance that would not be permitted in the district under this
Zoning Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued, so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:



   (a)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
Zoning Ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which
it is located.



   (b)   A nonconforminguse may be extended throughout any part of a
building that was manifestly arranged or designed for such use and which
existed at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance,
but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.



   (c)   If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of
a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals, either by
general rule or by making findings in the specific case, finds that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than
the existing nonconforming use.  In permitting such change, the Board may
require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the purpose
and intent of this Zoning Ordinance.  Where a nonconforming use of a
structure, land, or structure and land in combination, is hereafter changed
to a more conforming use, it shall thereafter be changed to a less conforming
use.



   (d)   A structure, or a structure and land in combination, in or on
which a nonconforminguse is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the district in which such structure is
located, and the nonconforminguse may not thereafter be resumed.



   (e)   Except as to those matters set forth in subsection (g) hereof,
a nonconforminguse of a structure, or a structure and land in combination,
which is discontinued or ceases to exist for six (6) consecutive months,
shall thereafter be used in conformity with the regulations of the district
in which it is located.  Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be
exempted from this provision.



   (f)   Except as to those matters set forth in subsection (g) hereof,
where nonconforminguse status applies to a structure and land in combination,
removal of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.



   (g)   If an existing structure is destroyed by any means, said
existing structure may be reconstructed within one (1) year from the date of
destruction without regard to conformity with this Zoning Ordinance, so long
as the prior use of such structure is continued, or a conforming use is
established.



• Section 11.06  Repairs and Maintenance.



   (a)   For a building devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforminguse, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive
months to complete ordinary repairs, or on the repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding
fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the
cubic content of the building, as it existed at the time of passage or
amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, is not increased.



   (b)   Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition, a building, or part
thereof, declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon the order of such official.



• Section 11.07  Uses Allowed As Special Land Uses, Not NonconformingUses.



   Any use for which a special land use is required, as provided in this
Zoning Ordinance, shall not be deemed a nonconforminguse but shall, without
further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district.



• Section 11.08  Change of Tenancy or Ownership.



   There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of existing
nonconforminguses of land, structures and premises, provided that there is no
change in the nature or character of such nonconforminguse.



ARTICLE 12
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS



• Section 12.01  Authority.



   There is hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals, the membership,
powers, duties of which are prescribed in Act 110 of the Public Acts of the
State of Michigan of 2006, as amended.  The Board of Zoning Appeals, in
addition to the general powers and duties conferred upon it by said Act, in
specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, shall
interpret and determine the application of the regulations established under
this Zoning Ordinance in harmony with their purpose and intent as hereinafter
set forth.



• Section 12.02  Membership.



   (a)   The City Council shall appoint a Board of Zoning Appeals
consisting of seven (7) members.  Two (2) members shall be appointed for a
three (3) year term, two (2) members shall be appointed for a two (2) year
term, three (3) members shall be appointed for a one (1) year term, each
being a resident at-large of the City of Howell for a period of no less than
one (1) year prior.  After the initial appointment, each member shall hold
office for a period of three (3) years or until a successor is appointed. 
Members may be removed at the pleasure of the City Council.  Any vacancy in
the Board shall be filled by the City Council for the remainder of the
unexpired term.  The Board shall annually elect its own Chair, Vice-Chair
and Secretary. Compensation of the members of the Board may be fixed by the
Council.



   (b)   In addition to the appointment of the seven (7) regular
members of the Board by Council, up to two (2) alternate members may also be
appointed for the same term as regular members of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.  The alternate members may be called on a rotating basis to sit as
regular members of the Board of Zoning Appeals in the absence of a regular
member.  An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a
regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the
regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest.  The
alternate member having been appointed shall serve on the case until a final
decision has been made.  The alternate member shall have the same voting
rights as a regular member of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



• Section 12.03  Meetings.



   (a)   All decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be made at
a meeting open to the public.  All deliberations of the Board constituting a
quorum of its members shall take place at a meeting open to the public,
except as provided in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the
Public Acts of 1976, as amended.



   (b)   A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for purposes of transacting the business of the Board and the Open
Meetings Act, Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended.  Each member
of the Board shall have one (1) vote.



   (c)   Regular meetings of the Board shall be called as needed in
response to receipt of a Notice of Appeal, so long as the meeting is
scheduled within a reasonable time frame following the Notice of Appeal. 
The meeting can be called by the Zoning Administrator, the Chair of the Board
of Zoning Appeals, or, in his or her absence, the Vice-Chair.  Public notice
of the date, time, and place of a public meeting of the Board shall be given
in the manner required by Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended.



   (d)   The business of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be conducted
in accordance with its adopted by-laws.



   (e)   The Chair, or in his or her absence, the Vice-Chair, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.



• Section 12.04  Powers and Duties.



   (a)   General.  The Board has the power to act on matters as
provided in this article and Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1921, as
amended.  The specific powers of the Board are enumerated in the following
subsections.



   (b)   Voting.  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or
determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of
the applicant on a matter upon which the Board is required to pass under this
Ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance, except that a concurring
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board shall be necessary to
grant a variance from uses of land permitted in this Ordinance.



   A member shall be disqualified from a vote in which there is a conflict
of interest.  Failure of a member to disclose a conflict of interest and be
disqualified from a vote shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Additionally, a BZA member who also sits on the Planning Commission is
prohibited from participating in a public hearing or voting on the same
matter that they voted on with the other body.



   (c)   Administrative Review.  The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any
order, requirement, permit decision, or refusal made by the Zoning
Administrator or other duly authorized enforcing agent in enforcing any
provision of this Zoning Ordinance.



   (d)   Interpretation.



      (1)   The Board shall hear and decide requests for
interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance or the zoning map, taking into
consideration the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance and the Master
Plan.



      (2)   A record shall be kept by the Board of all decisions for
interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance or the zoning map and land uses which
are approved under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance.  The Board shall
request the Planning Commission to review any ordinance amendment it deems
necessary.



   (e)   Variance.  Upon an appeal, the Board is authorized to grant a
variance from the strict provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, whereby
extraordinary or exceptional conditions exist for with the strict application
of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon, the owner of such
property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment
to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose
of this Zoning Ordinance.  In granting a variance, the Board may attach
thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features
of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose
of this Zoning Ordinance.  Further, in granting a variance, the Board shall
state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance as
outlined below.  When granting any variance, the Board must ensure that the
spirit of this Zoning Ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done.



      (1)   Use Variances.  The applicant must present evidence to
show that if the Zoning Ordinance is applied strictly, unnecessary hardship
to the applicant will result, and that all four (4) of the following
requirements are met:



         A.   That the property could not be reasonably used for
the purposes permitted in that zoning district;



         B.   That the appeal results from unique circumstances
peculiar to the property and not from general neighborhood conditions;



         C.   That the use requested by the variance would not
alter the essential character of the area; and



         D.   That the alleged hardship has not been created by
any person presently having an interest in the property.



      (2)   Non Use Variances.  The applicant must present evidence
to show that if the Zoning Ordinance is applied strictly, practical
difficulties will result to the applicant, including all four (4) of the
following:



         A.   The restrictions of this Zoning Ordinance
unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted
purpose or would render conformity unnecessarily burdensome;



         B.   The variance would do substantial justice to the
applicant as well as to other property owners in the district and a lesser
relaxation than that requested would not give substantial relief to the owner
of the property and be more consistent with justice to other property owners;



         C.   The plight of the landowner is due to the unique
circumstances of the property.



         D.   The alleged hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property.



• Section 12.05  Procedure for Appeal.



   (a)   An applicant requesting any action by the Board shall commence
such request by filing a notice of appeal on the form supplied by the City,
accompanied by such appeal fee as determined by the City Council, and all
plans, studies and any other information and data as applicable, all of which
shall be made a part of the record.



   (b)   Every appeal from a determination of the Zoning Administrator
or other duly authorized enforcing agent shall be made by the applicant
within thirty (30) days of the date of the order issuance or refusal to issue
a permit.



   (c)   The Board shall fix a time for a hearing on the appeal, and
shall notify the applicant of the time and place of such hearing.  Notice of
the public hearings shall be sent no less than fifteen (15)  days before the
hearing to the persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred
(300) feet of the boundary of the property for which the appeal is being
sought.  Notices will also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the
occupants of structures located within three hundred (300) feet of the
property in question.  The same notice shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City no less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing.  If the tenant's name is unknown, the term "occupant" may be
used.  The notice shall:



      (1)   Describe the nature of the special land use request;



      (2)   Indicate the property that is the subject of the special
land use request;



      (3)   State when and where the special land use public hearing
will be held; and



      (4)   Indicate when and where written comments will be
received concerning the request.



   (d)   Any person may appear at the public hearing or be represented
by an agent or attorney, and present any evidence in support of their
appeal.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to require the
attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and otherwise
cause the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertaining
to matters properly coming before the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (e)   The Board shall not decide an appeal until after a public
hearing.



   (f)   The Board may reverse, affirm, vary, or modify, any order,
requirement, or determination, as to which it has the power to consider, and
shall have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal was
taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.



   (g)   The Board may impose conditions with any decision.  Such
conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements:



      (1)   Be designed to protect natural resources, public health,
safety, and welfare and the social and economic well being of those who will
use the land, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed
land use or activity, and the community as a whole.



      (2)   Be related to the valid exercise of the police power,
and purposes, which are affected by the proposed use or activity.



      (3)   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this
Zoning Ordinance, be related to the standards established in this Zoning
Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary
to insure compliance with those standards.  Violations of any of these
conditions shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Ordinance, enforceable
as such and/or may be grounds for revocation or reversal of such decision.



   (h)   All decisions of the Board shall be in writing, and so far as
it is practicable, in the form of a general statement or resolution reciting
the conditions, facts, and findings of the Board.  The applicant shall be
advised of the decision after the public hearing unless the Board moves for a
continuation of such hearing.



   (i)   Any decision of the Board favorable to the applicant shall
remain valid only as long as the information or data relating thereto are
found to be correct and the conditions upon which the decision was based are
maintained.



   (j)   The Board may reconsider an earlier decision, if, in the
opinion of the Board, circumstances justify taking such action.



   (k)   No order of the Board of Zoning Appeals permitting the
erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period of longer
than one (1) year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration
is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started
and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.



   No order of the Board of Zoning Appeals permitting a use of a building
or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, unless such
use is established within such period.  Provided, however, that such order
shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or
alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is
started and proceeds to completion in accordance with such permit.



   (l)   Any person or persons, or any board or department of the City,
having an interest affected by a decision of the Board, shall have the right
to appeal to the circuit court on questions of law and fact.  Such appeal
must be filed in writing within thirty (30) days after the Boards decision
has been certified in writing or the Board approves the minutes of its
decisions. A request for reconsideration under subsection (j) above shall not
toll the time for taking such appeal.  In the event a request for
reconsideration is granted, the time period for appeal shall commence upon
the date of the approval of the minutes of the meeting where the appeal was
reconsidered.  In any event, only one (1) request for reconsideration on
each appeal shall be allowed.



ARTICLE 13
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE



• Section 13.01  Procedure.



   The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, on
recommendation of the Planning Commission, or on petition, after public
notice, hearing and report by the Planning Commission as provided by law,
amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or
subsequently established herein pursuant to the authority and procedure
established in Act 110 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan of 2006,
as amended.



   At least one (1) public hearing shall be held by the Planning
Commission, and a report made thereon, before the City Council shall adopt
any amendment to this Ordinance or the maps adopted hereunder.  Not less
than fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of the public hearing
shall first be published in a paper of general circulation in the City, and
not less than fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of the public
hearing shall first be given by mail to each person to whom real property is
assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property for
which the appeal is being sought.  Notices will also be sent by mail or
personal delivery to the occupants of structures located within three hundred
(300) feet of the property in question.  If the tenant's name is not know,
the term "occupant" may be used.  The notice shall:



      (1)   Describe the nature of the special land use request;



      (2)   Indicate the property that is the subject of the special
land use request;



      (3)   State when and where the special land use public hearing
will be held; and



      (4)   Indicate when and where written comments will be
received concerning the request.



An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained.  A hearing shall be granted to
any person interested at the time and place specified on the notice.



   A summary of the comments submitted at the public hearing shall be
transmitted with the report of the Planning Commission to the City Council. 
The City Council may hold additional public hearings if it considers it
necessary.  After receipt of the Planning Commission's report, the City
Council may adopt the proposed amendment, with or without amendments, or
refer the proposed amendment again to the Planning Commission for further
consideration.



   Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements
hereinafter set forth, an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance which is the
object of the petition shall be passed only by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the
City Council.  The protest petition shall be presented to the City Council
before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall be signed by one
(1) of the following:



   (a)   The owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of the
land included in the proposed change. 



   (b)   The owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land
included within an area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any
point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change.  Publicly
owned land shall be excluded in calculating this twenty (20) percent land
area requirement.



ARTICLE 14
REPEAL OF EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCE



• Section 14.01.  Repeal.




   The existing zoning regulations of the City of Howell being the City of
Howell Zoning Code are hereby repealed.  The adoption of this Ordinance,
however, shall not affect or prevent any pending or future prosecution of, or
action to abate, any existing violation of the aforementioned Code, as
amended, if the use so in violation is in violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance.





APPENDIX






Click here to view
Figure 1 Basement Definition





Click here to view
Figure 2.1 Measuring Building Height
(Mansard and Hip roofs)





Click here to view
Figure 2.2 Measuring Building Height
(Flat and Gable roofs)











Click here to view
Figure 2.3 Measuring Building Height
(Gambrel roof)











Click here to view
Figure 3 Grade





Click here to view
Figure 4.1 Parking Lot Landscaping - Perimeter Parking Lot
(Berm option)





Click here to view
Figure 4.2 Parking Lot Landscaping - Perimeter Parking Lot
(Landscape plantings/ Wall option)





Click here to view
Figure 5.1 Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses
(Plan view)





Click here to view
Figure 5.2 Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses
(Elevation)





Click here to view
Figure 5.3 Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses
(Section)





Click here to view
Figure 6 Greenbelt Buffer





Click here to view
Figure 7 Lot Types





Click here to view
Figure 8 Lot Lines, Width, Depth





Click here to view
Figure 9.1 One-Way Parking (54° - 90°)





Click here to view
Figure 9.2 Two-Way Parking (54° - 90°)





Click here to view
Figure 10.1 One-Way Parking (30° - 53°)





Click here to view
Figure 10.2 Two-Way Parking (30° - 53°)





Click here to view
Figure 11 Parallel Parking





Click here to view
Figure 12 Off-Street Stacking Spaces and Lanes for Drive-Through Facilities





Click here to view
Figure 13 Setbacks





Click here to view
Figure 14 Story Definition





Click here to view
Figure 15 Visibility at Intersections





Click here to view
Figure 16.1 Parking Lot Landscaping - Interior Parking Areas
(Trees in end islands, landscape median)





Click here to view
Figure 16.2 Parking Lot Landscaping - Interior Parking Areas
(Landscape islands)





Click here to view
Figure 17 Site Landscaping





Click here to view
Figure 18.1 Trash Container Screening
(Plan View)





Click here to view
Figure 18.2 Trash Container Screening
(Elevation)



Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 1250
Historic District



1250.01   Title.



1250.02   Statement of purpose.



1250.03   Definitions.



1250.04   Historic District Study Committee and the Study Committee report.



1250.05   Establishing, adding onto, modifying, or eliminating historic
districts.



1250.06   The Historic District Commission.



1250.07   Historic District Commission meetings, recordkeeping and rules
of procedure.



1250.08   Delegation of minor classes of work.



1250.09   Ordinary maintenance.



1250.10   Review by Commission.



1250.11   Design review standards and guidelines.



1250.12   Permit applications.



1250.13   Denials.



1250.14   Notice to proceed.



1250.15   Appeal of a Commission decision.



1250.16   Work without a permit.



1250.17   Demolition by neglect.



1250.18   Review of work in proposed districts.



1250.19   Emergency moratorium.



1250.20   Penalties for violations.



1250.21   Acceptance of gifts or grants.



1250.22   Acquisition of historic resources.



1250.23   Districts designated.



1250.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Historic District Ordinance of the
City of Howell."



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.02  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (a)   Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public
purpose and the City Council may hereby regulate the construction, addition,
alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in
historic districts within the City limits.  The purpose of this chapter is
to:



      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the City of Howell by
preserving districts which reflect elements of its history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering or culture.



      (2)   Stabilize and improve property values in each district
and surrounding areas.



      (3)   Foster civic beauty.



      (4)   Strengthen the local economy.



      (5)   Promote the use of historic districts for the education,
pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Howell and the State of
Michigan.



   (b)   The City may by ordinance establish one or more historic
districts.  The historic district(s) shall be administered by the Historic
District Commission and pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   "Alteration" means work that changes the detail of a resource
but does not change its basic size or shape.



   (b)   "Certificate of Appropriateness" means the written approval of
a permit application for work that is appropriate and does not adversely
affect a resource.



   (c)   "Commission" means the Historic District Commission of the
City of Howell.



   (d)   "Committee" means a Historic District Study Committee
appointed by the City Council.



   (e)   "Demolition" means the razing or destruction, whether entirely
or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by
neglect.



   (f)   "Demolition by neglect" means neglect in maintaining,
repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an
exterior feature of the resource of the loss of structural integrity of the
resource.



   (g)   "Denial" means the written rejection of a permit application
for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.



   (h)   "Department" means the Department of History, Arts and
Libraries.



   (i)   "Fire alarm system" means a system designed to detect and
annunciate the presence of fire or by-products of fire. Fire alarm system
includes smoke alarms.



   (j)   "Historic district" means an area, or group of areas, not
necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a
group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.



   (k)   "Historic preservation" means the identification, evaluation,
establishment, and protection of resources significant in history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.



   (l)   "Historic resource" means a publicly or privately owned
building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant
in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the
City of Howell, State of Michigan, or the United States.



   (m)   "Notice to proceed" means the written permission to issue a
permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource,
pursuant to a finding under Section 399.205(6) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as
amended.



   (n)   "Open space" means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped
area, or a formal or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link
or buffer between other resources.



   (o)   "Ordinary maintenance" means keeping a resource unimpaired and
in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to
time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the
external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the
usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not
constitute work for the purposes of this chapter.



   (p)   "Proposed historic district" means an area, or group of areas
not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries
and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the
purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as
a historic district or added to an established historic district.



   (q)   "Repair" means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to
good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external
appearance of a resource constitutes work for the purposes of this chapter.



   (r)   "Resource" means one or more publicly or privately owned
historic or non-historic buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or
open spaces located within a historic district.



   (s)   "Smoke alarm" means a single-station or multiple-station alarm
responsive to smoke and not connected to a system. As used in this
definition, a "single-station alarm" means an assembly incorporating a
detector, the control equipment, and the alarm sounding device into a single
unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the
point of installation. "Multiple-station alarm" means two or more
single-station alarms that are capable of interconnection such that actuation
of one alarm causes all integrated separate audible alarms to operate.



   (t)   "Work" means construction, addition, alteration, repair,
moving, excavation, or demolition.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.04  HISTORIC DISTRICT STUDY COMMITTEE AND THE STUDY COMMITTEE REPORT.



   Before establishing a historic district(s), the City Council shall
appoint a Historic District Study Committee. A majority of the persons
appointed to the Study Committee shall have a clearly demonstrated interest
in or knowledge of historic preservation. The Study Committee shall contain
representation of at least one member appointed from one or more duly
organized local historic preservation organizations. The Study Committee
shall do all of the following:



   (a)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each
proposed historic district following procedures established by the State
Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center.



   (b)   Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and
historic resources located within that district.



   (c)   Determine the total number of historic and non-historic
resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic
resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic
resources, the Committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for
evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for
inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set
forth in 36 CFR part 60, and criteria established or approved by the State
Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center.



   (d)   Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report
that addresses at minimum the following:



      (1)   The charge of the Committee;



      (2)   The composition of Committee membership;



      (3)   The historic district(s) studied;



      (4)   The boundaries of each proposed historic district in
writing and on maps;



      (5)   The history of each proposed historic district;



      (6)   The significance of each district as a whole, as well as
a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the
variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation
criteria;



      (7)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the local planning body, the State Historic Preservation
Office of the Michigan Historical Center, the Michigan Historical Commission,
and the State Historic Preservation Review Board; and



      (8)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to the
public pursuant to Section 399.203(4) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.



   (e)   Not less than sixty calendar days after the transmittal of the
preliminary report, the Historic District Study Committee shall hold a public
hearing in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice
of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner
required by Public Act 267. Written notice shall be mailed by first class
mail not less than fourteen calendar days prior to the hearing to the owners
of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the most
current tax rolls. The report shall be made available to the public in
compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended.



   (f)   After the date of the public hearing, the Committee and the
City Council have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the
City Council, to take the following actions:



      (1)   The Committee shall prepare and submit a final report
with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local
planning body to the City Council as to the establishment of a historic
district(s). If the recommendation is to establish a historic district(s),
the final report shall include a draft of the proposed ordinance(s).



      (2)   After receiving a final report that recommends the
establishment of a historic district(s), the City Council, at its discretion,
may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance(s). If the City Council passes
an ordinance(s) establishing one or more historic districts, the City shall
file a copy of the ordinance(s), including a legal description of the
property or properties located within the historic district(s) with the
Register of Deeds.  The City Council shall not pass an ordinance
establishing a contiguous historic district less than sixty days after a
majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as
listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment of
the historic district pursuant to a written petition.



   (g)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by a committee in the performance of an official function of the
Historic District Commission should be made available to the public in
compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.05  ESTABLISHING, ADDING ONTO, MODIFYING, OR ELIMINATING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS.



   (a)   The City Council may at any time establish by ordinance
additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously
considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic
district, or may eliminate an existing historic district.  Before
establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a historic
district study committee appointed by the City Council shall follow the
procedures as stated in Section 399.203(1-3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as
amended.  To conduct these activities, the City Council may retain the
initial committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a committee
to consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. The
committee shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent
to the proposed action.



   (b)   In considering elimination of a historic district, a committee
shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 399.203(1-3) of Public Act
169 of 1970, as amended for the issuance of a preliminary report, holding a
public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one
or more of the following:



      (1)   The historic district has lost those physical
characteristics that enabled the establishment of the district.



      (2)   The historic district was not significant in the way
previously defined.



      (3)   The historic district was established pursuant to
defective procedures.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.06  THE HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.



   (a)   The City Council may establish by ordinance a commission to be
called a Historic District Commission.  The Commission may be established at
any time, but not later than the time the first historic district is
established.  Each member of the Commission shall reside within the City
limits.  The Commission shall consist of five to seven members.  Members
shall be appointed by the City Council. A majority of the members shall have
a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. 
Members shall be appointed for a term of three years, except the initial
appointments of three members for a term of two years and two members for a
term of one year.  Subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms. 
Members shall be eligible for reappointment.  In the event of a vacancy on
the Commission, interim appointments shall be made by the City Council within
sixty calendar days to complete the unexpired term of such position.  Two
members shall be appointed from a list submitted by duly organized local
historic preservation organizations. If such a person is available for
appointment, one member shall be an architect who has two years of
architectural experience or who is duly registered in the State of Michigan.



   (b)   The City Council may prescribe powers and duties of the
Commission, in addition to those prescribed in this chapter, that foster
historic preservation activities, projects, and programs in the local unit.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.07  HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION MEETINGS, RECORDKEEPING AND RULES OF
PROCEDURE.



   (a)   The Historic District Commission shall meet at least quarterly
or more frequently at the call of the Commission.



   (b)   The business that the Commission may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act,
Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice of the date, time, and
place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267.
A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of
each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the Commission.



   (c)   The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions,
proceedings and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession
of, or retained by the Commission in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of
Information, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended.



   (d)   The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and
shall adopt design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties
under this act.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.08  DELEGATION OF MINOR CLASSES OF WORK.



   The Commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff or to
another delegated authority. The Commission shall provide to its delegated
authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of
appropriateness under this subsection.  The Commission shall review the
certificates of appropriateness issued by the delegate on at least a
quarterly basis to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities
should be continued.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.09  ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district or to prevent
work on any resource under a permit issued by the inspector of buildings or
other duly delegated authority before the chapter was enacted.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.10  REVIEW BY COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a
resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless
specifically authorized to do so by the City Council or unless interior work
will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The Commission
shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in
subsection 399.205(3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.11  DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.



   (a)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the U.S.
Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and guidelines for
rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67. Design
review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics
of historic districts administered by the Commission may be followed if they
are equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of Interior's Standards and
Guidelines and are established or approved by the State Historic Preservation
Office of the Michigan Historical Center.



   (b)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall also consider all of
the following:



      (1)   The historic or architectural value and significance of
the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding
area.



      (2)   The relationship of any architectural features of the
resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area.



      (3)   The general compatibility of the design, arrangement,
texture and materials proposed to be used.



      (4)   Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the
Commission finds relevant.



      (5)   Whether the applicant has certified in the application
that the property where work will be undertaken has, or will have before the
proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm system
complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State
Construction Code Act 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1501 to 125.1531.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.12  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (a)   A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the
exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district.
The person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an
application for a permit with the Building Official.  Upon receipt of a
complete application, the Building Official shall immediately refer the
application, along with all required supporting materials that make the
application complete, to the Commission.  A permit shall not be issued and
proposed work shall not proceed until the Commission has acted on the
application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to
proceed as prescribed in this chapter.  A commission shall not issue a
certificate of appropriateness unless the applicant certifies in the
application that the property where work will be undertaken has, or will have
before the project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm
system complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single
State Construction Code Act 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1501 to 125.1531.



   (b)   The Commission shall file certificates of appropriateness,
notices to proceed, and denials of applications for permits with the Building
Official. A building permit shall not be issued until the Commission has
acted as prescribed by the ordinance.



   (c)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect the
exterior of a resource the Commission considers valuable to the City of
Howell, the State of Michigan, or the nation, and the Commission determines
that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public
purpose of the City, State or Nation, the Commission shall attempt to
establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for
the preservation of the resource.



   (d)   The failure of the Commission to act on an application within
sixty calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the
Commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant
and the Commission, shall be considered to constitute an approval.



   (e)   The City may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit
application.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.13  DENIALS.



   If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the
Building Official or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied by a
written explanation by the Commission of the reasons for denial and, if
appropriate, a notice that an application may be re-submitted for Commission
review when the suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also
include the notification of the applicant's right to appeal to the State
Historic Preservation Review Board and to the circuit court.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.14  NOTICE TO PROCEED.



   Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance
of a notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following conditions
prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the
Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the
following conditions:



   (a)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public
or to the structure's occupants.



   (b)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program
that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant
proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals,
financing and environmental clearances.



   (c)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to
the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond
the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for
sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within
the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner.



   (d)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority
of the community.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.15  APPEAL OF A COMMISSION DECISION.



   (a)   The applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission
concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the State Historic
Preservation Review Board. The appeal shall be filed within sixty calendar
days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may
submit all or part of the appellant's evidence and arguments in written form.
The State Historic Preservation Review Board shall consider an appeal at its
first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit
applicant, aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic Preservation
Review Board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction
over the Historic District Commission whose decision was appealed to the
State Historic Preservation Review Board.



   (b)   Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation in the
City of Howell as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally
aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission may appeal the
decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a
decision rendered under this chapter may not appeal to the court without
first exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation
Review Board.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.16  WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the
Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to restore the resource
to the condition that the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to
modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. 
If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement
within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek an order from the circuit
court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or
to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of
appropriateness.  If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the
order of the court, the Commission or its agents may enter the property and
conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or
modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in
accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work done shall be
charged to the owner and may be levied by the City of Howell as a special
assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the
circuit court, the Commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes
of this section.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.17  DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.



   Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a
historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and
approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may do
either of the following:



   (a)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to demolition by neglect.



   (b)   If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time,
the Commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as
necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be
charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City of Howell as a special
assessment against the property. The Commission or its agents may enter the
property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the
circuit court.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.18  REVIEW OF WORK IN PROPOSED DISTRICTS.



   Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a
proposed historic district, the City Council may, at its discretion, adopt a
resolution requiring that all applicants for permits within the proposed
historic district be referred to the Historic District Commission as
prescribed in Section 1250.12.  The Historic District Commission shall
review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the
proposed historic district was an established historic district. The review
may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year, or
until such time as the City Council approves or rejects the establishment of
the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.19  EMERGENCY MORATORIUM.



   If the City Council determines that pending work will cause irreparable
harm to resources located within an established or proposed historic
district, the City Council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium
on all such work for a period not to exceed six months, upon finding that the
threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit
application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be
summarily denied.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.20  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (a)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this act is
responsible for a civil infraction violation and may be fined not more than
five thousand dollars ($5,000).



   (b)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this act may
be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource
unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, moved, excavated or demolished.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.21  ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRANTS.



   The City Council may accept State or Federal grants for historic
preservation purposes; may participate in State and Federal programs that
benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for
historic preservation purposes. The City Council may appoint the Historic
District Commission to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program
responsibilities.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.22  ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES.



   If all efforts by the Commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it
is determined by the City Council that public ownership is the most suitable,
the City Council, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the
resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds from
the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the
recommendation of the Commission. The Commission is responsible for
maintaining publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically
designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the
City Council. Upon recommendation of the Commission, the City may sell
resources acquired under this section with protective easements included the
property transfer documents, if appropriate.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1250.23  DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.



   (a)   Howell Opera House Historic District.  The Howell Opera House
Historic District is designated May 20, 2013. The boundaries of the Howell
Opera House Historic District are shown on a map on file in the office of the
City Clerk.  The district is comprised of the following described parcel:



      (1)   Section 36, Township 3 North, Range 4 East, Howell City,
Crane and Brooks Addition beginning at Northwest corner of Lot 55, thence
East 45.5 feet, South 60 feet, East 6 inches, South 72 feet, West 46 feet,
North 132 feet to begin excepting south 10 feet for alley.



      (2)   Tax ID# 4717-36-307-010.



      (3)   Commonly known as 123 W. Grand River Avenue.



(Ord. 874.  Passed 5-20-13.)



PART FOURTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE



      Chap. 1410. State Construction Code.



      Chap. 1420. (Repealed)



      Chap. 1430. Fire Limits. (Repealed)



      Chap. 1440. Flood Plain Management.



      Chap. 1450. Fees for Permits, Certificates and Inspections.



      Chap. 1460.   Residential Rental Properties.



      Chap. 1470.   Property Maintenance for Rental Properties of
the Ordinance of the City of Howell. (Repealed)



      Chap. 1480.   Property Maintenance.



CHAPTER 1410
State Construction Code



1410.01   Adoption by reference.



1410.02   Purpose.



1410.03   File and distribution copies.



1410.04   Conflicts.



1410.05   Enforcement; Board of Building Code Appeals.



1410.06   Extensions of building permits.



1410.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Adoption of Codes by reference - see CHTR. Sec. 6.5



   State Construction Code - see M.C.L. Secs. 125.1501 et seq.



   Building sewers and connections - see S.U. & P.S. 1042.03, 1042.04



   Removal of building materials - see S.U. & P.S. 1060.05



   Enforcement of Zoning Code by Building Inspector - see P. & Z. Chapter
1240 (Zoning Code)



   Building permits and certificates of occupancy - see P. & Z. Chapter
1240 (Zoning Code)



   Design and construction standards for one-family dwellings - see P. &
Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Review of building permit applications - see B. & H. 1440.05



1410.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   Pursuant to Section 6.5 of the City Charter and Sections 8 and 8a of
the State Construction Code Act (Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972 (MCL
125.1501 et seq.)), as amended, the State Construction Code is hereby adopted
by reference as if the same were fully set forth herein.  The State
Construction Code, as hereinafter known, is more specifically set forth in R
408.30401 to 408.30499 of the Michigan Administrative Code adopting by
reference the International Building Code, 2009 edition and the International
Residential Code, 2009 edition both as published by the International Code
Council, Inc.  Any and all amendments which are hereinafter made to the
State Construction Code, pursuant to Sections 8 and 8a of Act 230 referenced
herein, shall amend, by reference, this chapter as of the effective date of
the amendment of the State Construction Code.



(Ord. 702.  Passed 1-17-2000; Ord. 765.  Passed 10-25-04; Ord. 887. 
Passed 6-23-14.)



1410.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the State Construction Code, as adopted in Section
1410.01, is to prescribe construction and material standards and
specifications for all occupancies named in such Code.



(Ord. 765.  Passed 10-25-04.)



1410.03  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.



   Printed copies of the State Construction Code, as adopted in Section
1410.01, shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the
City Building Official, and be available for inspection by and distribution
to the public at all times.



(Ord. 765.  Passed 10-25-04.)



1410.04  CONFLICTS.



   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the State
Construction Code, as adopted in Section 1410.01, and a provision of any City
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the provisions of the State Code
shall prevail.



(Ord. 702.  Passed 1-17-2000; Ord. 765.  Passed 10-25-04.)



1410.05  ENFORCEMENT; BOARD OF BUILDING CODE APPEALS.



   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 9 of Act 230 of the Public Acts
of 1972 (MCL 125.1509), as amended, the Building Official is hereby
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the
City under Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. The City hereby
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such Act
throughout its corporate limits.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 10-14-74; Ord. 765.  Passed 10-25-04; Ord. 887.  Passed
6-23-14.)



1410.06  EXTENSIONS OF BUILDING PERMITS.



   Pursuant to the State Construction Code, Section 105.5, building
permits shall become invalid after the expiration of 180 days pursuant to the
terms and conditions set out in that Section.  One or more extensions of
time may be authorized by the Building Official for periods not more than 180
days each, subject to the terms of Section 105.5 of the State Construction
Code and Section 1450.02 of the Howell City Code.



(Ord. 870.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1410.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to any other civil remedy allowed by law, whoever violates
any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a Municipal civil
infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set forth in Section
202.99.



(Ord. 794.  Passed 3-26-07.)



CHAPTER 1420
Unsafe Buildings



EDITOR'S NOTE: Chapter 1420 was repealed by Ordinance 918, passed October 8,
2018.



CHAPTER 1430
Fire Limits



EDITOR'S NOTE: Chapter 1430 was repealed by Ordinance 486, passed February
16, 1987.



CHAPTER 1440
Flood Plain Management



EDITOR’S NOTE: This chapter, previously a codification of Resolution 00-19,
passed April 24, 2000, was repealed in its entirety by implication and
re-enacted by Resolution 08-22, passed August 25, 2008.



1440.01   Definitions.



1440.02   Adoption by reference.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Flood control in home rule cities - see M.C.L. Secs. 117.4a, 117.4e



   Municipal bond issues - see M.C.L. Sec. 135.3



   Drains and drainage; flood control projects - see M.C.L. Secs. 280.429,
280.431



   Floodplain easements - see M.C.L. Sec. 281.628



1440.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires that floodplain
management regulations must be present and enforced in participating
communities, and utilize the following definitions, which also apply for the
purposes of this chapter:



   (a)   "Flood" or "flooding" means:



      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal
waters, the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source, mudflows, and,



      (2)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood
or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding, as defined in this chapter.



   (b)   "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a
community, issued by the FEMA, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been
designated as Zone A, M, and/or E.



   (c)   "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flood").



   (d)    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, and floodplain management regulations.



   (e)   "Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance), and other applications of police power that provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.



   (f)   "Structure" means, for floodplain management purposes, a
walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, gas or liquid
storage facility, as well as a mobile home or manufactured unit.



(Res. 08-22.  Passed 8-25-08.)



1440.02  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   To maintain eligibility and continued participation in the NFIP:



   (a)   The City directs its designated enforcing agent for the
Construction Code Act to be the City Building Official, who shall administer,
apply, and enforce the floodplain management regulations as contained in the
State Construction Code, including Appendix G, and to be consistent with
those regulations by:



      (1)   Obtaining, reviewing, and reasonably utilizing flood
elevation data available from Federal, State, or other sources pending
receipt of data from FEMA to identify the flood hazard area and areas with
potential flooding;



      (2)   Ensuring that all permits necessary for development in
floodplain areas have been issued including a floodplain permit, approval, or
letter of no authority from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
under the floodplain regulatory provisions of Part 31, Floodplain Regulatory
Authority, found in Water Resources Protection of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended;



      (3)   Reviewing all permit applications to determine whether
the proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. Where it
is determined that the building will be located in a flood hazard area or
special flood hazard area, the Building Official shall implement the
following applicable codes according to their terms, which are the floodplain
management regulation portions and referenced codes and standards of the
current Michigan Residential Code, Michigan Building Code, and Appendix G of
the Michigan Building Code, all as adopted by the City under Ordinance No.
765, otherwise known as Chapter 1410 of the Howell City Code;



      (4)   Reviewing all proposed subdivisions to determine whether
such proposals are reasonably safe from flooding and to ensure compliance
with all applicable floodplain management regulations;



      (5)   Assisting in the delineation of flood hazard areas,
providing information concerning uses and occupancy of the floodplain or
flood-related erosion areas, maintaining floodproofing and lowest floor
construction records, cooperating with other officials, agencies and persons
for flood plain management;



      (6)   Advising FEMA of any changes in City boundaries,
including appropriate maps; and



      (7)   Maintaining records of new structures and substantially
improved structures concerning any certificates of floodproofing, lowest
floor elevation, basements, and elevations to which structures have been
floodproofed.



   (b)   The City assures the Federal Insurance Administrator
(Administrator) that it intends to review, on an on-going basis, all amended
and revised FHBMs and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and related
supporting data and revisions thereof and revisions of 44 CFR, Part 60,
Criteria for Land Management and Use, and to make such revisions in its
floodplain management regulations as may be necessary to continue to
participate in the program.



   (c)   The City further assures the Administrator that it will adopt
the current effective FEMA Flood Insurance Study (FIS), FHSMs, and/or the
FIRMs by reference within its Floodplain Management Map Adoption Ordinance or
similarly binding ordinance documentation.



(Res. 08-22.  Passed 8-25-08.)



CHAPTER 1450
Fees for Permits, Certificates and Inspections



1450.01   Collection.



1450.02   Building permit fees.



1450.03   Sign permit fees.



1450.04   Demolition permit fees.



1450.05   Mobile home set-up permit fees.



1450.06   Land divisions and combinations.



1450.07   Plat review fees.



1450.08   Fees for petition for zoning amendment.



1450.09   Site plan review fees; charges and escrows.



1450.10   Appeal fee to Zoning Board of Appeals.



1450.11   Special use application fees.



1450.12   Fees for planned unit developments.



1450.13   Fees for site condominium projects.



1450.14   Miscellaneous fees.



1450.99   Penalty.



1450.01  COLLECTION.



   Fees for inspections or for the issuance of permits or certificates of
occupancy, or copies thereof, required or issued under the Howell City Zoning
Code, shall be collected by the Building Inspector in advance of issuance
thereof.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 752.  Passed 1-12-04; Ord. 905.  Passed
7-25-16.)



1450.02  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   The following building permit fees shall apply for those items listed
in this subsection. Other fees listed throughout this section may apply, as
well, depending upon the project:



   (a)   Residential and non-residential building permit fees - new
construction.  Residential and non-residential building permit fees for new
construction shall be based on the International Code Council's (ICC) Permit
Fee Schedule, as amended, utilizing the ICC gross area modifier and type of
construction factor contained therein. Appeals of a revised cost estimate
shall be made to the City Manager.



   (b)   Residential and non-residential building permit
fees-renovations/additions.  Residential and non-residential building permit
fees for renovations and/or additions shall be determined by taking the
actual cost of the renovation and/or addition and multiplying the same by the
ICC permit fee multiplier, adjusted by using a three year construction cost
average. The minimum permit fee shall be $100.



   (c)   Residential and non-residential plan review fees.  Plans
submitted to the Building Inspector shall be accompanied by a plan review fee
as set forth below:



      (1)   Plan review fees for residential renovations shall be
determined as follows:



         A.   For projects with a construction value under thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00), there shall be no plan review fee.



         B.   For projects with a construction value above thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00), there shall be a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00).



      (2)   Plan review fees for new residential construction and
for new non-residential construction and/or renovations shall be determined
as follows:



         A.   For construction values up to thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000), a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00);



         B.   For construction values between thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000) and up to five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), the fee
shall be determined by taking the value and multiplying it by .0015;



         C.   For construction values over five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000), the fee shall be determined by taking the value and
multiplying it by .0010.



   (d)   Soil erosion control permits or waivers. A soil erosion
control permit or waiver must be obtained from the Livingston County Drain
Commissioner, after applying for a building permit.



   (e)   Nonstructural alterations.  Permits shall not be required for
nonstructural alterations costing five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less
pursuant to the Howell City Zoning Code.



   (f)   Plumbing, mechanical and electrical permits and fees. Permits
for plumbing, mechanical and electrical work must be obtained from, and fees,
if any, paid to, the Livingston County Building Department.



   (g)   Building permits issued by the Building Official may be issued
by said official upon the filing of a refundable performance bond as set
forth herein.  The bond shall be returned in full so long as the work as set
out in the building permit is completed while the permit remains valid.  The
bond will be forfeited in full if the work set out in the permit is not
completed while the permit is valid.  The bond amounts are hereby set out as
follows:



      (1)   A performance bond in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) cash for a new single family dwelling;



      (2)   A performance bond in the amount of two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00) cash for a construction project costing more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000) but less than four thousand nine hundred
ninety-nine dollars ($4,999);



      (3)   A performance bond in the amount of seven hundred and
fifty dollars ($750.00) cash for a construction project costing more than
five thousand dollars ($5,000) but less than fourteen thousand nine hundred
ninety-nine dollars ($14,999);



      (4)   A performance bond in the amount of five percent (5%) of
the total project cost for a construction project costing more than fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000) up to a maximum bond of $5,000.



      (5)   Performance bonds shall not be required in the following
circumstances:



         i.   Any project that has gone through site plan review
and has provided the required review escrow required under Section 1450.09.



         ii.   Any sign permit issued under Section 1450.03.



         iii.   Any permit that is issued for interior
renovations only to existing commercial structures.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 871.  Passed 5-20-13; Ord. 905.  Passed
7-25-16; Ord. 918,  Passed 10-8-18.)



1450.03  SIGN PERMIT FEES.



   All property owners shall obtain a sign permit from the Building
Inspector prior to the installation, display, erection, relocation or
alteration of any sign, as required by the Howell City Zoning Code. A one
hundred dollar ($100.00) fee shall be charged for all sign permits.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.04  DEMOLITION PERMIT FEES.



   All property owners shall obtain a demolition permit from the Building
Inspector prior to the demolition of any building. It shall be the property
owner's responsibility to provide verification that all utilities to the
building have been shut off and disconnected prior to the start of
demolition. The demolition permit fees are as follows:



   Residential dwellings/single family/duplex      $100.00



   Industrial/commercial buildings         150.00



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.05  MOBILE HOME SET-UP PERMIT FEES.



   All owners of mobile home sites shall obtain a permit from the Building
Inspector prior to the installation and complete set-up of a mobile home in a
mobile home park. A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fee shall be charged for all
mobile home set-up permits.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.06  LAND DIVISIONS AND COMBINATIONS.



   All applications for land division under Chapter 1216 or combination of
parcels shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
each new parcel created.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.07  PLAT REVIEW FEES.



   (a)   The schedule of fees for the review of plans and plats shall
be established by resolution of Council in accordance with Section 256(1) of
Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended. A proprietor submitting a
plan or plat for approval shall be required to deposit the established fees
with the City Clerk, and until the fee is paid the plan or plat shall not be
considered of reviewed.  Fees shall be established for the following:



      (1)   Tentative approval of preliminary plats. The proprietor
shall pay the established City filing fee plus the established fee per lot
when a preliminary plat is submitted for tentative approval pursuant to the
Zoning Code.



      (2)   Final approval of preliminary plats. The proprietor
shall pay the established City filing fee plus the established fee per lot
when a preliminary plat is submitted for final approval pursuant to the
Zoning Code.



      (3)   Approval of final plats. The proprietor shall pay the
established fees for the following when a final plat is submitted for
approval pursuant to the Zoning Code:



         A.   City filing and review fee. The established City
filing and review fee, plus the established fee per lot, shall be paid as
provided in paragraphs (a)(2) and (b)(2) hereof.



         B.   Recording fee. An established recording fee shall
be paid, which the City Clerk shall forward to the Livingston County Plat
Board upon Council approval of the final plat.



         C.   Inspection charges. All charges for the City
inspection of public improvements shall be paid by the proprietor prior to
final plat approval.



   (b)   Amounts. The following fees for review of plats and
inspections of improvements may, by resolution, be amended from time to time
by Council:



      (1)   Preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall require,
pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) hereof, a fee for each subdivision plat
submitted for preliminary approval of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus:



         A.   Ten dollars ($10.00) per lot for the first through
the fiftieth lots;



         B.   Twenty dollars ($20.00) per lot for the fifty-first
through the one hundredth lots; and



         C.   Thirty dollars ($30.00) per lot for each lot in
excess of 100.



      (2)   Final plat. The Planning Commission shall require,
pursuant to paragraph (a)(2) hereof, a fee for each subdivision plat
submitted for final approval of two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus
one-quarter percent of the total cost estimate for completion of all required
public improvements.



      (3)   Recording final plat. The proprietor shall pay to the
City a recording fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) which shall be forwarded with
the final plat to the County Plat Board.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.08  FEES FOR PETITION FOR ZONING AMENDMENT.



   All petitions for zoning amendment of the Howell City Zoning Code shall
be accompanied by a fee of seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00).



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.09  SITE PLAN REVIEW FEES; CHARGES AND ESCROWS.



   Required site plan fees, charges and escrows shall be as follows:



   (a)   Site plan application fee (nonrefundable).  A seventy-five
dollar ($75.00) application fee shall be charged for all projects requiring
site plan review pursuant to the Howell City Zoning Code. Said fee shall be
paid prior to staff site plan review.



   (b)   Internal staff site plan review (nonrefundable).  For all
development plans requiring site plan review, there shall be charged a
nonrefundable fee to cover the cost for City staff review of the site plan.
The internal staff site plan review fee shall be one-half of one percent of
the total development cost* (building cost(s) plus site improvement cost(s)),
with a minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a maximum fee of two
thousand dollars ($2,000). Said fee shall be paid prior to staff site plan
review.



   (c)   Site plan consultant review escrow deposit. For all
development plans requiring site plan review, there shall be a chase escrow
account established to cover site plan review costs by the City's consulting
planner and/or consulting engineer, as well as any other reasonable expenses
deemed necessary by the City Manager. The escrow amount shall equal one
percent of the total project development cost* (building cost(s) plus site
improvement cost(s)), with a minimum deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000)
and a maximum deposit of seven thousand dollars ($7,000). Such deposit shall
be made prior to site plan review. If such deposit is not sufficient to cover
the costs of the site plan review and/or other reasonable expenses deemed
necessary and appropriate by the City Manager, then the developer may either
deposit additional funds, the amount of which shall be determined by the City
Manager, in such amount for the completion of the site plan review and/or
these other investigations, or withdraw the project, thereby forfeiting the
entire deposit previously submitted to the City. Any escrow amount remaining
after completion of the site plan review process will be refunded to the
developer, or, at the developer's option, can become part of the construction
escrow.



   (d)   Performance guarantee. Any and all performance guarantees
shall be governed by the provisions of the Howell City Zoning Code.



   (e)   Construction escrow. For all construction projects for which a
site plan has been required and approved, there shall be a cash escrow
account established to cover consulting costs during construction by the
City' s consulting planner and/or consulting engineer, as well as any other
reasonable expenses deemed necessary by the City Manager. The escrow amount
shall equal one percent of the performance guarantee amount. Said escrow
amount shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000). Such deposit shall be made prior to the issuance
of a building permit. If such deposit is not sufficient to cover consulting
costs during construction and/or other reasonable costs deemed necessary by
the City Manager, then the developer shall deposit additional funds, the
amount of which shall be determined by the City Manager, in such account to
permit completion of the consultant's work and/or to cover other reasonable
expenses. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the developer
reimburses the City for all costs incurred on the project. Any escrow amount
remaining after completion of the project and the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy will be refunded to the developer.



   (f)   Site improvement construction permit fee. For all construction
projects for which a site plan fee has been required and approved, there
shall be issued by the Building Inspector a site improvement construction
permit. The nonrefundable fee charged for the permit is to cover the cost for
staff assistance, oversight and inspection during the construction of site
improvements. The permit fee shall be based on the site improvement costs and
shall be determined as follows: for each one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
fraction thereof, three dollars ($3.00) per thousand dollars ($1,000).



   (g)   Total project development cost.



      (1)   At the time of submittal of the site plan documents, the
developer shall submit an itemized cost estimate for the proposed project.
The cost estimate shall cover all site improvement costs, including, but not
limited to, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, drainage, fences,
screens, walls, landscaping and widening strips. In addition, a separate
building cost estimate shall be provided for all buildings that are to be
constructed as part of the initial development. If a project is to be done in
phases, then site plan fees will be charged for each phase as it is
accomplished. The cost(s) estimated for building construction will be
reviewed by the Building Inspector using the International Code Council's
Permit Fee Schedule. Site improvement cost estimates will be reviewed by the
City Engineer.



      (2)   The City Engineer shall estimate the anticipated cost
for the City to construct the site improvements should the developer fail to
complete the work. These cost estimates will then be compared with the
developer's cost estimates. Based on the review of the developer's cost
estimates by the Building Inspector and the City Engineer, the cost estimates
may be revised. The final cost estimates, as approved by the City Building
Inspector and the City Engineer, will be used for determining all project
fees, deposits, escrows, etc. Developer appeals of a revised cost estimate
shall be made first to the City Manager and then to the Commission. For site
plan review to proceed, the developer shall pay all required fees in full as
determined by the Building Inspector and City Engineer prior to staff site
plan review. If the fees are reduced as a result of the developer's appeal, a
refund of the difference shall be made to the developer.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.10  APPEAL FEE TO ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   All appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the Howell
Zoning Code shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00).



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.11  SPECIAL USE APPLICATION FEES.'



   All special use applications made to the Planning Commission pursuant
to the Howell Zoning Code shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00).



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.12  FEES FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   All planned unit development applications made to the Planning
Commission or to the City Council pursuant to the Zoning Code shall be
accompanied by a fee in the manner set forth in Sections 1450.08 and 1450.09
hereof.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.13  FEES FOR SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS.



   All site condominium project applications made to the Planning
Commission or to the City Council pursuant to the Howell Zoning Code shall be
accompanied by a fee in the manner set forth in Sections 1450.08 and 1450.09
hereof.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.14  MISCELLANEOUS FEES.



   All property owners shall obtain a permit from the Building Inspector
prior to the installation of any of the following, together with a fee for
the issuance of the permit, as follows:



   (a)   Applications for deck installation shall be accompanied by a
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00);



   (b)   Applications for all pool installations shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00);



   (c)   Applications for re-roofing of any residential or commercial
building shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00);



   (d)   Applications for sidewalk cafes shall be accompanied by a fee
of twenty-five dollars ($25.00);



   (e)   A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) re-inspection fee shall be
charged for all inspections over the required inspections and for any failed
inspections after the first failed inspection for a given project; and



   (f)   All work performed prior to the issuance of a permit as set
forth herein shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the cost of the required
permit, in addition to the original cost of the permit.



(Ord. 723. Passed 11-19-01; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



1450.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter by either not securing
or paying a fee as set forth herein is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines as set forth in Section
202.99 of the Howell City Code.



(Ord. 752.  Passed 1-12-04; Ord. 905.  Passed 7-25-16.)



CHAPTER 1460
Residential Rental Properties



1460.01   Purpose.



1460.02   Definitions.



1460.03   Rental registration.



1460.04   Responsible local agent.



1460.05   Registration for residential rental structures and units.



1460.06   Registration forms and fee.



1460.07   Registration term and renewal.



1460.08   Transfer of ownership.



1460.09   Inspections.



1460.10   Notices and orders.



1460.11   Inspection guidelines. (Repealed)



1460.12   Harassment.



1460.13   Appeal process.



1460.14   Revocation of certificate of occupancy.



1460.15   Vacating and securing buildings.



1460.16   Authority of the Building Official.



1460.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCE



   Anti-Discrimination, see ADM. Ch. 209



1460.01  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are to establish certain responsibilities
and duties of landlords and tenants essential to make such dwellings safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation, provide for registration with the
Community Development Department, to require a certificate of registration
issued by the Community Development Department, to provide a complaint-based
rental inspection program, and to designate penalties for violations of this
chapter.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Building Official" means the City employee or his/her
designee responsible for conducting inspections under the building code,
rental inspection guidelines, and property maintenance code for residential
rental structures and units.



   (b)   "Building Code" means Chapter 1410, as amended, of the Howell
City Code.



   (c)   "Certificate of Registration" means the document issued by the
Building Official required for every dwelling within the City offered for
rent or lease, and certifies compliance with this chapter.



   (d)   "Community Development Department" means the City department
responsible for enforcement of this chapter.



   (e)   "Dwelling" means any house, room, apartment, boarding
house/rooming house, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. Hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts,
country inns, and resorts shall not be defined as a dwelling for purpose of
this chapter and shall be exempt from rental registration requirements.



   (f)   "Fee" means a fee determined from time to time by City Council
resolution.



   (g)   "Inspection Guidelines" shall be the City of Howell Rental
Inspection Guidelines.



   (h)   "Lease" means any written or oral agreement that sets forth
conditions concerning the use and occupancy of residential rental structures
or residential rental units between an owner and tenant.



   (i)   "Manager" means a person, partnership, firm or corporation
that actively operates or manages a residential rental property for an owner.



   (j)   "Multi-family (rental) dwelling complex" means a rental
complex with ten or more units on one site under one ownership and one
identified complex name.  The rental complex may carry separate tax parcel
identification numbers or separate mailing addresses, but must be on one
contiguous parcel(s) of land in one identified area.



   (k)   "Owner" means any person, agent, firm partnership,
association, corporation, or company or organization of any kind having a
legal or equitable interest in a residential rental structure or a
residential rental unit.



   (l)   "Residential rental structure" means any building that
contains one or more residential rental units regardless of whether or not
one of the units is occupied by the owner.



   (m)   "Residential rental unit" means any apartment, room, rooming
house, boarding house, dwelling, or portion thereof or any condominium unit
for which a person or group of person pays rent directly or indirectly to the
owner thereof for the purpose of a person to reside therein. This definition
includes one- and two-family dwellings, multiple and multi-family dwellings,
apartment units, flats, rooming house rooms, and boarding houses. This
definition does not include hotels and motels licensed and inspected by the
state, bed and breakfast establishments, or country-inn establishments.



   (n)   "Responsible local agent" means an individual person, a real
estate holding company, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity who
represents the owner. The responsible local agent must have a place of
business or residence in this state within 60 miles of the Howell City
limits. The responsible local agent shall be designated by the owner as
responsible for operating such premises in compliance with all the provisions
of the City codes and ordinances. The owner may act as the responsible local
agent provided that the owner resides or has a place of business in the state
and within 60 miles of the City limits.



   (o)   "Rooming house" means a building, other than a hotel or
dormitory, which is not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling, containing
rooming units, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite
periods, lodging is provided for 2 or more roomers.



   (p)   "Tenants" means occupants, lessees, and/or persons residing in
a residential rental structure of residential rental unit.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07; Ord. 819.  Passed 5-4-09; Ord. 860.  Passed
10-22-12.)



1460.03  RENTAL REGISTRATION.



   (a)   The owner of any residential rental structure or residential
rental unit shall register each residential rental structure and all
residential rental units contained within the residential rental structure
with the City.



   (b)   The owner shall designate a person as the responsible local
agent who may be the owner and who shall be responsible for operating and
providing access to the residential rental structure or a residential rental
unit.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.04  RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT.



   Each residential rental structure and unit shall have a responsible
local agent identified. All official notices of the City may be issued to the
responsible local agent, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have
been issued upon the owner of record.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.05  REGISTRATION FOR RESIDENTIAL RENTAL STRUCTURES AND UNITS.



   All owners or responsible local agents shall comply with the following:



   (a)   All residential rental units and structures shall be
registered and the owner shall pay a fee assessed at the time of registration.



   (b)   All newly constructed residential rental structures and units
shall be registered prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by
the City and shall not be charged a registration fee.



   (c)   A residential rental structure or unit which is sold,
transferred, or conveyed shall be re-registered by the new owner within
thirty (30) days of the date of the deed, land contract, or other instrument
of conveyance. No fee will assessed within this time period. If a property is
not registered within the thirty (30) day period then a registration fee will
be assessed.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07; Ord. 819.  Passed 5-4-09.)



1460.06  REGISTRATION FORMS AND FEE.



   (a)   Application for registration shall be made on a form supplied
by the City and filed with the Community Development Department, which shall
include at least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, telephone number of the applicant.



      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners
of the residential rental structure or unit.



      (3)   The name, local address and telephone number of the
responsible local agent.



      (4)   The number of residential rental structures at each
site, the address of and number of residential rental units in each
residential rental structure.



      (5)   An authorization appointing a responsible local agent
signed by both the owner and the responsible local agent.



      (6)   Water affidavit or release of responsibility for water
service payment naming the person responsible for payment of water and
sanitary sewer service for the rental unit or structure.



   (b)   A registration fee, as established by City Council resolution,
shall be assessed for each site where residential rental structure or units
are located.



   (c)   No post office box will be accepted as a legal address. A post
office box, however, may be accepted as a mailing address upon written
request of the property owner. The owner shall be responsible for notifying
the city of any change of address of either the owner or the responsible
local agent.



   (d)   Once approved, the Building Official shall issue to the owner
a certificate of registration.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07; Ord. 819.  Passed 5-4-09.)



1460.07  REGISTRATION TERM AND RENEWAL.



   Registration is required prior to the use or occupancy of any
residential rental structure or residential rental unit, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.  Registration shall be renewed on an annual
basis.  The registration year shall begin on January 1 and shall terminate
at midnight on December 31 of that year.  Renewals shall be applied for
thirty days prior to the annual registration expiration date and received by
the City no later than January 31 of the following year.  The annual term of
registration shall be valid as long as ownership remains  unchanged.  No
registration fee will be assessed for annual registrations.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07; Ord. 819.  Passed 5-7-09.)



1460.08  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any residential rental structure
or residential rental unit who has received a notice of violation of any code
or ordinance of the City, including zoning violations, building code
violations, violations of rental inspection guidelines, or nuisance code
violations, to transfer, convey, lease or sell, including by land contract,
ownership and/or interest in any way to another, unless such owner shall have
first furnished to the grantee, vendee, or transferee a true copy of any
notice of violation and shall have furnished to the Community Development
Department a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, vendee, or
transferee acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation and
acknowledging legal responsibility for correction of the violation.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.09  INSPECTIONS.



   (a)   The Building Official shall inspect residential rental
structures and residential rental units pursuant to any of the following
circumstances:



      (1)   Upon receipt of a new rental registration application
for a property that was  not previously registered.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a complaint from an owner or tenant that
the premises are in violation of the Property Maintenance for Rental
Properties Ordinance of the City of Howell (Chapter 1480 ) or any portion of
this chapter.



      (3)   Upon receipt of a report or a referral from the Howell
City police department, Howell City department of public services, other law
enforcement agencies, public agencies or departments, or any individual
indicating that the premises may be in violation of this chapter. The request
shall be based on the personal knowledge of the person making the report.



      (4)   If an exterior survey of the premises gives the building
inspector probable cause to believe that the premises are in violation of
this chapter.



      (5)   Upon receipt of information that the residential rental
unit is not registered with the City as required by this chapter.



   (b)   The owner or responsible local agent shall be sent notice
within two (2) business days regarding the need to schedule an inspection due
to a complaint or condition of the premises. If the owner or agent does not
respond to the notice, the following will take place:



      (1)   The Building Official shall notify the owner of a
residential rental structure or unit of the date and time such structure is
to be inspected. Such notice may be personally delivered or may be sent by
first class mail.



      (2)   Upon receipt of the notice, the owner must either:



         A.   Appear at the date and time scheduled for the
inspection; or



         B.   Object within ten days of the mailing or delivery
of notice, and:



            1.   Schedule an alternative date for the
appointment within ten days from the date identified in the initial notice; or



            2.   Direct the Building Official to contact the
tenants of the rental unit directly to schedule the inspection and provide
the tenant's name and address.



      (3)   If an owner of a residential rental structure or unit
requests in writing that the Building Official schedule an appointment with
the tenant, the Building Official shall notify the tenant of the residential
rental unit of the date and time such unit is to be scheduled for inspection.
Such notice may be personally delivered or may be sent by first class mail.
Upon receipt of the notice, the tenant must either:



         A.   Appear at the date and time scheduled for the
inspection; or



         B.   Object within ten days and schedule an alternative
date and time for the appointment within ten days from the date identified in
the original notice.



      (4)   If an owner or tenant subsequently learns he or she will
not be present for a scheduled appointment, the individual must provide the
Building Official with at least twenty-four (24) hours advance notice and
must schedule a second inspection date within ten days from the scheduled
appointment. Failure to appear for a scheduled appointment without providing
notice shall be a violation of this chapter and a municipal civil infraction.
Failure to appear for a scheduled second inspection date shall be a violation
of this chapter and a municipal civil infraction.



   (c)   During any inspection, the Building Official shall note any
violation of this chapter or other sections of this code and give notice of
the violations to the responsible local agent. The Building Official shall
direct the responsible local agent to correct violations within the time set
forth in the notice. A reasonable time for correcting violations shall be
determined by the Building Official in light of the nature of the violations
and all relevant circumstances, but shall not exceed sixty (60) days. Upon
request of the person responsible for correcting violations, the Building
Official may extend the time for correcting violations if the Building
Official deems such action appropriate under all relevant circumstances, but
not to exceed an additional 60 days.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07; Ord. 872.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1460.10  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   (a)   Except as set forth herein, whenever the Building Official
determines that there has been a violation of any section of this chapter, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation and order for correction of the
violation as provided in this section. This section shall not apply to the
enforcement of violations of Section 1460.09 (Inspections), Section 1460.12
(Harassment) or Sections 1460.03, 1460.04, and 1460.05 (violations of the
registration requirements) set forth in this chapter. Such notice shall:



      (1)   Be in writing.



      (2)   Include a statement of the conditions that constitute
violations of this chapter.



      (3)   State the date of the inspection, the name of the
inspector, the address of the dwelling and the date set for re-inspection.



      (4)   Specify a time limit for the performance of any act it
requires.



      (5)   Notify the owner, responsible local agent or the tenant,
as the case may require, of the right to appeal from the notice or order to
the Rental Housing Board of Appeals.



      (6)   Be served upon the owner or the tenant or, as the case
may require, on the responsible local agent. Such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served if a copy thereof is (i) served personally, or (ii) sent
by first class mail to the last known address. Notice given to the
responsible local agent is deemed as notice given to the owner.



   (b)   If a violation of this chapter, as stated in the original
notice of violation, continues, the Building Official shall send a final
notice of violation and may issue an order to vacate to the owner or
responsible local agent and tenant. Such notice shall be sent by regular,
first class mail to the last known address of the owner or responsible local
agent and the tenant and shall:



      (1)   Specify the date of the inspection.



      (2)   Specify the address where the violation was found.



      (3)   Include the name, telephone number, and signature of the
inspector.



      (4)   Include a description of each violation observed by the
inspector.



      (5)   State that each violation is a separate municipal civil
infraction.



      (6)   Order the premises to be vacated within a time to be set
by the inspector, the length of which shall be determined by the extent of
the danger to the tenants, but in no case shall it exceed thirty (30) days,
or alternatively:



         A.   Order correction of all violations within a time
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.



         B.   State that a re-inspection will be made to
determine whether all violations have been corrected by the specified date. A
re-inspection fee as adopted by resolution by the City Council, will be
required to be paid prior to a re-inspection. The owner or responsible local
agent shall be responsible for contacting the Community Development
Department for scheduling the re-inspection within ten (10) days of the date
on the notice;



         C.   State that failure to comply with the notice may
result in a notice of civil infraction pursuant to Chapters 202 and 208 of
the Howell City Code; or



         D.   Employ any other additional or optional corrective
or enforcement measure as provided for under this chapter or allowed by law.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.11  INSPECTION GUIDELINES. (REPEALED)



   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Section 1460.11 was repealed by Ordinance 918, passed
October 8, 2018.)



1460.12  HARASSMENT.



   (a)   Any tenant or other person who shall maliciously or
vexatiously cause an inspection to be made for the purpose of harassing any
individual, owner or responsible local agent, corporation, or governmental
agency when no violation is present may, "de minimis", be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction.



   (b)   Building Officials are duly authorized to inspect properties
in conjunction with this chapter. Building Officials shall not be harassed,
stalked, threatened, hindered, assaulted, or otherwise interfered within the
performance of their duties. Notwithstanding, any other section in this
chapter, a violation of this subsection shall be a municipal civil infraction.



   (c)   Any owner or responsible party who harasses or threatens a
tenant with loss of occupancy as a result of filing a valid complaint shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.13  APPEAL PROCESS.



   (a)   If the owner or responsible local agent disagrees with the
opinion of the Building Official as to either the existence of an alleged
violation or the period of time that will be reasonably required for the
owner to correct the alleged violation as set forth in the final notice of
violation and order to repair given pursuant to this chapter, the owner or
responsible local agent may appeal to the Rental Housing Board of Appeals,
which is hereby designated to hear such appeals. Any tenant of a dwelling
shall have standing to appeal any notice or order to vacate the dwelling.



   (b)   The Rental Housing Board of Appeals shall consist of five
persons appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The members
of the Rental Housing Board of



   Appeals shall consist of persons who are qualified by experience to
pass on matters pertaining to this chapter and who are not employees of the
City. Specifically, the membership of the board shall be:



      (1)   One licensed builder, construction tradesman, licensed
engineer, or licensed architect who is not a rental property owner or tenant;



      (2)   Two current residential rental property owners or
responsible local agents;



      (3)   One current residential rental property tenant; and



      (4)   One resident of the City at large who is neither a
residential rental property owner nor a tenant.



Members are to serve three-year staggered terms. The initial Rental Housing
Board of Appeals shall adopt by-laws which address the rules of procedure to
conduct meetings, which shall be made available to all persons upon request.



   (c)   Any owner or tenant requesting such an appeal shall file a
written request therefor to the Community Development Department within ten
days after the date of receipt of the notice of violation or within the time
frame for taking any action indicated on a notice or order, whichever time is
shorter. The appeal shall be on a form developed by the Community Development
Department.



   (d)   As soon as practical, the Rental Housing Board of Appeals
shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing and shall hear testimony and
argument from the owner and the Building Official and shall by a majority
vote, determine the question at hand. The decision of the Rental Housing
Board of Appeals shall be binding upon the owner, tenant and/or the City.



   (e)   The Rental Housing Board of Appeals has powers that are
enumerated as follows:



      (1)   Administrative Review – The board may hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any decision,
violation, requirement, or refusal made by the Building Official, inspecting
officer, or the Community Development Department in enforcing any provision
of this chapter or the Property Maintenance for Rental Properties Ordinance
of the City of Howell (Chapter 1480).



      (2)   Interpretation – The board may hear and decide
requests for interpretation of this chapter or the Property Maintenance for
Rental Properties Ordinance of the City of Howell (Chapter 1480), taking into
consideration the intent and purpose of this chapter.



      (3)   Record Keeping – The board shall keep a record of all
decisions and interpretations of this chapter. The board shall request that
City Council review their records and make ordinance revisions, as necessary.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.14  REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   If the owner does not correct a violation of any section of this
chapter, the Building Official shall revoke any existing certificate of
occupancy(s). Any structure not in compliance with this article is deemed a
nuisance per se.



(Ord 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.15  VACATING AND SECURING BUILDINGS.



   The Building Official may declare a residential rental structure or
residential rental unit to be unfit for human occupancy or entry (i.e., red
tagged) based upon those criteria found in Section 1480.02 of the Howell City
Code.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07; Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1460.16  AUTHORITY OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (a)   This chapter shall not impair or diminish the authority of the
Building Official to employ any alternative action or corrective measure
provided for under any housing or building codes as adopted or recognized by
the City, where applicable.



   (b)   This article shall not be construed so as to limit the
application and enforcement of the City zoning ordinance, the blight and
nuisance ordinance, or housing and building codes adopted by the City as to
the maintenance of residential dwellings or the health, safety, welfare of
tenants residing in residential dwellings, where applicable.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



1460.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Any owner of a residential rental structure or unit who fails
to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction pursuant to the Section 202.99 of the Howell
City Code.



   (b)   The City may also seek any and all remedies available to it by
law, including bringing an action for an injunction or other process against
a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 792.  Passed 1-8-07.)



CHAPTER 1470
Property Maintenance for Rental
Properties Ordinance of the City of Howell



   EDITOR'S NOTE: Chapter 1470 was repealed by Ordinance 918, passed
October 8, 2018.



CHAPTER 1480
Property Maintenance



1480.01   Intent.



1480.02   Adoption of Code by reference.



1480.03   Grading and drainage.



1480.04   Defacement of property.



1480.05   Building materials left outside.



1480.06   Laborers and materials.



1480.07   Hearings and appeals.



1480.08   Violations; repair or removal by city; recovery of costs..



1480.99   Penalty.



1480.01  INTENT.



   This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which
is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected
by the continued occupancy and maintenance of any and all structures, units
and premises.  Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of
health and safety as required herein.



(Ord. 873.  Passed 5-20-13.)



1480.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Pursuant to Section 6.5 of the Howell City Charter, the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International
Code Council, for the purpose of regulating existing buildings and structures
and premises in the City of Howell, as in this chapter modified, is hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, save and except such
portions as may be hereinafter be amended or deleted by the City of Howell or
the International Code Council, said amendments being effective as of the
date of the amendment. A complete printed copy of the International Property
Maintenance Code, as adopted and the amendments herein, shall be kept on file
in the office of the City Clerk and the Community Development Office, where
it shall be available for inspection by and distribution to the public during
regular business hours.



(Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1480.03  GRADING AND DRAINAGE.



   No property owner shall change the grade or drainage pattern so as to
cause water to flow upon neighboring properties. Detention and retention
structures as required under the Howell City Zoning Code are exempt from this
provision.



(Ord. 873.  Passed 5-20-13; Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1480.04  DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY.



   No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public
property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.  It shall be
the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state
of maintenance and repair according to the Building Official.



(Ord. 873.  Passed 5-20-13;  Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1480.05  BUILDING MATERIALS LEFT OUTSIDE.



   No property owner shall store, accumulate, or permit the storage or
accumulation of any building materials on property owned, leased, rented or
occupied by him or her for any period longer than reasonably necessary for
the immediate use of such materials, but in no event longer than the length
of an active building permit on the premises.



(Ord. 873.  Passed 5-20-13; Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1480.06  LABORERS AND MATERIALS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the Code Official, with the approval
of Council, may employ such laborers and materials as may be necessary to
implement this chapter.



(Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1480.07  HEARINGS AND APPEALS.



   Notwithstanding those requirements set out in Section 111, Means of
Appeal, of the International Property Maintenance Code such requirements
shall not apply to property maintenance violations issued under this Chapter.
In the place of Section 111 shall be the following for purposes of appeals:



   Any person interested, who may be aggrieved by an order or notice of
the code official made pursuant to this chapter, may, within twenty days from
the date of service of such order or notice, appeal to the Howell City
Council by filing, with the code official from whom the appeal is taken and
with the City Clerk, a notice of appeal, in writing, specifying the grounds
thereof. The code official shall forthwith transmit to Council all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the code official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to Council,
after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life, health and property. In such a case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted
by Council or by a court of record. Any person, whether or not a previous
party of the appeal, owner, agent or occupant interested, who may feel
aggrieved by an order or notice of the code official shall have the right to
apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of
law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by
law following the filing of the decision in the office of the Howell City
Clerk.



(Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1480.08  VIOLATIONS; REPAIR OR REMOVAL BY CITY; RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (a)   No owner of an unsafe building or structure, to whom an order
or notice to repair or remove such building or structure is given, shall fail
to commence or to complete such repair or removal within the time limit
prescribed by such notice.



   (b)   If the owner fails to commence or complete such work within
such time limit, the Code Official may cause such work to be commenced and/or
completed by the City, the cost and expense thereof, with a penalty of ten
percent, to be collected from the owner of such structure in the manner
provided by law. The recovery of such cost and expense, together with the
penalty, may be in addition to the penalty provided for in Section 1480.99.



(Ord. 918.  Passed 10-8-18.)



1480.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Any owner of a structure, unit or premises who fails to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction pursuant to Section 202.99 of the Howell City Code.



   (b)   The City may also seek any and all remedies available to it by
law, including bringing an action for an injunction or other process against
a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 873.  Passed 5-20-13.)



PART SIXTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE



      Chap. 1610.   International Fire Code.



      Chap. 1612.    Fire Code Administration and Enforcement.



      Chap. 1613.   Open Burning and Outdoor Burning.



      Chap. 1614.   Fireworks.



      Chap. 1620.   Fire Lanes.



      Chap. 1630.   Life Safety Code.



      Chap. 1641.   Regulated Flood Prone Hazard Areas.



CHAPTER 1610
International Fire Code



1610.01   Adoption by reference.



1610.02   Purpose.



1610.025   Code Official; Board of Fire Code Appeals.



1610.03   File and distribution copies.



1610.04   Conflicts.



1610.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fires and fire protection generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 29.1 et seq.,
41.181, 125.401 et seq., 750.240 et seq.



   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 238



   Smoke control - see GEN. OFF. 622.01; P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF. 662.01(b)(14)



   Fire alarm systems - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1066



   Flammable materials and explosives - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



1610.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   Pursuant to Section 6.5 of the Howell City Charter, the International
Fire Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H,
I and J, as published by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted
by reference as if the same were fully set forth herein, save and except such
portions as may be hereinafter amended or deleted, and the same shall
hereafter be known as the Fire Prevention Code for the City of Howell.



(Ord. 701.  Passed 1-17-2000; Ord. 759.  Passed 7-26-04; Ord. 892.  Passed
5-4-15.)



1610.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01,
is to prescribe regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and
property from fire or explosion and to provide for inspections and
regulations relating thereto.



(Ord. 542.  Passed 3-25-91; Ord. 759.  Passed 7-26-04.)



1610.025  CODE OFFICIAL; BOARD OF FIRE CODE APPEALS.



   (a)   All references made in the Fire Prevention Code to the code
official shall be a reference to the Howell Area Fire Authority Chief, or his
or her designee, and the Howell Area Fire Authority Chief is hereby given
authority and charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code.



   (b)   The Board of Zoning Appeals, formed pursuant to Chapter 1240,
Article 12 of the Zoning Ordinance, is hereby constituted as the Board of
Fire Code Appeals and shall decide all appeals pursuant to the Code,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Fire Prevention Code to the
contrary.



(Ord. 542.  Passed 3-25-91; Ord. 759.  Passed 7-26-04.)



1610.03  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.



   Printed copies of the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in Section
1610.01, shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, available for
inspection by and distribution to the public at all times.



(Ord. 542.  Passed 3-25-91; Ord. 759.  Passed 7-26-04.)



1610.04  CONFLICTS.



   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01, and a provision of any local
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the stricter standard shall
prevail.  However, in the event of a conflict between any of the provisions
of the Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01, and Chapter 1630
of this Code, the less restrictive standard shall prevail.  In the event of
a conflict between the Fire Prevention Code and a provision of any State of
Michigan code adopted by reference by the City, the provision of the State
code shall prevail.



(Ord. 542.  Passed 3-25-91; Ord. 759.  Passed 7-26-04.)



1610.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty if no
specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 1612
Fire Code Administration and Enforcement



1612.01   Referenced codes and standards.



1612.02   Enforcement responsibilities.



1612.03   Unlawful boarding or tampering with Authority/Department
equipment.



1612.04   Damage/injury to Authority/Department equipment and/or personnel.



1612.05   General and required operational permits.



1612.06   Hazardous material references.



1612.07   Installation of fire suppression and permit fees; installation
of fire alarm/detection systems and permit fees.



1612.08   Permit issuance; additional fees; cancellation fees.



1612.09   Board of appeals.



1612.10   Violations; penalties; municipal civil infractions; collection
of charges.



1612.11   Definitions.



1612.12   Open burning regulation.



1612.13   Miscellaneous provisions.



1612.14   Flammable and combustible liquids and materials; aerosol
products; business operations, storage, dispensing and identification.



1612.15   Explosive materials, fireworks and rocketry; requirements and
prohibitions.



1612.16   Storage tank regulations for flammable and combustible liquids;
aboveground and underground tanks; permits.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fire code adopted - see F. P. Ch. 1610



   Fires and fire protection generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 29.1 et seq.,
41.181, 125.401 et seq., 750.240 et seq.



   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 238



1612.01  REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.



   The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are
listed in Chapter 80 of Chapter 1610.01 and such codes and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this
code and the referenced standards, the provisions, which establish the higher
standard for the promotion of the safety and welfare of the public and the
protection of the public, or as otherwise determined by the State of Michigan
law, shall apply.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.02  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES.



   On behalf of and under the auspices of the City, the Howell Area Fire
Authority, through the Howell Area Fire Department, shall be responsible for
fire prevention, inspection activities and code enforcement of buildings and
occupancies as related to the risk of fire or explosion within the City. The
function of the Authority and Department shall be the implementation,
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code and the codes
and standards referenced in Chapter 80 of Chapter 1610.01.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.03  UNLAWFUL BOARDING OR TAMPERING WITH AUTHORITY/DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT.



   A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire official
in charge of said fire authority/department emergency equipment, cling to,
attach to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire
authority/department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at
rest, operate any emergency warning equipment, or to manipulate or tamper
with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any
equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department
emergency vehicle.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04.)



1612.04  DAMAGE/INJURY TO AUTHORITY/DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT AND/OR PERSONNEL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or
conspire to damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle or
equipment at any time; or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire
authority/department personnel while performing authority/departmental duties.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04.)



1612.05  GENERAL AND REQUIRED OPERATIONAL PERMITS.



   Permits shall be in accordance with Section 1610.01, otherwise being
section 105 of the International Fire Code of the Fire Prevention Code. Where
reference is made to this section for permits elsewhere in this code and
there are no provisions for issuing said permits by the department of fire
prevention, the code official is authorized to waive the particular permit
requirement. The code official is authorized to issue operational permits for
the operations set forth herein and in Chapter 1610 of the Code. Where there
are no provisions for issuing said permits, the code official is authorized
to waive the particular permit requirement.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04.)



1612.06  HAZARDOUS MATERIAL REFERENCES.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 105.6.20  Hazardous Materials. An operational permit is
required to store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous
materials in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.20.  An operational
permit, once issued, shall remain valid until revoked or until the occupancy
for which the permit was issued shall change ownership. Upon any change of
ownership, a new operational permit for the occupancy shall be required to
store, transport or site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in
excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.20. Notwithstanding the fact that
no additional permit need be issued, nor any further fee charged, for a
change in the operation or manner of storage, transportation, dispensing, use
or handling of the permitted hazardous substance, nor for any change in the
type of hazardous substance being so used, any such change from the
conditions of the original permit shall create a duty on the permit holder to
advise the fire marshal or his designee of such changes forthwith. Failure to
comply with this notification mandate may be cause for revocation of an
operational permit where the circumstances surrounding such permit have been
changed without notice to the fire marshal.



   Exception:   (1)   Nothing in this subsection shall apply to a
farm or farm operation as defined in Section 202 of this Code and Michigan
Complied Laws Section 286.472, that being the Michigan Right to Farm Act, Act
93 of the Public Acts of 1981, as amended.



            (2)   Nothing in this subsection shall apply to
one or two family dwelling occupancies.



   Section 105.6.20.1  Required amounts for reporting.  Reportable
quantities shall be considered the maximum amount of hazardous material on
site at any given time. This amount is required to be reported to the fire
department as indicated in Table 105.6.20.



   Section 105.6.20.2  Permit Fees.  The following fees shall be applied
to the maximum quantity of each form of hazardous materials:



   Quantity & Form                  Fee



   0 - 1,000 lbs.; 0 - 100 cu. ft.; 0 - 330 gal.          $100.00



   1,001 - 20,000 lbs; 101- 6,000 cu. ft.; 331 - 990
gal.      $250.00



   20,001 + lbs.; 6,001 + cu. ft.; 991 + gal.          $500.00



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.07  INSTALLATION OF FIRE SUPPRESSION AND PERMIT FEES; INSTALLATION OF
FIRE ALARM/DETECTION SYSTEMS AND PERMIT FEES.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 105.7.1.1  Installations.  Before any fire suppression system
or component is installed, enlarged, extended or modified, a permit shall be
obtained from the code official. This shall include any device or relay
connected to or controlled by the fire suppression system. A qualified
installer who is properly licensed and/or certified to perform such work as
determined by the code official must perform all work. Construction documents
shall be reviewed by the code official prior to the issuance of the permit.
Upon issuance of the permit, the permit must be posted at the job site in
plain view.



   Section 105.7.1.2  Permit fees.  Permit fees cover initial plan
review and two inspections.



      Sprinkler Systems:



      Riser(s) & Sprinkler Heads         Fee
      1 - 20 heads               $80.00
      21 - 50 heads               $90.00
      51 - 100 heads               $100.00
      101-200 heads               $120.00
      201 - 300 heads            $140.00
      301 - 400 heads            $160.00
      401 - 500 heads            $180.00
      501 - 1000 heads            $200.00
      > 1001 heads               $0.50 per head



      Standpipes:  $45.00 per standpipe.



      Fire pump:  $50.00



Dry or wet chemical fire suppression systems: $90.00 per system. Each
additional system in the same building reviewed at the same time is $45.00.
Alterations, additions, or modifications to each existing system are $35.00.



      Total flooding agent extinguishing systems:  $90.00 plus
appropriate detection system fee.



Plan Reviews: The code official might require an outside third party. This
review will be charged  at the current fire safety consultants or plan
reviewer's rates. These fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit.



Section 105.7.6.1  Installations.  Before any fire alarm or detection
system or component is installed, enlarged, extended or modified, a permit
shall be obtained from the code official. This shall include auxiliary
devices such as magnetic locks, electronic locks, or any device or relay
connected to or controlled by the fire alarm or detection system. A qualified
installer who is properly licensed and/or certified to perform such work as
determined by the code official must perform all work. Construction documents
shall be reviewed by the code official prior to the issuance of the permit.
Upon issuance of the permit, the permit must be posted at the job site in
plain view.



Section 105.7.6.2 Permit fees.  Permit fees cover initial plan review and
two inspections.



      Device                     Fee



      Control Panel                  $20.00



      First initiating or auxiliary
      Control devices (smoke detector,
      Heat detector, control switch, etc.)         $10.00



      Each additional initiating or aux control
      Device   $0.50 per device



      First audio/visual indicating or
      Communications device (horn, strobe,
      Bell, etc.)                  $10.00



      Each additional audio/visual indicating
      or communications device            $0.50 per device



Plan Reviews: The code official might require an outside third party. This
review will be charged at the current fire safety consultants or plan
reviewer's rates. These fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.08  PERMIT ISSUANCE; ADDITIONAL FEES; CANCELLATION FEES.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 105.7.17 Permit issuance.  A permit granted hereunder shall
not be transferable nor shall any such permit be extended beyond the time set
forth therein unless approved by the fire official. When work is started
without a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.



   Section 106.5 Additional fees. The following fees may be charged for a
re-inspection and shall apply to each inspector performing the re-inspection.
These fees shall be paid in full prior to the re-inspection being performed.



      1.   $30.00 per re-inspection during normal working hours.



      2.   $75.00 per re-inspection during non-working hours.



   Section 106.6 Cancellation fees. Handling cost of permits canceled
after being issued is 35% of the permit fee or $10.00, whichever is greater.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.09  BOARD OF APPEALS.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 108.4 Board of appeals members. The board of appeals shall
consist of the following:



   Two (2) members of the Howell Area Fire Authority board. Three (3)
certified fire inspectors from a jurisdiction outside the Howell Area Fire
Authority.



      No member of the appeals board shall have a conflict of interest
with the issue being addressed.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04.)



1612.10  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS; COLLECTION OF
CHARGES.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation
of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or
of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The sanction for a violation
which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in an amount as
set forth in section 202.99 of the Howell City Code, plus any costs, damages,
expenses and other sanctions, as authorized by the Revised Judicature Act,
MCL 600.101, et seq., that being Act No 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as
amended, and other applicable laws.



   Section 109.5  Prohibited parking; exception; bus-loading zone;
violation as civil infraction. The code official may issue a civil infraction
against a person who parks a vehicle in such a manner as to conflict,
obscure, prevent or obstruct access to fire hydrants, fire stations,
accidents, emergency exits for egress from a building, within 500 feet of a
fire blocking designated fire lanes or any other violation under Ordinance
No. 745 or Ordinance 746 of the Howell City Code as it relates to fire safety
violations.



   Section 109.5.1 Fee Schedule. For any violation of the parking
requirements listed in Section 109.4 of this Code, the fine for such an
offense shall be as set forth in Chapter 430.05 of the Howell City Code.



   Section 109.5.2 Towing and Storage Costs.  In addition to the above
violation penalties, a person who violates this section shall be responsible
for all vehicle towing and storage costs incurred if the Fire Chief and/or
his/her designees, as defined in Section 109.5 (2) herein, determines that
the vehicle parked in violation of section 109.5 must be towed to insure
public safety and/or fire department access to a building or emergency scene.



   Section 109.6 Application and allocation for fees, fines. Payment for
any permit fees shall be paid to the Howell Area Fire Authority. Payment for
civil infraction or municipal civil infraction fines and costs shall be paid
to the City.



   Section 109.6.1 Issuing of tickets for violations. The Fire Chief
and/or his/her designees, who shall be the Deputy Fire Chief, Assistant Fire
Chiefs, Fire Marshal, and fire inspectors assigned to the Fire Marshal's
Division shall be authorized to issue tickets for violation of any code
within this Chapter.



   Section 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be issued a municipal civil infraction violation notice pursuant to
Chapter 202 of the Howell City Code.



   Section 111.5 Collection of charges. The Howell Area Fire Authority may
proceed in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to collect any monies
remaining unpaid for services provided as a mature debt of the Howell Area
Fire Authority and shall have any and all other remedies provided by law for
the collection of all charges.



   Section 114.1 False alarms; inspections; orders to correct.



   (1)   A fire, sprinkler, or water alarm system experiencing more
than two false alarms within a thirty-day (30) period or four false alarms
within the calendar year is deemed defective. Upon written notice to the
owner or lessee of the alarm system by the Fire Chief and/or his/her
designee, the owner or lessee shall have the system inspected by an alarm
system contractor who shall, within fifteen days, file a written report to
the fire chief and/or his/her designee of the result of his/her inspection,
the probable cause of the false alarms and his/her recommendation for
eliminating false alarms.



   (2)   Upon receipt of the report, the fire chief and/or his/her
designee shall forward the same to the owner or lessee, ordering corrections,
based upon recommendations contained in the report.



   (3)   The owner or lessee shall have three working days from the
receipt of the order to make such corrections. Thereafter, to defray the cost
of responding to false alarms, the owner or lessee of an alarm system shall
pay to the fire authority the amount of the response as per the cost recovery
fees for each false alarm received and responded to by the fire department
during the calendar year in which the order to correct the system was issued.
The amount due to the fire authority shall be paid forthwith upon demand by
the fire department and if not so paid, the fire authority and/or designee
shall have the right, along with all of the other rights it may have, to
impose a lien on the real and personal property of the owner or lessee and
such lien shall be enforced in the same manner as are delinquent taxes.



   Section 114.2 Misrepresented False Alarms. It shall be unlawful for any
person to summon, in any way, the fire department unless a valid reason for
their response is present. The fire chief and/or his/her designee shall have
the authority to issue fines as per the cost recovery ordinance to any person
causing a false alarm, if the person causing a false alarm is a minor the
fines shall be the responsibly of the minors legal supervisor.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.11  DEFINITIONS.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 202 General Definitions. The following definitions shall be in
addition to the definitions noted in the International Fire Code, 2012
edition.



   "Code Official" The fire chief, fire marshal, fire inspector, code
enforcement officer, or other designated authority charged by the applicable
governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement of the code,
or duly authorized representative. The term "fire official" may be used
interchangeably with "code official" in this code.



   "False Alarm" Means the activation of an alarm of an alarm system
through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the
negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or his/her employee or
agent. "False alarm" does not include the alarm caused by severe weather or
other violent conditions beyond the control of the owner or lessee of an
alarm system or his/her employee or agent.



   "Farm"  Means the land, plants, animals, buildings, structures,
including ponds used for agricultural or aqua cultural activities, machinery,
equipment, and other appurtenances used in the commercial production of farm
products.  MCL 286.472(a).



   "Farm Operations"  Means the operation and management of a farm or a
condition or activity that occurs at any time as necessary on a farm in
connection with the commercial production, harvesting, and storage of farm
products.  MCL 286.472(b).



   "Fire Watch"  A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and
systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more
qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlled fire
hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and
notifying the fire department by method(s) approved or recommended by the
code official.



   "Misrepresented False Alarm"  The willful and knowing initiation or
transmission of a signal, message or other notification of event of fire or
the emergency when no danger exists.



   "Water Capacity"  The amount of water, in either pounds or gallons, at
60 deg. F (15.6 deg. C) required to fill a container full of water.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.12  OPEN BURNING REGULATION.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 307.1.2 Local Burning Ordinances Preserved.  Nothing in this
Code shall be construed as prohibiting the City from regulating matters of
open burning pursuant to Chapter 1613 of the Howell City Code. In the event
of a conflict between this Code and Chapter 1613, Chapter 1613 shall be
deemed to supersede this Code and control, for so long as it remains in
force. Notwithstanding Chapter 1613, however, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal,
or fire code official shall retain the authorization under Section 307.7 of
this code to ban all open burning if conditions warrant.



   Section 307.6 Fire department training. Open burning is allowed for the
purpose of training fire fighters in fire fighting practice, or for the
purpose of training the public, including workers or employees, or for the
purpose of demonstration by the fire official or other trained fire
personnel, when such burning is done in accordance with accepted practice.



   Section 307.7 Banning open burning. The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or
fire code official shall be authorized to issue a ban on all open burning if
conditions are too hazardous in the opinion of the fire code official to
allow the open burning, open flame, etc.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08; Ord. 893.  Passed
5-4-15.)



1612.13  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



Section 312.2.1 Maintenance. It shall be the property owner's responsibility
to provide and maintain this protection.



   Section 507.5 Fire Hydrants systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply
with section 507.5.1 through 507.5.6 and shall be in accordance with Appendix
C and Howell Area Fire Department standards and policies.



   Section 507.5.4.1. Removal of obstructions. If upon the expiration of
the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments to
fire hydrant, or to other fire protection equipment, are not removed, the
code official shall proceed to remove or have removed the same. The expense
incurred shall be a debt to the local governing body from the responsible
person and shall be collected as any other debt to the Howell Area Fire
Authority.



   Section 903.3.5.3 Required pressure margin. Due to unforeseeable and
changing conditions within the water supply, the code official is authorized
to require a pressure margin of up to 20 lbs. over the minimum design
criteria for installed automatic fire sprinkler systems. Where this margin
cannot be achieved, approved means shall be taken to provide this margin.



   Section 912.2 Location. With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings
and landscaping, fire department connections shall be so located that fire
apparatus and hose connected to supply the system will not obstruct access to
the buildings for other fire apparatus. The location of fire department
connections shall be within 100 feet of a hydrant and shall be approved by
the code official.



   Section 915.1 General. Precautions shall be taken in all rooms and
areas containing fire sprinkler equipment such as piping, valve(s), and fire
pump(s), to prevent freezing of said equipment during times of extremely cold
temperatures.



   (Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.14  FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS AND MATERIALS; AEROSOL PRODUCTS;
BUSINESS OPERATIONS, STORAGE, DISPENSING AND IDENTIFICATION.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 2301.1 Scope. Automotive motor fuel-dispensing facilities,
marine motor fuel- dispensing facilities, fleet vehicle motor fuel-
dispensing facilities, aircraft motor-vehicle fuel-dispensing facilities and
repair garages shall be in accordance with this chapter and the International
Fuel Gas Code, International Building Code, International Mechanical Code,
and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids
Rules, as amended, or their equivalent. Such operations shall include both
public accessible and private operations.



   Section 2306.1 General. Storage of flammable and combustible liquids
shall be in accordance with Chapter 57 and Section 2306, and the Michigan
Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended,
or their equivalent.



   Section 2306.7.8 Gravity and pressure dispensing. Flammable or
combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by gravity from tanks, drums,
barrels, or similar containers. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be
dispensed by a device operating through pressure within a storage tank, drum
or container. Approved pumps taking suction from the top of the container
shall be utilized.



      Exception:   (1)   Tanks, drums, barrels, or similar
containers used in farms or farm operations as defined within this code.



            (2)    Tanks, drums, barrels or similar containers
used at one or two family residential dwellings.



   Section 5103.2  Identification. Cartons shall be identified on at
least one side with the classification level of the aerosol products
contained within the carton as follows:



      LEVEL _________________  AEROSOLS



   The side of the carton marked shall be clearly visible when stored in
configurations of two or more cartons.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.15  EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS, FIREWORKS AND ROCKETRY; REQUIREMENTS AND
PROHIBITIONS.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 5601.1.1 Explosive materials standards. In addition to the
requirements of this chapter, NFPA 495 shall govern the manufacture,
transportation, storage, sale handling and use of explosive materials, and
the Michigan Explosive Law 1970 PA 202, as amended, or its equivalent.



   Section 5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale,
handling and use of fireworks are prohibited unless in compliance with the
Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, being Act 256 of 2011, as amended by Act 65 of
2013, and as hereinafter amended, or its equivalent, and Chapter 1614 of the
Howell City Code, as amended.



   Section 5601.1.4 Rocketry. The storage, handling and use of model and
high-power rockets shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 1122, NFPA
1125, and NFPA 1127, and the Michigan Model Rocket Law 1965 PA 333, as
amended, or its equivalent.



   Section 5608.1 General. The display of fireworks, including proximate
audience displays and pyrotechnic special effects in motion picture,
television, theatrical, and group entertainment productions, shall comply
with this chapter and NFPA 1123 or NFPA 1126. Approved public displays shall
be handled by an approved competent operator, and the fireworks shall be
arranged, located, discharged and fired in a manner that will not be a hazard
to property or endanger any person.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 857.  Passed 7-9-12; Ord. 878. Passed
8-26-13; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



1612.16  STORAGE TANK REGULATIONS FOR FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS;
ABOVEGROUND AND UNDERGROUND TANKS; PERMITS.



   The following subsections of the International Fire Code as adopted
pursuant to Section 1610.01 of the Howell City Code are hereby amended as
follows:



   Section 5701.3 Referenced documents. The applicable requirements of
Chapter 50, other chapters of this code, the International Building Code, and
the International Mechanical Code pertaining to flammable liquids, and the
Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as
amended, or their equivalent shall apply.



   Section 5701.4 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in
Section 105.6 and 105.7, and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207,
as amended, or its equivalent.



   Section 5704.2.9 Aboveground tanks. Above-ground storage of flammable
and combustible liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 5704.2 and
Sections 5704.2.9.1 through 5704.2.9.7.10, and the Michigan Above-ground
Storage Tanks Rules, or their equivalent.



      Exception:   (1)    Above-ground storage tanks used in
farms or farm operations as defined within this code.



            (2)    Above-ground storage tanks used at one or
two family residential dwellings where the water capacity of said tank is
less than 1,100 gallons.



   Section 5704.2.11 Underground tanks. Underground storage of flammable
and combustible liquids in tanks shall comply with section 5704.2 and
Sections 5704.2.11.1 through 5704.2.11.5.2, and the Michigan Underground
Storage Tank Rules, or their equivalent.



   Section 6101.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in
sections 105.6 and 105.7 and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207,
as amended, or its equivalent.



   Distributors shall not fill LP-gas container for which a permit is
required unless a permit for installation has been issued for that location
by the fire code official.



(Ord. 763.  Passed 9-27-04; Ord. 893.  Passed 5-4-15.)



CHAPTER 1613
Open Burning and Outdoor Burning



1613.01   Purpose.



1613.02   Applicability.



1613.03   Definitions.



1613.04   Prohibition on outdoor burning and open burning.



1613.05   Open burning of refuse.



1613.06   Open burning of trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, grass
clippings and other vegetative matter.



1613.07   Outdoor wood-fired and corn-fired boilers.



1613.08   Campfire.



1613.09   Patio wood-burning units.



1613.10   Liability.



1613.11   Right of entry and inspection.



1613.12   Severability.



1613.13   Violation, enforcement and penalties.



1613.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and
welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and
welfare of citizens of the City by regulating the air pollution and fire
hazards of open burning and outdoor burning.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the
City.



   (a)   This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking food using
charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.



   (b)   This chapter does not apply to burning for the purpose of
generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within
a building used for human or animal habitation.



   (c)   This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene,
natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating,
construction or maintenance activities.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   "Campfire" means an outdoor fire that is on or in the ground
intended for recreation or cooking.



   (b)   "City" means the City of Howell.



   (c)   "Clean wood" means natural wood which has not been painted,
varnished or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated
with preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues, as in plywood or
other composite wood products.



   (d)   "Construction and demolition waste" means building materials,
including but not limited to waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated
wood, painted wood, wiring plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from
construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house,
commercial or industrial building, or other structure.



   (e)   "Fire Official" means the Fire Chief or his/her designee of
the Howell Area Fire Department.



   (f)   "Howell Area Fire Department" is a division of the Howell Area
Fire Authority.



   (g)   "Outdoor burning and/or open burning" means kindling or
maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly into
the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney. This includes
burning in a barrel.



   (h)   "Outdoor corn-fired boiler" means a corn-fired boiler, stove,
or furnace that is not located within a building intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals.



   (i)   "Outdoor wood-fired boiler" means a wood-fired boiler, stove,
or furnace that is not located within a building intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals.



   (j)   "Patio wood-burning unit" means a chimenea, patio warmer, or
other portable wood-burning device that sits off the ground, measuring
thirty-six inches (36") in diameter or less or thirty-six inches by
thirty-six inches (36" x 36") and which is used for outdoor recreation and/or
heating.



   (k)   "Refuse" means any waste material except trees, logs, brush,
stumps, leaves, grass, clippings, and other vegetative matter.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.04  PROHIBITION ON OUTDOOR BURNING AND OPEN BURNING.



   Open burning and outdoor burning are prohibited in the City.  This
prohibition may be waived by the City Council upon a showing by the person
requesting waiver that such burning will be in a manner that is safe,
efficient, with minimal smoke and flame danger to the surrounding area where
the open burning will occur. The City Council shall request a recommendation
from the Howell Area Fire Department, or any other City department affected
by the request, and consider such recommendations regarding the waiver
request.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08; Ord. 850.  Passed 2-27-12.)



1613.05  OPEN BURNING OF REFUSE.



   Open burning of refuse is prohibited.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.06  OPEN BURNING OF TREES, LOGS, BRUSH, STUMPS, LEAVES, GRASS CLIPPINGS
AND OTHER VEGETATIVE MATTER.



   Open burning of trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, grass clippings and
other vegetative matter is prohibited.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.07  OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED AND CORN-FIRED BOILERS.



   No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor wood-fired or
corn-fired boiler in the City.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.08  CAMPFIRE.



   Campfire is prohibited.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.09  PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNITS.



   A patio wood-burning unit may be installed and used in the City, only
in accordance with all of the following provisions.



   (a)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse.



   (b)   The patio wood-burning unit shall burn only clean wood.



   (c)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be located at least ten feet
from any combustible materials, combustible wall or partition, exterior
window opening, exit access or exit.



   (d)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be constantly attended and
supervised by a competent person of at least eighteen (18) years of age until
the fire is extinguished. The person shall have readily available for use
such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for total control of
the fire.



   (e)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not cause a nuisance to
neighbors.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.10  LIABILITY



   A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible
for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage
caused by the fire, said charges payable to the City or the Howell Area Fire
Department.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.11  RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.



   The Fire Official or any authorized officer, agent, employee or
representative of the City who presents credentials may inspect any property
for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.12  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any portion of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter
shall not be affected.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



1613.13  VIOLATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.  Along with those officials who may issue civil
infraction violations under Chapter 208 of the Howell City Code, the Fire
Chief, or his/her designee, of the Howell Area Fire Authority, through the
Howell Area Fire Department, is also empowered to issue civil infractions for
violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 816.  Passed 10-13-08.)



CHAPTER 1614
Fireworks



1614.01   Definitions.



1614.02   Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks.



1614.03   Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks by minors without adult
supervision.



1614.04   Enforcement.



1614.99   Violations, fines and penalties.



1614.01   DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   "Consumer fireworks" means fireworks devices that are designed
to produce visible efforts by combustion, that are required to comply with
the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated
by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts
1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or
3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks.



   (b)   "Display fireworks" means large fireworks devices that are
explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1,
4.1.



   (c)   "Firework or fireworks" means any composition or device,
except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designated for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration,
or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks,
articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects.



   (d)   "Low-impact fireworks" means ground and handheld sparkling
devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to
3.1.1.8, and 3.5.



   (e)   "Novelties" means that term as defined under APA standard
87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following:



      (1)   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets,
strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of
explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum
explosive content per cup.



      (2)   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick
noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in paragraph (1)
above are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to
break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.



      (3)   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch
in diameter.



(Ord. 857.  Passed 7-9-12.)



1614.02   PROHIBITION ON USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   (a)   Except as provided for in subsection (b), below, no person
shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the City, except
that this prohibition shall not preclude any person from the ignition,
discharge and use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of, or
the day after a National holiday. The following are National holidays for
purposes of this section:



      New Year's Day



      Birthday of Martin Luther King Jr.



      Washington's Birthday



      Memorial Day



      Independence Day



      Labor Day



      Columbus Day



      Veterans Day



      Thanksgiving Day



      Christmas Day



   (b)   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks
within the City between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., on the day
preceding, the day of, or the day after a National holiday, as said National
holidays are set out in subsection (a) above.



   (c)   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks
within the City on public property, school property, church property, or the
property of another person without that organization's or person's expressed
permission to use those fireworks on those premises.



(Ord. 857.  Passed 7-9-12; Ord. 878.  Passed 8-26-13.)



1614.03   PROHIBITION ON USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS BY MINORS WITHOUT ADULT
SUPERVISION.



   No person under the age of eighteen shall ignite, discharge or use
consumer fireworks within the City without adult supervision.



(Ord. 858.  Passed 8-13-12.)



1614.04   ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Chief, his designees and sworn law enforcement officers are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 857.  Passed 7-9-12; Ord. 858.  Passed 8-13-12.)



1614.99   VIOLATIONS, FINES AND PENALTIES.



   Any violation of this chapter by any person, firm, or corporation shall
be a municipal civil infraction subject to a civil fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation.



(Ord. 857.  Passed 7-9-12; Ord. 878.  Passed 8-26-13.)



CHAPTER 1620   Fire Lanes



1620.01   Establishment.



1620.02   Location; dimensions and design; maintenance.



1620.03   Signs.



1620.04   Obstructions; removal and impounding.



1620.05   Records.



1620.06   Appeals.



1620.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fires and fire protection generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 29.1 et seq.,
41.181, 125.401 et seq., 750.240 et seq.



   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 238



   Parking Violations Bureau - see TRAF. Ch. 430



   Smoke control - see GEN. OFF. 622.01; P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Fire alarm systems - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1066



   Flammable materials and explosives - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



1620.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (a)   The Fire Chief of the City or his or her designee shall be
responsible for establishing fire lanes on both public and private property.
The following criteria shall be used in determining the necessity of fire
lanes:



      (1)   The lack of access to the building from public streets;
and



      (2)   The lack of traffic lanes to and around areas capable of
handling fire vehicles.



   (b)   Fire lanes shall be established by the Fire Chief or his or
her designee, as deemed necessary, at the following locations. This list
shall not be deemed to be all-inclusive, but is only a guide to
establishment, where fire lanes are necessary.



      (1)   Schools, colleges, universities and their dormitories;



      (2)   Places of public assemblage;



      (3)   Hospitals, nursing homes and homes for the aged;



      (4)   Government utilized buildings;



      (5)   Child and adult foster care facilities larger than 3,000
square feet;



      (6)   Bulk plants for storage of hazardous materials;



      (7)   Apartments and condominiums possessing three units or
more;



      (8)   Shopping centers; and



      (9)   Hotels and motels.



   (c)   Fire lanes shall be established whenever the Fire Chief or his
or her designee deems them to be necessary for the safety of occupants and
property on the aforementioned areas, or, when petitioned by a landowner,
they may be established in accordance with the above criteria. The Fire Chief
or his or her designee shall notify the landowner of any property whereon
fire lanes are established, by mailing notice of the same to the address of
the owner by certified mail. This section shall apply to existing facilities,
to remodeling and modification of existing facilities and to new
construction. Site plans of such facilities shall include proposed lanes, and
final approval will be based on the adequacy of such lanes.



(Ord. 395. Passed 2-25-80.)



1620.02  LOCATION; DIMENSIONS AND DESIGN; MAINTENANCE.



   Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings which are set back more
than 150 feet from a public way or which exceed thirty feet in height and are
more than fifty feet from a public way.



   Fire lanes shall be at least twenty feet in width, with the road edge
closest to the building at least ten feet from the building. Any dead-end
road more than 300 feet long shall be provided with a turn-around at the
closed end at least ninety feet in diameter.



   The proper maintenance of fire lanes on private property shall be the
responsibility of the landowner.



(Ord. 395. Passed 2-25-80.)



1620.03  SIGNS.



   All fire lanes shall be conspicuously posted with uniform fire lane
signs, as prescribed by the Fire Chief or his or her designee, erected not
more than 100 feet apart in all designated lanes. The erection and
maintenance of such signs shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
No owner who is notified that a fire lane must be established on his or her
property shall fail, within thirty days thereof, to erect uniform fire lane
signs. When approved fire lane signs are not erected within thirty days of
notification, Council shall direct such signs to be erected and the cost
thereof assessed against the property. Such remedy shall be in addition to
the penalty provided in Section 1620.99.



(Ord. 395. Passed 2-25-80.)



1620.04  OBSTRUCTIONS; REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDING.



   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle or trailer,
whether occupied or not, or leave any other obstruction, in a designated fire
lane, whether on public or private property, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a
police officer or traffic control device.



   (b)   Police officers having jurisdiction in the locality of such
fire lane are hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle,
trailer or other object from the fire lane to a commercial garage or other
designated location, when the same is illegally left unattended in violation
of this section, provided that such fire lane is indicated by signs so placed
as to be clearly discernible to any person. A vehicle, trailer or other
object may be held until the towing and storage charges have been paid in
full.



   (c)   If a vehicle, trailer or other object is located within a fire
lane at the time the Fire Department is responding to an alarm for any reason
which necessitates use of the fire lane, any member of a Police Department or
Fire Department having jurisdiction in the locality may remove the same or
cause the same to be removed by any reasonable means possible without
liability.



(Ord. 395. Passed 2-25-80.)



1620.05  RECORDS.



   The Fire Chief of the City or his or her designee shall keep an
accurate, current record of all fire lanes established within his or her
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 395. Passed 2-25-80.)



1620.06  APPEALS.



   If any landowner is aggrieved by a decision as to the establishment of
a fire lane, he or she shall, within thirty days of the date of mailing of
the fire lane establishment notice or of denial of a petition to establish a
fire lane, file with the Fire Department a written exception to such
decision, together with the reasons for the exception. Within thirty days of
receipt of such exception, the Department, after consideration of the reasons
for such exceptions, shall affirm, modify or rescind the original decision.
If the owner feels further aggrieved, he or she may appeal within thirty days
of such determination. Council, after consideration of the reasons for such
exceptions, shall affirm, modify or rescind the original decision. (Ord. 395.
Passed 2-25-80.)



1620.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1630
Life Safety Code



1630.01   Purpose and intent.



1630.02   Application.



1630.03   Definitions.



1630.04   Mixed occupancies generally.



1630.05   Mixed occupancies - mercantile, business and residential.



1630.06   Portable fire extinguishers in mercantile occupancies.



1630.07   Necessity of fire alarms.



1630.08   Conflicts.



1630.09   Enforcement; Board of Fire Code Appeals.



1630.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fires and fire protection generally - see M.C.L. Secs. 29.1 et seq.,
41.181, 125.401 et seq., 750.240 et seq.



   Fire Department - see ADM. Ch. 238



   Smoke control - see GEN. OFF. 622.01; P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning Code)



   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF 662.01(b)(14)



   Fire alarm systems - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1066



   Flammable materials and explosives - see P. & Z. Chapter 1240 (Zoning
Code)



   Adoption of BOCA Fire Prevention Code - see F.P. Ch. 1610



1630.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements that
will provide a reasonable degree of safety from fire in buildings and
structures.  This chapter endeavors to avoid requirements that might involve
unreasonable hardships or unnecessary inconvenience or interference with the
normal use and occupancy of a building, but insists upon compliance with a
minimum standard for fire safety consistent with the public interest.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.02  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to both new construction and existing
buildings containing business occupancies, mercantile occupancies and
residential occupancies.  A limited but reasonable time shall be allowed for
compliance with any part of this chapter for existing buildings, commensurate
with the magnitude of expenditure, disruption of services, and degree of
hazard. 



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   "Automatic fire warning system" means a device or system of
devices which automatically detect heat, smoke, or other products of
combustion, with alarms which produce an audible signal for the purpose of
notifying the occupants of the presence of fire so they may evacuate the
premises.



   (b)   "Automatic sprinkler system" means an integrated sprinkler
system of underground and/or overhead piping designed in accordance with fire
protection engineering standards.  The system above ground shall be a
network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a
building, structure, or area, generally overhead, in which the automatic
sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern.  The system shall be
activated by heat from fire and shall discharge water over the fire area.



   (c)   "Building" means any structure used or intended for supporting
or sheltering any use or occupancy, as defined in this chapter.  "Building"
shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof."



   (d)   "Business occupancies" means those used for the transaction of
business (other than that covered under mercantile), for the keeping of
accounts, records and similar purposes.



   (e)   "Fire alarm" means an audible alarm contained in an appliance
which shall be of such character and so distributed as to be effectively
heard about the ambient sound level occurring under normal conditions of
occupancy and that are so distinctive from audible signals used for other
purposes in the same building.



   (f)   "Mercantile occupancies" means those occupancies in which
stores, markets, and other rooms, buildings, or structures are used for the
display and sale of merchandise.



   (g)   "Portable fire extinguisher" means a portable device
containing an extinguishing agent that can be expelled under pressure for the
purpose of suppressing or extinguishing a fire.



   (h)   "Residential occupancies" means those occupancies in which
buildings contain one or more living units, with independent sleeping
accommodations for normal residential purposes, independent cooking, and
bathroom facilities.



   (i)   "Smoke alarm" means a device which automatically detects heat,
smoke, or other products of combustion, which actuates an audible signal upon
detection.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.04  MIXED OCCUPANCIES GENERALLY.



   Where two or more classes of occupancy occur in the same building or
structure, and are so intermingled that separate safeguards are impractical,
means of egress facilities, construction, protection, and other safeguards
shall comply with the most restrictive life safety requirements of the
occupancies involved.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.05  MIXED OCCUPANCIES - MERCANTILE, BUSINESS AND RESIDENTIAL.



   No residential occupancy shall be located above a mercantile or
business occupancy unless the residential occupancy and exit stair therefrom
are separated from the mercantile or business occupancy by construction
having a fire resistance rating of at least one hour, or where the mercantile
or business occupancy is protected throughout by an approved automatic
sprinkler system as defined above, or by an automatic fire detection system
that must be capable of sounding an alarm in the occupancies as required
herein.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.06  PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS IN MERCANTILE OCCUPANCIES.



   Portable fire extinguishers approved by the Fire Chief shall be
provided in all mercantile occupancies, and employees shall be trained and
instructed in the proper use of said fire extinguishers.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.07  NECESSITY OF FIRE ALARMS.



   For every building or structure of such size, arrangement or occupancy
that a fire itself may not provide adequate occupant warning, a fire alarm
facility shall be provided where necessary to warn occupants of the existence
of fire.  Fire alarms will alert occupants to initiate escape and facilitate
the orderly conduct of fire exit drills.  All sounding devices shall be
heard over ambient noise levels and be recognized as a fire alarm signal.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.08  CONFLICTS.



   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the BOCA
Fire Prevention Code, being Chapter 1610 of these Codified Ordinances, and
this chapter, the less restrictive standard shall prevail.  In the event of
a conflict between this chapter and a provision of any State code, the
provision of the State code shall prevail. 



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.09  ENFORCEMENT; BOARD OF FIRE CODE APPEALS.



   (a)   The Howell City Fire Chief, or his or her designee, is hereby
given authority and charged with the administration and enforcement of this
chapter.



   (b)   The Board of Zoning Appeals, formed pursuant to the Zoning
Code, is hereby constituted as the Board of Fire Code Appeals and shall
decide all appeals made under this chapter, said appeal to be taken within
twenty days after receipt of notice of a decision by the Howell City Fire
Chief.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-25-91.)



1630.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for a Municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the civil fines set
forth in Section 202.99.



CHAPTER 1641
Regulated Flood Prone Hazard Areas.



1641.01   Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas.



1641.01  DESIGNATION OF REGULATED FLOOD PRONE HAZARD AREAS.



   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) entitled Livingston County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions) and dated
September 17, 2008, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMs) panel numbers
of 26093C as follows: 0189D, 193D, 0302D, 0304D, 0306D, and 0308D and dated
September 17, 2008 are adopted by reference for the purposes of
administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part
of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content
of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential
Code.



(Ord. 815.  Passed 9-8-08.)



 


