
Ionia, MI Code of Ordinances


CODIFIED ORDINANCES
OF
IONIA, MICHIGAN




Local legislation current through March 5, 2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CHARTER



EDITOR'S NOTE:  The Charter of the City of Ionia was approved by the voters
on November 2, 1993.  Dates appearing in parentheses following a section
indicate that such section was subsequently amended or added on the date
given.




ARTICLE I   Incorporation, Boundaries and Powers.





ARTICLE II   City Council.





ARTICLE III   City Manager.





ARTICLE IV   Departments, Offices and Agencies.





ARTICLE V   Financial Procedures.





ARTICLE VI   Elections.





ARTICLE VII   General Provisions.





ARTICLE VIII   Taxation.





ARTICLE IX   Utilities, Franchises and Permits.





ARTICLE X   Borrowing.





ARTICLE XI   Special Assessment.





ARTICLE XII   Miscellaneous.





ARTICLE XIII   Transition; Separability.





   Resolution of Adoption.




CHARTER OF THE CITY OF IONIA, MICHIGAN



(Prepared by the Ionia Charter Revision Commission, elected



November 6, 1990)



RAYMOND L. MONTE, Chairperson



GRACE WEDDERBURN, Vice-Chairperson



DAVID COOK, Secretary



CHARLENE AUSTIN



THOMAS D. DICKINSON



WILLIS A JEPSON



TED RIDDER



DON STANTON



CHARLES VAN LOAN



PREAMBLE



WE, THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF IONIA, MICHIGAN, IN ORDER TO SECURE THE
BENEFITS OF EFFICIENT SELF-GOVERNMENT AND TO PROMOTE OUR COMMON WELFARE DO
HEREBY ENACT AND ESTABLISH THIS CHARTER.



ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION, BOUNDARIES AND POWERS



Section 1.01.  Incorporation.



   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the "City of
Ionia," as its limits are now or may hereafter be established, shall be and
is continued as a municipal corporation under the laws of the State of
Michigan, and shall be known by the name of "City of Ionia."



Section 1.02.  Boundaries.



   The City shall embrace the territory constituting the City of Ionia on
the effective date of this Charter, together with such annexations or
additions thereto and less such detachments therefrom as may be made from
time to time.  Upon annexation, addition or detachment of territory, the
boundaries shall be deemed thereby changed without amendment of this
section.  The Clerk shall maintain and keep available in the Clerk's office
for public inspection and distribution an official description of the current
boundaries of the City.



Section 1.03.  Powers of the City.



   The City shall have all powers possible for a City to have under the
Constitution and laws of this State as fully and completely as though they
were specifically enumerated in this Charter.



Section 1.04.  Construction of Powers.



   The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally
in favor of the City and the specific mention of particular powers in the
Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power
granted in this article.



Section 1.05.  Intergovernmental Relations.



   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions
and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or any state civil
division or agency, or the United States or any of its agencies.



ARTICLE II
CITY COUNCIL



Section 2.01.  General Powers and Duties.



   All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council, except as
otherwise provided by law or this Charter and the Council shall provide for
the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations
imposed on the City by law.



Section 2.02.  Composition, Eligibility, Election and Terms



   (a)   Composition.  There shall be a City Council composed of the
Mayor and eight members.  Two Council members shall be nominated and elected
from and by the voters in each of four Council districts [wards].  The Mayor
shall be elected from the City at large in accordance with the provisions of
Section 2.03.



   (b)   Eligibility.  Council members shall be registered voters of
the ward from which they are elected.



   (c)   Election and Terms.  The regular election of Council members
shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in odd
numbered years, in the manner provided by law.  At the first election under
this Charter eight Council members shall be elected, two from each ward. 
The candidate from each ward receiving the most votes will serve a four-year
term; the candidate from each ward receiving the next greatest number of
votes will serve a two-year term.  Commencing at the next regular election
and at all subsequent elections, all Council members shall be elected for
four-year terms.  The term of Council members shall begin the first day of
January after their election.



Section 2.03.  Mayor.



   At each mayoral election beginning with the first election under this
Charter a Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years.  Only registered
voters of the City shall be eligible to hold the office of Mayor.  The Mayor
shall be a member of the City Council and shall preside and vote at meetings
of the Council, represent the City in inter-governmental relationships,
appoint with the advice and consent of the Council the members of citizen
advisory boards and commissions, present an annual state of the City message,
and perform the duties specified by the Council.  The Mayor shall be the
chief executive officer of the City.  The Council shall elect from among its
members a Deputy Mayor who, if a vacancy occurs, shall become Mayor for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



Section 2.04.  Compensation; Expenses.



   The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, determine the annual
salary of the Mayor and Council members.  The Mayor and Council members
shall also receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties of office.  The Council shall also by ordinance
or resolution fix the salary and compensation of all other elective and
appointive officers of the City unless otherwise provided by law.



Section 2.05.  Prohibitions.



   (a)   Holding Other Office.  Except where authorized by law, no
Council member shall hold any other elected public office during the term for
which the member was elected to the Council.  No former Council member shall
hold any compensated appointive office or employment with the City until one
year after the expiration of the term for which the member was elected to the
Council.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Council
from selecting any current or former Council member to represent the City on
the governing board of any regional or other intergovernmental agency.



   (b)   Appointments and Removals. Except as set forth in Section
4.01(b), neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner
control or demand the appointment or removal of any City administrative
officer or employee whom the City Manager or any subordinate of the City
Manager is empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views and
fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to
appointment and removal of such officers and employees.



   (c)   Interference With Administration.  Except for the purpose of
inquiries and investigations under Section 2.09, and except to provide
information that might assist in efficient management of City affairs, the
Council or its members shall deal with City officers and employees who are
subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager solely through
the City Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give orders
to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit the inclusion of Council members
in advisory committees which might meet directly with the City Manager and/or
employees under the supervision of the City Manager.  The input of Council
members involved in such committees must remain advisory in nature and should
never be presented so as to appear directive.



Section 2.06.  Vacancies; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies.



   (a)   Vacancies.  The office of a Council member shall become
vacant upon the member's death, removal from the ward, resignation, removal
from office or forfeiture of office in any manner authorized by law.



   (b)   Forfeiture of Office.  A Council member shall forfeit that
office if the Council member:



      (1)   Lacks at any time during the term of office for which
elected any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law;



      (2)   Violates any express prohibition of this Charter;



      (3)   Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or



      (4)   Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of
the Council without being excused by the Council.



   (c)   Filling of Vacancies.  A vacancy in the City Council shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, at the next regular
election following not less than 60 days upon the occurrence of the vacancy,
but the Council by majority vote of all its remaining members shall appoint a
qualified person to fill the vacancy until the person elected to serve the
remainder or the unexpired term takes office.  If the Council fails to do so
within 30 days following the occurrence of the vacancy the election
authorities shall call a special election to fill the vacancy, to be held not
sooner than 90 days and not later than 120 days following the occurrence of
the vacancy, and to be otherwise governed by law. Notwithstanding the
requirement in Section 2.11, if at any time the membership of the Council is
reduced to less than five, the remaining members may by majority action
appoint additional members to raise the membership to five.



Section 2.07.  Judge of Qualifications.



   The City Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications
of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office.  The
Council shall have the power to set reasonable additional standards of
conduct for its members beyond those specified in the Charter and may provide
such penalties as it deems appropriate, including forfeiture of office.  In
order to exercise these powers, the Council shall have power to subpoena
witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence.  A
member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of office
shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing
shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
City at least one week in advance of the hearing.  Decisions made by the
Council under this section shall be subject to judicial review.



Section 2.08.  City Clerk.



   There shall be an official of the City elected from the City at large
who shall have the title of and be City Clerk.  At the first election under
this Charter, said official shall be elected for a term of two years.  In
the second election under this Charter said official shall be elected for a
term of four years and shall thereafter be elected for a four year term. 
The term of said official shall begin on the first day of January following
his or her election.  Only registered voters of the City of Ionia shall be
eligible to hold the office of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give notice
of Council meetings to its members and the public, keep the journal of its
proceedings and perform such other duties as are assigned by this Charter or
by the Council or by State law.



Section 2.09.  Investigation.



   The City Council may make investigations into the affairs of the City
and conduct of any City department, office, or agency and for this purpose
may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the
production of evidence.  Failure or refusal to obey a lawful order issued in
the exercise of these powers by the Council shall be a misdemeanor punishable
by fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days or both.



Section 2.10.  Accounting System and Independent Audit.



   The City Council shall provide for a uniform system of accounts as
required by law and for an independent annual audit of all City accounts and
may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary.  Such audits
shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants
who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of
the City government or any of its officers.  The Council may, without
requiring competitive bids, designate such accountant or firm annually or for
a period not exceeding three years.  If the State makes such an audit, the
Council may accept it as satisfying the requirements of this section.



Section 2.11.  Procedure.



   (a)   Meetings.  The Council shall meet regularly at least once in
every month at such times and places as the Council may prescribe by rule. 
Special meetings may be held on the call of the Mayor or of a quorum or more
members and upon no less than twelve hours notice to each member.  Except as
allowed by State law, all meetings shall be public. All business which the
Council may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance
with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended,
being sections 15.261 to 15.275 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.



   (b)   Rules and Journal.  The City Council shall determine its own
rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping in the English
language a written or printed journal of each of its sessions.  This journal
shall be a public record.



   (c)   Voting.  Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by
roll call and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal.  A simple
majority of members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller
number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent
members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by rules of the
Council.  No action of the Council, except as otherwise provided in the
preceding sentence and in Section 2.06, shall be valid or binding unless
adopted by the affirmative vote of a simple majority or more members of the
Council.



Section 2.12.  Action Requiring an Ordinance.



   In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of
this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the City Council shall be
by ordinance which: 



   (1)   Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or
abolish any City department, office or agency;



   (2)   Provide for any fine or other penalty or establish a rule or
regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed;



   (3)   Grant, renew, or extend a franchise;



   (4)   Regulate land use and development.



   (5)   Adopt procedures to assure sound accounting practices and
internal financial controls.



   (6)   Provide a procedure for the collection of all public utility
rates as per Section 9.03.



   (7)   Provide a procedure for special assessment.



   Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done
either by ordinance or by resolution.



Section 2.13.  Ordinances in General. 



   (a)   Form.  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in
writing and in the form required for final adoption.  No ordinance shall
contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its
title.  The enacting clause shall be "The City of Ionia hereby ordains..." 
Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance or part of the
City Code shall set out in full the ordinance, sections or subsections to be
repealed or amended, and shall indicate matters to be omitted by enclosing it
in brackets or by strikeout type and shall indicate new matters by
underscoring or by italics.



   (b)   Procedure.  An ordinance may be introduced by any member at a
regular or special meeting of the Council.  Upon introduction of any
ordinance, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy to each Council member and
to the City Manager, shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office
of the City Clerk and such other public places as the Council may designate,
and shall publish the ordinance together with a notice setting out the time
and place for a public hearing thereon and for its consideration by the
Council.  The public hearing shall follow the publication by at least seven
days, may be held separately or in connection with a regular or special
Council meeting and may be adjourned from time to time; all persons
interested shall have an opportunity to be heard.  After the hearing, the
Council may adopt the ordinance with or without amendment or reject it, but
if it is amended as to any matter of substance, the Council may not adopt it
until the ordinance or its amended sections have been subjected to all the
procedures hereinbefore required in the case of a newly introduced
ordinance.  As soon as practicable after adoption, the Clerk shall have the
ordinance and a notice of its adoption published and available at a
reasonable price.



   (c)   Effective Date.  Except as otherwise provided by law, every
adopted ordinance shall become effective on publication, or at any later date
specified therein, provided publication has been previously made.  No
ordinance shall become operative until published.



   (d)   "Publish" Defined.  As used in this section, the term
"publish" means to print in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the City: (1) The ordinance or a brief summary thereof; and (2) the places
where copies of it have been filed and the times when they are available for
public inspection and purchase at a reasonable price.



Section 2.14.  Emergency Ordinances.



   To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the
public peace, the City Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances,
but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise,
regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services or authorize
the borrowing of money except as provided in Section 5.07(b). An emergency
ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for
ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an
emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a
declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and
specific terms.  An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without
amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the
affirmative vote of at least a simple majority of members shall be required
for adoption.  After its adoption the ordinance shall be published and
printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances.  It shall not become
operative until published.  Every emergency ordinance except one made
pursuant to Section 5.07(b) shall automatically stand repealed as of the 61st
day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent
re-enactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the
emergency still exists.  An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by
adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this
section for adoption of emergency ordinances.



Section 2.15.  Codes of Technical Regulations.



   The City Council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations
by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance.  The procedure and
requirements governing such an adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for
ordinances generally except that: 



   (1)   The requirements of Section 2.13 for distribution and filing
of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of the code
of technical regulations as well as of the adopting ordinance; and



   (2)   A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations shall be
made available by the City Clerk for distribution or for purchase at a
reasonable price.



Section 2.16.  Authentication and Recording; Codification; Printing.



   (a)   Authentication and Recording.  The City Clerk shall
authenticate by signing and shall record in full in a properly indexed book
kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City
Council.



   (b)   Codification.  Within three years after adoption of this
Charter and at least every ten years thereafter, the City Council shall
provide for the preparation of a general codification of all City ordinances
and resolutions having the force and effect of law.  The general
codification shall be adopted by the Council by ordinance and shall be
published promptly in bound or loose-leaf form, together with this Charter
and any amendments thereto, pertinent provisions of the Constitution and
other laws of the State of Michigan, and such codes of technical regulations
and other rules and regulations as the Council may specify.



   This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the Ionia City
Code.  Copies of the Code shall be furnished to City officers, placed in
libraries and public offices for free public reference, and made available
for purchase by the public at a reasonable price fixed by the Council.



   (c)   Printing.  The City Council shall cause each ordinance and
resolution having the force and effect of law and each amendment to this
Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed
ordinances, resolutions and Charter amendments shall be distributed or sold
to the public at reasonable prices as fixed by the Council.  Following
publication of the first Ionia City Code and at all times thereafter, the
ordinances, resolutions, and Charter amendments shall be printed in
substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be
suitable in form for integration therein.  The Council shall make such
further arrangements as it deems desirable with respect to reproduction and
distribution of any current changes in or additions to the provisions of the
Constitution and other laws of the State of Michigan, or the codes of
technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code.



Section 2.17.  Penalties.



   The City Council may provide in ordinances adopted by it for the
punishment of violations thereof.  Such punishment may be a fine or
imprisonment, or both, in the discretion of the court, not exceeding the
limits permitted by law.  The court may order imprisonment until a fine is
paid and it may suspend sentences or establish probationary supervision. 
Imprisonment for violations of ordinances may be in the County jail.
Enforcement by injunction, mandamus, orders of superintending control or
other proceedings may also be authorized.



ARTICLE III
CITY MANAGER



Section 3.01.  Appointment and Qualifications.



   The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall confirm by a
majority vote of its total membership a City Manager for an indefinite term
and fix the Manager's compensation. The City Manager shall be appointed
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications.  The
manager need not be a resident of the City or State at the time of
appointment but may reside outside the City while in office only with the
approval of the Council.



Section 3.02.  Removal.



   The City Manager may be suspended by a resolution approved by the
majority of the total membership of the City Council which shall set forth
the reasons for suspension and proposed removal.  A copy of such resolution
shall be served immediately upon the City Manager.  The City Manager shall
have fifteen days in which to reply thereto in writing and upon request,
shall be afforded a public hearing, which shall occur not earlier than ten
days nor later than fifteen days after such hearing is requested.  After the
public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the City
Council by a majority vote of its total membership may adopt a final
resolution of removal.  The City Manager shall continue to receive full
salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal.



Section 3.03.  Acting City Manager.



   By letter filed with the City Clerk, the City Manager shall designate a
City officer or employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of
City Manager during the Manager's temporary absence or disability.  The City
Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer
of the City to serve until the City Manager returns.



Section 3.04.  Powers and Duties of the City Manager.



   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City,
responsible to the Council for the administration of all City affairs placed
in the Manager's charge by or under this Charter.  The City Manager shall:



   (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service,
suspend or remove all City employees and appointive administrative officers
provided for by or under this Charter, except as otherwise provided for by
law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. The
City Manager may authorize any administrative officer subject to the
Manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to
subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency;



   (2)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the City, except for hospital and library functions
and except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law;



   (3)   Attend all City Council meetings.  The City Manager shall
have the right to take part in discussion but shall not vote;



   (4)   See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the
City Council, subject to enforcement by the City Manager or by officers
subject to the Manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed;



   (5)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the City Council;



   (6)   Submit to the City Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as
of the end of each fiscal year;



   (7)   Make such other reports as the City Council may require
concerning the operations of City departments, offices, and agencies subject
to the City Manager's direction and supervision;



   (8)   Keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial
condition and future needs of the City;



   (9)   Make recommendations to the City Council concerning the
affairs of the City;



   (10)   Provide staff support services for the Mayor and Council
members; and



   (11)   Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or
may be required by City Council.



ARTICLE IV
DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES



Section 4.01.  General Provisions



   (a)   Creation of Departments.  The City Council may establish City
departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this Charter
and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices, and agencies,
except that no function assigned by this Charter to a particular department,
office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this Charter specifically so
provides, assigned to any other.



   (b)   Direction by City Manager.  All departments, offices, and
agencies under the direction and supervision of the City Manager shall be
administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and
supervision of the Manager.  With the consent of City Council, the City
Manager may serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices, or
agencies or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of them.  The
appointment or dismissal of a department head must be approved by a majority
vote of the total membership of the Council.



Section 4.02.  Personnel System.



   (a)   Merit Principle.  All appointments and promotions of City
officers and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness
demonstrated by a valid and reliable examination or other evidence of
competence.



   (b)   Merit System.  Consistent with all applicable Federal and
State laws, the City Council shall provide by ordinance for the
establishment, regulation and maintenance of a merit system governing
personnel policies necessary to effective administration of the employees of
the City's departments, offices and agencies, including, but not limited to,
classification and pay plans, examinations, force reduction, removals,
working conditions, in-service training, grievances and relationships with
employee organizations.



Section 4.03.  Offices and Agencies.



   (a)   City Attorney.  The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council
shall confirm by a majority vote of its total membership a City Attorney who
shall serve as chief legal adviser to the Council, the City Manager, and all
City departments, offices and agencies, shall represent the City in all legal
proceedings and shall perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter or
by ordinance.



   (b)   Treasurer.  The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council
shall confirm by a majority vote of its total membership a Treasurer who
shall be responsible for all monies and funds received and disbursed by all
City departments, offices and agencies, shall countersign all checks and
vouchers, invest City funds pursuant to law and sound investment practices
and shall perform any other duties prescribed by law, this City Charter or
ordinance.



   (c)   Assessor.  The Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall
confirm by a majority vote of its total membership a City Assessor who shall
perform the duties of assessor in accordance with State statute.



   (d)   Board of Review.  The Mayor shall appoint and the City
Council shall confirm by a majority vote of its total membership a Board of
Review, who shall perform the duties of a board of review in accordance with
State statute.



Section 4.04.  Planning.



   Consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws with respect to
land use, development and environmental protection, the City Council shall:



   (1)   Designate an agency or agencies to carry out the planning
function and such decision-making responsibilities as may be specified by
ordinance;



   (2)   Adopt a comprehensive plan and determine to what extent zoning
and other land use control ordinances must be consistent with the plan; and



   (3)   Adopt development regulations, to be specified by ordinance,
to implement the plan.



ARTICLE V
FINANCIAL PROCEDURES



Section 5.01.  Fiscal Year.



   The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July and
end on the last day of June except for such variation as in the discretion of
the Council may be necessary to accomplish transition to this Charter from
the existing charter.



Section 5.02.  Submission of Budget and Budget Message.



   On or before the first day of May of each year, the City Manager shall
submit to the City Council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an
accompanying message.



Section 5.03.  Budget Message.



   The City Manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal
terms and in terms of the work programs.  It shall outline the proposed
financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the
important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current
year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the
reasons for such changes, summarize the City's debt position and include such
other material as the City Manager deems desirable.



Section 5.04.  Budget.



   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds
and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or
this Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or
the City Council may require.  The budget shall begin with a clear general
summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income,
indicating the proposed property tax levy; and all proposed expenditures,
including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be so arranged
as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and
expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of
the preceding fiscal year.  It shall indicate in separate sections:



   (1)   The proposed goals and objectives and expenditures for current
operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by
organization unit, and program, purpose or activity, and the method of
financing such expenditures;



   (2)   The amount of proposed capital outlay expenditure, except
those financed by enterprise, public improvement or building and site, or
special assessment funds, including the estimated total cost and proposed
method of financing of each capital construction project and the projected
additional annual operating cost and the method of financing the operating
costs of each capital construction project for three years beyond the fiscal
year covered by the budget.



   (3)   The anticipated income and expense and profit and loss for the
ensuing year for each utility or other enterprise fund operated by the City.



   For any fund, the total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the
total of estimated income plus carried forward fund balance, exclusive of
reserves.



Section 5.05.  City Council Action on Budget.



   (a)   Notice and Hearing.  The City Council shall publish in one or
more newspapers of general circulation in the City the general summary of the
budget and a notice stating:



   (1)   The times and places where copies of the message and budget
are available for inspection by the public; and



   (2)   The time and place, not less than two weeks after such
publication, for a public hearing on the budget.



   (b)   Amendment Before Adoption.  After the public hearing, the
City Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment.  In amending
the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or
decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for
debt service or for an estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to
the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater
than total estimated income.



   (c)   Adoption.  The City Council shall adopt a budget on or before
the fifteenth day preceding the last day of the twelfth month of the fiscal
year currently ending.  If it fails to adopt a budget by this date, the
budget proposed by the City Manager shall go into effect as an interim or
temporary budget provided it does not violate this Charter or State law.



Section 5.06.  Appropriation and Revenue Resolutions.



   To implement the adopted budget, the City Council shall adopt, prior to
the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year:



   (a)   A revenue resolution for the levy, collection and return of
State, County and school taxes and for the establishment of the times for the
assessment roll, the meeting of the Board of Review and the confirmation of
the assessment roll in conformance with the general laws of the State;



   (b)   An appropriation resolution making appropriations by
department or major organizational unit and authorizing a single
appropriation for each program or activity;



   (c)   A tax levy resolution authorizing the property tax levy or
levies and setting the tax rate or rates; and



   (d)   Any other ordinances or resolutions required to authorize new
revenues or to amend the rates or other features of existing taxes or other
revenue sources.



Section 5.07.  Amendments After Adoption.



   (a)   Supplemental Appropriations.  If during the fiscal year the
City Manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in
excess of those estimated in the budget, the City Council by resolution may
make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.



   (b)   Emergency Appropriations.  To meet a public emergency
affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the City Council may
make emergency appropriations.



   (c)   Reduction of Appropriations.  If at any time during the
fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues or fund
balances available will be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which
appropriations have been authorized, the Manager shall report to the City
Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any
remedial action taken by the Manager and recommendations as to any other
steps to be taken. The Council shall then take action to prevent any deficit
and for that purpose it shall reduce one or more appropriations.



   (d)   Transfer of Appropriations.  At any time during the fiscal
year the City Council may by resolution transfer part or all of the
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or major organization
unit to the appropriation for other departments or major organizational
units.  The Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balances among programs within a department or organizational
unit and shall report such transfers to the Council in writing within 60 days.



   (e)   Limitation; Effective Date.  No appropriation for debt
service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced
below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the
amount of the unencumbered balance thereof.  The supplemental and emergency
appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations and reduction or
transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective
immediately upon adoption.



Section 5.08.  Lapse of Appropriations.



   Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not
been expended or encumbered.  An appropriation for a capital expenditure
shall continue in force until expended, revised or repealed; the purpose of
any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without
any disbursement from or encumbrance of appropriation.



Section 5.09.  Overspending of Appropriation Prohibited.



   No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment
or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and
unless the City Manager or the Manager's designee first certifies that there
is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotments or appropriation and
that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim
or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable.  Any authorization
of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this
Charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal.  A violation of this
provision shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized
or made such payment or incurred such obligation.  Such officer may also be
liable to the City for any amount so paid. Except where prohibited by law,
however, nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent the making or
authorizing of payments to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of
bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for
payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, but only if such action is made
or approved by Council resolution.



Section 5.10.  Capital Program.



   (a)   Submission to City Council.  The City Manager shall prepare
and submit to the City Council a capital program in accordance with Section
5.04 (2) no later than the final date for submission of the budget.



   (b)   Contents.  The capital program shall include:



      (1)   A clear general summary of its contents;



      (2)   A list of all capital improvements and other capital
expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the 5 fiscal years
next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for
each;



      (3)   Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each
improvement or other capital expenditure;



      (4)   The method of financing, upon which each capital
expenditure is to be reliant; and



      (5)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining
the facilities to be constructed or acquired.



   The above shall be revised and extended each year with regard to
capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or
acquisition.



Section 5.11.  City Council Action on Capital Programs.



   (a)   Notice and Hearing.  The City Council shall publish in one or
more newspapers of general circulation in the City the general summary of the
capital program and a notice stating:



      (1)   The times and places where copies of the capital program
are available for inspection by the public; and



      (2)   The time and place, not less than two weeks after such
publication, for public hearing on the capital program.



   (b)   Adoption.  The City Council by resolution shall adopt the
capital program with or without amendment after public hearing and on or
before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the current fiscal year.



Section 5.12.  Public Records.



   Copies of the budget, capital program and appropriation and revenue
ordinances or resolutions shall be public records.  All records of the City
shall be made available to the general public in compliance with the Freedom
of Information Act, being Act 422 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended,
being Sections 15.231 to 15.246 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.



ARTICLE VI
ELECTIONS



Section 6.01.  Regular and Special Elections; Party Candidates.



   (a)   A regular City election shall be conducted on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each odd numbered year.  The
registration of voters, the preparation of ballots or machines, and the
conduct of elections in the City of Ionia shall be in accordance with this
Charter and the State election laws and shall be under the general
supervision of the City Clerk.  Special elections, but not more than two in
any one year unless otherwise authorized by law, shall be held when called by
resolution of the City Council, or when required by this Charter or general
law.



   (b)   Political parties will file a slate of candidates with the
City Clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in August
of odd numbered years.



   (c)   Party candidates will be selected at a convention held on the
first Monday of August, under rules adopted by the parties in accordance with
State statute and due process of law.



Section 6.02.  Candidates Without Political Party Affiliation.



   (a)   Qualifying Petition; Filing; Filing Fee in Lieu of Petition
Prohibited; Qualifications.



      (1)   For the purpose of this article, "qualifying petition"
means a nominating petition required of and filed by a person to qualify to
appear on an election ballot as a candidate for office without political
party affiliation.



      (2)   A person may file a qualifying petition for a partisan
office. A filing fee shall not be tendered instead of a qualifying petition.



      (3)   A person filing a qualifying petition shall meet the
qualifications prescribed by law to hold the office.



   (b)   Qualifying Petition; Form, Size and Contents; Circulation.



      (1)   The form, size and contents of a qualifying petition
shall be prescribed by the City Clerk and in substantially the same form as
provided in M.C.L.A. 168.590h.



      (2)   A qualifying petition for a Citywide office may be
circulated on a Citywide basis.



      (3)   A qualifying petition for the office of a Council member
will be circulated in the ward for which such candidate's name will be placed
on the ballot.



   (c)   Qualifying Petition; Signatures; Time.



      (1)   Subject to the requirements prescribed in subsections
6.02 (b)(2) and (3) a qualifying petition for an office shall be signed by a
number of qualified and registered electors of the district that is
represented by the office being sought by the candidate equal to not less
than 2% of the total number of votes cast for all candidates for that office
at the last election in which that office was elected.  In any case, at
least 25 signatures shall be submitted.



      (2)   All signatures on a qualifying petition shall be
obtained not more than 180 days immediately before the date of filing under
subsection 6.02 (d)



      (3)   As part of the minimum number of required signatures
under this section, a qualifying petition for a Citywide office will not have
more than 50% of the required number of signatures from any one ward.



   (d)   Qualifying Petition; Filing; Time; Filing Notice of Withdrawal.



      (1)   A qualifying petition for an office will be filed with
the City Clerk.



      (2)   A qualifying petition for an office elected at the
general November election shall be filed not later than 4:00 p.m. on the
first Monday of August of odd numbered years. A qualifying petition for an
official elected at an election other than the general November election
shall be filed not later than the deadline established by statute for filing
a partisan petition or certificate of nomination for the office or at least
90 days before that election, whichever is later.  [NOTE:  The Charter
language pertaining to filing nominating petitions for the regular city
election is superseded by Michigan Election Law MCL 168.644e as amended under
PA 44 of 2010 and PA 276 of 2012. The candidate nomination petition filing
deadline is 4:00 p.m., 15th Tuesday prior to odd-year November election.]



      (3)   A candidate who files a qualifying petition shall not be
permitted to withdraw his or her candidacy unless a written notice of
withdrawal is filed with the City Clerk.  The notice shall be filed not
later than 4:00 p.m. of the third day after the last day for filing a
qualifying petition.



   (e)   Providing Blank Qualifying Petition Forms.  Upon request, the
City Clerk shall provide blank qualifying petition forms to a person who
wishes to appear as a candidate on a ballot in the Clerk's jurisdiction as a
candidate without political party affiliation.  The City Clerk is the only
officer required to supply qualifying petition forms for circulation.



   (f)   Applicability of Certain Provisions; Canvass; Hearing;
Certification.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall canvass a qualifying petition filed
with the City Clerk and shall make an official declaration of the sufficiency
or insufficiency of the qualifying petition at least 60 days before the
election.



      (2)   A filing officer who receives a qualifying petition from
a candidate who has met the requirements of this Charter shall certify to the
proper board or boards of election commissioners the candidate's name, post
office address, and office sought not later than 60 days before the election.



   (g)   Person Filing Qualifying Petition; Restrictions; Selecting
Single Office to Which Candidacy Restricted; Failure to Make Selection.



      (1)   A person who files a qualifying petition shall not file
a filing fee, and shall not be nominated as a candidate by a political party
convention, caucus or committee for an office to be elected at the election
for which the person has filed a qualifying petition.



      (2)   A person who files a qualifying petition for more than
one office which offices are incompatible and the terms of which offices run
concurrently or overlap shall select the one office to which his or her
candidacy is restricted not later than 4:00 p.m. of the third day after the
last day for filing a qualifying petition.  Failure to make this selection
disqualifies the person as a candidate for the offices for which qualifying
petitions were filed and the petitions shall not be canvassed.



(Am. Res. Unno.  Passed 11-7-17.)



Section 6.03.  Council Wards; Adjustment of Wards.



   (a)   There shall be four City Council wards the boundaries of which
shall be changed from time to time to satisfy the requirements of and in the
manner required by general law.



   (b)   Ward boundary lines existing on the effective date of this
charter shall remain undisturbed until changed by Council per M.C.L.A.
117.27a.



ARTICLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section 7.01.  Conflicts of Interest; Board of Ethics.



   (a)   Conflicts of Interest.  The use of public office for private
gain is prohibited. The City Council shall implement this prohibition by
ordinance.  Regulations to this end shall include but not be limited to:
acting in an official capacity on matters in which the official has private
financial interest clearly separate from that of the general public; the
acceptance of gifts and other things of value; acting in a private capacity
on matters dealt with as a public official; the use of confidential
information; and appearances by City officials before other City agencies on
behalf of private interest.  This ordinance shall provide for reasonable
public disclosure of finances by officials with major decision-making
authority over monetary expenditures and, insofar as permissible under State
law, shall provide for fines and imprisonment for violations.



   (b)   Board of Ethics.  The City Council shall, by ordinance,
establish an independent Board of Ethics to administer and enforce the
conflict of interest and financial disclosure ordinances.  No member of the
Board may hold elective or appointed office under the City or any other
government or hold any political party office.  Insofar as possible under
State law, the City Council shall authorize the Board to issue binding
advisory opinions, conduct investigations on its own initiative and, on
referral or complaint, refer cases for prosecution, impose administrative
fines, and hire independent counsel.  The City Council shall appropriate
sufficient funds to the Board of Ethics to enable it to perform the duties
assigned to it.



Section 7.02.  Prohibitions.



   (a)   Activities Prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in
any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any City position or
appointive City administrative office because of race, gender, age, handicap,
religion, country of origin or political affiliation.



      (2)   No person shall willfully make any false statement,
certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or
appointment under the provisions of this Charter or the rules and regulations
made hereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud
preventing the impartial execution of such provisions, rules and regulations.



      (3)   No person who seeks appointment or promotion with
respect to any City position or appointive City administrative office shall
directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other
valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his or her test,
appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion.



      (4)   No person shall knowingly or willingly solicit or assist
in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political
party or political purpose to be used in conjunction with any City election
from any City employee.



      (5)   No City employee shall knowingly or willfully make,
solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any political
party or committee to be used in a City election or to campaign funds to be
used in support of or opposition to any candidate for election to City office
or City ballot issue.  Further, no City employee shall knowingly and
willfully participate in any aspect of any political campaign on behalf of or
opposition to any candidate for City office.  This section shall not be
construed to limit any person's right to exercise rights as a citizen to
express opinions or to cast a vote, nor shall it be construed to prohibit any
person from active participation in political campaigns at any other level of
government.



   (b)   Penalties.  Any person convicted of a violation of this
section shall be ineligible for a period of five years following such
conviction to hold any City office or position and, if an officer or employee
of the City, shall immediately forfeit his or her office or position.  The
City Council shall establish by ordinance such further penalties as it may
deem appropriate.



ARTICLE VIII
TAXATION



Section 8.01.  Power, Limitation and Subjects of Taxation.



   The Council shall have full power and authority to levy and collect
from year to year such amount of taxes upon all real and personal property,
not exempt from taxation, within the limits of the City of Ionia as it may
deem necessary to defray the expenses thereof, not to exceed one and one-half
per cent on each dollar of the equalized valuation in any one year for all
purposes, exclusive of costs of collection and exclusive of a library tax and
public transportation tax.  The Council may, in addition, levy and collect a
library tax of not exceeding one mill and a transportation tax of not
exceeding 3/4 of one mill on each dollar of the equalized valuation in any
one year.  The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same
as for state, county and school purposes under the general law.



   The levy, collection and return of State, County, school and City taxes
shall be in accordance with the general law. City taxes shall be due and
payable on July 1 in each year. No exemption from taxation shall be allowed
except as expressly required or permitted by law.



Section 8.02.  Assessment Roll.



   Between tax day and the first meeting of the Board of Review in each
year, the City Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll in the
manner and form provided in the general tax law.



Section 8.03.  Board of Review.



   The Board of Review shall consist of three electors of the City who, at
the time of their appointment, are not either elected or appointed officials
of the City.  They shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve three-year
staggered terms subject to confirmation by the Council.  Each term shall
commence as of January 1.  The Board shall select its own clerk, who may be
the City Assessor.  They shall meet and complete their work as required by
law. Their compensation shall be fixed by the Council.



Section 8.04.  Notice of Meeting.



   The Assessor shall cause notice of the date, time and place of the
first annual meeting of the Board of Review to be published at least one week
prior thereto in a newspaper circulated in the City, but failure to give such
notice shall not invalidate the roll.



Section 8.05.  Duties and Procedure of Board of Review.



   The Board of Review shall have power to correct or amend said
assessment roll and to increase or decrease any assessment or valuation of
taxable property, may strike therefrom any property wrongfully listed or add
any property rightfully taxable, either on its own motion or at the request
of any person.  Any person considering himself or herself aggrieved by
reason of any assessment may complain thereof either verbally or in writing
or by authorized representative to said Board.  The Board may establish
reasonable regulations for the conduct of its hearings, require the filing of
a brief statement of the arguments by those appealing to it, require the
appellant to appear in person or in writing or by authorized representative,
and otherwise provide for the expediting of its work.  The concurrence of a
majority of the membership of said Board shall be necessary to change any
assessment.  The Assessor shall make any changes, additions, or corrections
to said roll directed by the Board of Review.  Thereupon said Board shall
complete and adopt the roll and a majority thereof shall endorse the same as
provided by law.  When so endorsed, said roll shall be conclusively presumed
by all courts to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes
mentioned in the general laws.  The omission of the endorsement or any other
formality herein prescribed shall not affect the validity of the roll.  A
summary of the assessment roll shall be delivered to the City Council by the
Assessor immediately thereafter.



Section 8.06.  Assessment of Taxes.



   The Assessor shall take the assessment roll as adopted by the Board of
Review and the budget as adopted by the Council and prepare a "City Tax Roll"
by spreading thereon rateably to each person or property assessed the sums
required to be raised by property taxation by the terms of the annual
appropriation resolution adopted by the City Council or by the terms of other
valid procedures.



Section 8.07.  Warrant.



   Upon delivering said City tax roll to the City Treasurer, the Assessor
shall annex thereto his or her warrant over his or her signature, with the
seal of the City affixed, commanding the Treasurer to collect from the
several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein and
enforce payment as provided herein or by general law.



Section 8.08.  Lien and Persons Liable.



   All taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due the City as provided by
general law, and as of July 1 of the year of assessment, the said taxes, both
real and personal, with any applicable charges, fees or penalties shall
become a lien, paramount to all other claims, encumbrances or liens, upon the
property against which they are assessed until paid.



Section 8.09.  Statement to Taxpayers.



   Upon receipt of said City tax roll, the Treasurer shall proceed to
collect the taxes.  The Treasurer shall prepare and mail to each taxpayer,
at his or her last known address on the tax roll, a statement or billing
showing the description of the property, the assessed valuation, and the tax
payable, but the failure to send or receive such statement shall not
prejudice the validity of the tax or the right and duty to collect or enforce
payment thereof.



Section 8.10.  Collection Fees and Interest.



   The City taxes provided for by this Charter shall be assessed, levied
and billed prior to July 1 in each year, shall become payable on that date,
and shall be collected on or before July 31 in each year, and if so paid no
interest or penalty fees shall be charged.  As of August 1 in each year a
collection fee as per statute shall be charged, and when paid said charges
shall be placed in the general fund of the City.  Additional fees
corresponding to State law may be imposed by the Council for delinquent taxes
after January 1 next following.  The City Council may, by ordinance,
establish a system for the installment collection or said taxes extending not
more than one year and provide for the collection of reasonable interest or
collection fees thereon and of penalties for the late payment of installments.



Section 8.11.  All Taxes Other Than City.



   For the purpose of assessing and levying taxes in the City for all
purposes other than City taxes, the City shall be considered the same as a
township and, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all provisions of
State law relative to the collection of such taxes, the accounting therefor
to the appropriate taxing units, and the returning of delinquent taxes to the
county treasurer for collection shall apply and the City Treasurer shall have
all of the powers and duties in connection therewith as township treasurers.



Section 8.12.  Failure to Pay Personal Property Tax.



   If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any
personal property tax assessed to him, her or it, the Treasurer shall collect
the same by seizing the personal property of such person, firm or corporation
to an amount sufficient to pay such tax and applicable fees together with
charges for subsequent sale costs, wherever the same may be found in the
State, and from such seizure no property shall be exempt.  The Treasurer may
sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all
charges in accordance with general law.  If otherwise unable to collect a
tax on personal property, the Treasurer may sue therefor the person, firm or
corporation to whom it is assessed.



Section 8.13.  Jeopardy Assessment of Personal Property Taxes.



   Whenever the proper conditions exist, the Treasurer shall accelerate
the date on which personal property taxes shall be collected, as provided by
general law.



Section 8.14.  Failure to Pay Real Estate Taxes.



   All City taxes, including assessments, interest or other charges, upon
real property remaining uncollected by the treasurer on March 1 following the
date when said amounts become payable, or one year thereafter in case an
installment collection ordinance applies thereto, shall be subject to one of
the following procedures:



   (a)   The real property against which such taxes, assessments,
interest or other charges have been assessed shall be subject to sale or
redemption for the enforcement and collection thereof in the manner which may
be provided by ordinance.  The Council is hereby empowered to adopt an
ordinance providing for the sale and redemption of real property for such
unpaid taxes, assessments, interest and other charges by sale conducted by
the City Treasurer, with a redemption period as provided for sales by county
treasurers, and foreclosure of the lien and perfection of the sale by
petition duly filed in the Circuit Court for the County of Ionia followed by
a decree or order thereof.



   (b)   If no such ordinance is adopted and in effect, then such
taxes, assessments, interest and other charges shall be returned to the
County Treasurer in the manner provided by law for returns by township
treasurers for township, county and school taxes, and the same shall be
collected in the same manner by the County Treasurer, and shall remain a lien
upon the property against which they are assessed or chargeable until paid.



Section 8.15.  Inequitable Assessment or Tax.



   If it shall be found, at any time, that any property has been subjected
to a substantially inequitable assessment or tax, as by reason of errors in
computations, decimal misplacement, double entries, and the like, so that the
same amounts to a constructive fraud upon the taxpayer, and if the City
Attorney shall prepare and file a written memorandum indicating that, under
current statutes and case law, relief would be granted by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then the City Council may so determine and declare by
resolution without requiring the commencement of court proceedings and any
necessary adjustment may be taken from the general fund of the City.



ARTICLE IX
UTILITIES, FRANCHISES AND PERMITS



Section 9.01.  General Powers of City Respecting Utilities.



   The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers
granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve,
enlarge, extend, repair, maintain, encumber, convey, dispose of or sell,
either within or without its corporate limits, public utilities, including,
for illustration but not by way of limitation, aeronautical facilities,
public utilities for treating and supplying water, for supplying light, heat,
power, gas, waste water and sewage treatment and disposal, garbage disposal,
public transportation and facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles;
and also to sell and deliver the products or services thereof, both within or
without its corporate limits.  The power to supply said utility services, as
herein possessed and reserved, shall include the power to extract, process,
manufacture, transport or purchase the same from others.  Each such utility
shall establish and maintain City-wide service to every practical extent.



Section 9.02.  Rates.



   The City Council shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such
rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the
inhabitants of the City and others with such public utility services as the
City may provide.  It is hereby declared to be the duty of the Council to
establish rates which will make each utility service self sustaining,
including the accumulation and maintenance of adequate reserves, unless it
declares upon its records that self-sustaining rates are determined not to be
in the public interest.



Section 9.03.  Collection of Utility Rates and Charges.



   The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public
utility rates and charges of the City.  Such ordinance may provide at least:



   (a)   The City shall have as security for the collection of utility
rates and charges a lien subject to the limitation of State law upon the real
property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective
immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced
in the manner provided in such ordinance.



   (b)   The terms and conditions under which utility services may be
discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 



   (c)   Suit may be instituted by the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of such rates or charges.



   (d)   With respect to the collection of rates, the City shall have
all the powers granted to cities by any statute of the State.



Section 9.04.  Accounts and Finances.



   Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned and
operated by the City.  Such accounts shall be classified and made in
accordance with generally accepted municipal utility accounting practice. 
Charges for all services furnished to or rendered by other City departments
or agencies including City tax equivalents if required by the Council shall
be recorded.  An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the
financial position of the utility and the results of its operations, which
report shall be on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection.



Section 9.05.  Granting of Privately-Owned Public Utility Franchises.



   All irrevocable public utility franchises and all renewals and
extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted by ordinance
only.  No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than 30 years.  No
franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the
Council shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first
been referred to the people at a regular or special election as provided by
law.



Section 9.06.  Conditions of Public Utility Franchises.



   All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this
Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be
subject to the following rights of the City, but this enumeration shall not
be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise
any provision within the power of the City to impose or require.



   (a)   To repeal the same for misuse, non-use or failure to comply
with the provisions thereof;



   (b)   To require property and adequate extension of plant and
service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of
efficiency;



   (c)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products and prevent unjust discrimination in service for rates;



   (d)   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public
in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;



   (e)   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the
Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the
public;



   (f)   To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys,
bridges, streams, rivers, and public places and the space above and beneath
them;



   (g)   To make an independent audit and examination of accounts at
any time, and to require reports annually, provided that this condition shall
not apply to public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the Michigan
Public Service Commission.



   The City Council shall cause to be instituted such actions or
proceedings as may be necessary to prosecute a public utility company for
violations of its franchise, the City Charter, or ordinances, and may revoke,
cancel, or annul any franchise granted by the City which for any reason has
become inoperative, illegal or void.



Section 9.07.  Regulation of Rates.



   All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing
or controlling rates, fares and charges and may provide for readjustments
thereof at periodic intervals.  The value of the property of the utility
used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event
include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective
profits.



Section 9.08.  Joint Use Permitted.



   Every such public utility may be required by the City to permit joint
use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and
other public places of the City by the City and by other utilities insofar as
such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable
rental therefor.  In the absence of agreement and upon application by any
public utility, the Council shall determine the terms and conditions of such
joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor.



Section 9.09.  Revocable Permits.



   Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the
will of the City Council, may be granted by the City Council by resolution on
such terms and conditions as it shall determine, provided that such permits
shall in no event be construed to be franchises or amendments to
franchises.  All said temporary permits shall be subject to the right of the
City to make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time and to
require reports annually or at more frequent intervals as prescribed by
resolution of the City Council. When the City Council deems it in the public
interest, such permits may be exclusive.



Section 9.10.  Acquisition by City;  Condemnation.



   The City shall have the right to acquire by condemnation or otherwise
the property of any public utility in accordance with the general laws of the
State, provided that the price to be paid shall in no event include any value
predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits.



Section 9.11.  Use of Public Places.



   Every public utility shall be subject to the power of the City to use,
control and regulate use of its streets, alleys, bridges, streams, rivers,
parks, and public places, and the space above and beneath them and shall pay
such part of the cost of improvements or maintenance thereof as shall arise
from such use and shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages
arising from such use.



Section 9.12.  Existing Franchises and Permits Remain in Effect.



   All franchises and permits to which the City of Ionia is a party when
this Charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect with
their respective terms and conditions.



ARTICLE X
BORROWING



Section 10.1.  Borrowing.



   Subject to the applicable provisions of law as the same are now or may
hereafter be enacted, the City may borrow money for any purpose within the
scope of its powers, and may issue bonds or other evidence of indebtedness
therefor.  Such bonds or other evidence of indebtedness shall include but
not be limited to:



   (a)   General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith and
credit of the City for the payment thereof.



   (b)   Special assessment bonds which are issued in anticipation of
the payment of special assessments for public improvements in a special
assessment district or combination thereof, which bonds may be either an
obligation of the special assessment district or districts, or both an
obligation of such district and a general obligation of the City.



   (c)   Revenue bonds as authorized by law.



   (d)   Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing,
constructing, improving or operating of any public utility which the City is
authorized by law to finance in this manner, or for such other purposes as
may be authorized by law.



   (e)   Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the motor
vehicle highway fund or any other source which the City may be permitted by
law to pledge for the payment of principal and interest thereof.



   (f)   Tax anticipation notes as authorized by law.



   (g)   Calamity bonds issued in case of fire, flood, or other
calamity as authorized by law.



   (h)   Bonds for the City's share of the cost of local improvements,
which bonds may be issued as a part of, or independently of, any issue of
special assessment bonds which are issued for the same improvement or
improvements.



   (i)   Bonds for refunding indebtedness of the City.



   (j)   Time-purchase contracts as authorized elsewhere herein.



   (k)   Any other purpose recited in general law.



Section 10.2.  Use of Borrowed Funds.



   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement of the purpose for which the same is issued and no officer of the
City shall use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, except that,
whenever the original proceeds of any bond issued or a part thereof, remain
unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was
made, the City Council may authorize the use of such unexpended and
unencumbered fund as permitted by law:



   (a)   For an additional extension or improvement of the facility or
project for which the bond issue was made.



   (b)   For the retirement of such bond issue.



   (c)   If such bond issue has been fully retired or funds are
segregated which are adequate for such purpose, then for the retirement of
other bonds or obligations of the City.



   (d)   If there is no other indebtedness, or funds are segregated
which are adequate for such purpose, then for such other purposes as may be
permitted by law.



Section 10.3.  Special Assessment Collections.



   All collections on each special assessment roll or combination of
rolls, in anticipation of which bonds have been issued, shall be set apart in
a separate fund (but not necessarily a separate bank account) and shall be
used for the purpose for which levied and for payment of the principal of and
interest on such bonds.  If there is any deficiency in a special assessment
fund to meet the payment of the principal and interest to be paid therefrom,
monies shall be advanced from the general fund of the City to meet such
deficiency and shall be replaced in the general fund when the special
assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor.



Section 10.4.  Execution of Bonds.



   All bonds issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk, and shall bear the corporate seal of the
City.  Said signatures may be by facsimile if permitted by law. Any attached
coupons may be signed with the facsimile signature of the City Clerk.



Section 10.5.  Bond Record.



   The City Clerk shall keep a detailed record of all bonds and other
evidence of indebtedness.  Upon payment of the same the Clerk shall mark
them "cancelled" and keep them until their destruction is permitted by
general law.



ARTICLE XI
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT



Section 11.1.  Special Assessment Power.



   The City Council shall have the power to determine, with or without a
petition therefor, that the whole or any part of the expense of any public
improvement or repair shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the
parcels of property especially benefitted and so declare by resolution. 
Such resolution shall state the estimated cost of the improvement, what
portion of the cost shall be paid by special assessment, what portion, if
any, shall be a general obligation of the City, the number of installments in
which assessments may be paid and the interest to be charged, and designate
the districts or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be
levied.



Section 11.2.  Procedure Ordinance.



   The City Council shall prescribe by general ordinance the complete
special assessment procedure to be used, including the preparing of plans and
specifications, estimating costs, conducting a public hearing on construction
necessity, the preparation, hearing, correction and confirmation of the
special assessment roll, the collection of special assessments, the
assessment of single lots or parcels, the apportionment of assessments if
land is divided, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements
by the special assessment method.  Said ordinance shall authorize additional
assessments if the prior assessment proves insufficient to pay for the
improvement and costs incident thereto or in case of invalidity in whole or
in part, and it shall provide for the refund of excessive assessments,
provided that if the excess is less than 5% of the total cost it may be
placed in the general fund of the City.



Section 11.3.  Assessment Lien.



   From the date of confirmation of any assessment or reassessment roll
the same shall constitute a lien upon the respective lots or premises
assessed and shall also be a charge against the person to whom assessed until
paid, and, in case of delinquency, may be enforced by addition to any later
return to the County Treasurer of regular taxes or by suit against such
person.



Section 11.4.  Contest of Assessment.



   No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the
purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment
or reassessment:



   (a)   Unless, within 30 days after the confirmation of the special
assessment roll, written notice is given to the City Clerk for attention of
the City Council indicating an intention to file such suit or action and
stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal; and



   (b)   Unless such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days
after the confirmation of the roll.  If the City Attorney submits a written
opinion finding said roll illegal, in whole or in part, the City Council may
revoke its confirmation, correct the illegality if possible, and re-confirm
the same as amended, provided that no property which is not involved in the
illegality shall be assessed more than was imposed upon the original
confirmation without further notice and hearing thereon.



ARTICLE XII
MISCELLANEOUS



Section 12.01.  City Power Illustrated.



   The City shall have full control of streets, streams, and public
places; may acquire, manage and dispose of real, personal and intangible
property by any means permitted by law; regulate businesses and amusements as
it deems necessary or desirable; protect the public health, safety, peace,
morals and welfare; and do all things permitted by law to be provided for in
its Charter whether herein enumerated or not.



Section 12.02.  Dilapidation and Nuisances.



   The City shall have power to prohibit and abate dilapidation, debris,
weeds, nuisances, and all other conditions adversely affecting the peace,
health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City and to establish
by ordinance procedures for declaring the existence thereof, requiring
abatement by the owner or occupant of the premises or other person
responsible for the condition, the holding of a public hearing thereon after
reasonable notice thereof to any person materially affected by the
proceeding, the adoption of an order by the Council requiring the abatement
or removal thereof, or the accomplishment thereof by the City and the
assessment of the cost against the premises as a special assessment or
collection of the cost against the owner, occupant, or person responsible by
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.



Section 12.03.  Preservation and Destruction of Records.



   Subject to any applicable State law, the City shall have power to
determine the period and manner in which municipal records shall be preserved
and the time and manner in which they may be summarized, microfilmed,
recorded, or destroyed.



Section 12.04   Health.



   The City Council may appoint a health officer, organize and maintain a
health department, have and exercise all powers and authority conferred upon
boards of health by the general laws, and enact such ordinances as may be
deemed necessary for the preservation and protection of the health of the
inhabitants of the City.  The City is hereby authorized to consider,
negotiate, determine and agree upon the terms and conditions under which this
City may join in the organization and maintenance of a county health
department, or similar agency authorized by law.  It may delegate to such
department or agency such powers, functions, and duties relating to health as
it may deem proper, contract therewith for extra services, and appropriate
thereto money, services, or both.  It may make applicable to the area of the
City any rules or regulations promulgated by said department or agency, and
penalties for the violation thereof.



Section 12.05.  Hospital.



   The City of Ionia is hereby empowered to own, operate, enlarge,
relocate, and maintain a general hospital for the use and benefit of its
citizens, either within or without its corporate limits.  Subject to valid
and equitable charges it may extend the services of such hospital by
contract, fees, or otherwise to non-residents.  To assist in fulfilling this
function, the Council shall have power to carry out the terms of any deed or
trust granted to the City, may appoint a board of directors of the hospital,
and may allot for its support such portions of the general fund as are
reasonably necessary or as may be required by the terms of any trust.  This
Charter shall be deemed to extend general powers and duties to the Council to
carry out hospital functions on behalf of the City.



Section 12.06.  Library.



   The City of Ionia is hereby empowered to own, operate, enlarge,
relocate, and maintain a public library and branches thereof.  To assist in
fulfilling this function, the Council shall have power to carry out the terms
of any deed or trust granted to the City, may appoint a board of directors of
the library, and may allot for its support such portions of the general fund
as reasonably necessary or as may be required by terms of any trust.  This
Charter shall be deemed to extend general powers and duties to the Council to
carry out library functions on behalf of the City and in particular, but not
in limitation, those functions and duties imposed by deed dated July 8, 1903,
from Marion Hall Fowler to the City of Ionia and the provisions of Act No.
272, Local Acts of 1903, which provisions are incorporated into and made part
of such deed by reference.



Section 12.07.  City Liability.



   The City shall have all the immunities from claims for damages for
injury to persons or property as may be permitted by law.  The procedures in
regard to filing of claims and disposition of same shall be as permitted by
law.



Section 12.08.  Bonds.



   The City may determine whether any officer or employee of the City or
person using public property shall give a bond, and the amount thereof, which
bond shall be procured from a surety company authorized to do business under
the laws of the State of Michigan. The City may require additional bonds
during periods of special risk.  Premiums on all such bonds shall be paid by
the City, or such agency as may be benefited thereby.



Section 12.09.  Oath.



   Every elective officer and such other employees as may be designated by
the Council, before taking office, shall take and subscribe the oath of
office prescribed by Article XI Section 1 of the Michigan Constitution of
1963.



Section 12.10.  Condemnation.



   The City shall provide by resolution for acquiring by condemnation or
otherwise such property and rights as may be required for any public use or
purpose within the scope of its powers in the manner prescribed by the
statutes of this State.  Any property or rights so acquired and no longer
needed for the original purpose, at the discretion of the City, may be
diverted to any other public use or purpose within the scope of the powers of
the City, or may be leased, encumbered, or sold and disposed of in such
manner as said City shall prescribe, subject to the limitations imposed by
Section M.C.L.A 117.5(e).



Section 12.11.  Advisory Committees or Boards.



   The City Council or City Manager with the approval of the City Council
may, from time to time, appoint such committees or boards as are deemed
appropriate to advise and consult with them, and with appropriate department
heads, regarding any Municipal activity. Such committees or boards shall
serve temporarily and without compensation unless otherwise provided by the
City Council.



Section 12.12.  Depository.



   The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for City
funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City monies.



Section 12.13.  Saving Clause.



   If any section or part of a section of this Charter proves to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or
impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a
section of this Charter or of the Charter as a whole, unless it clearly
appears that such other section or part is wholly or necessarily dependent
for its operation upon the section or part of a section so held invalid or
unconstitutional.



Section 12.14.  Receipt and Payment of Money.



   All monies shall be received by the City Treasurer regardless of
source.  Unless otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, all monies drawn
from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to the authority of appropriation
of the Council.  The Council, upon the recommendation of the City Manager,
where necessary to expedite operating procedures, may authorize by
resolution, designated officers and employees of the City to make minor
disbursements from petty cash accounts, which disbursements shall be
accounted for and shall be audited by the Treasurer.  Checks for the
expenditure of City funds shall be signed by the Treasurer and countersigned
by the Manager or Clerk, or other person designated by the Council.



Section 12.15.  Deferred Payment Contracts.



   The City may enter into installment or lease-purchase contracts for the
acquisition or sale of real or personal property or capital equipment as
permitted by law.  Each such contract shall not extend over a period greater
than 30 years or as permitted by law.  All such deferred payments shall be
included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable.



Section 12.16.  Investment of City Funds.



   Idle monies may be invested according to the general laws of the State
as the City Council may determine.



ARTICLE XIII
TRANSITION; SEPARABILITY



Section 13.01.  Officers and Employees.



   (a)   Rights and Privileges Preserved.  Nothing in this Charter
except as otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights
or privileges of persons who are City officers or employees on January 15,
1994, which is hereby declared and determined to be the effective date of
this charter.



   (b)   Continuance of Office or Employment.  Except as specifically
provided by this Charter, if at the time this Charter takes full effect a
City administrative officer or employee holds any office or position which is
or can be abolished by or under this Charter, he or she shall continue in
such office or position until the taking effect of some specific provision
under this Charter directing that he or she vacate the office or position.



   (c)   Personnel System.  An employee holding a City position at the
time this Charter takes full effect, who was serving in that same or a
comparable position at the time of its adoption, shall not be subject to a
competitive test as a condition of continuance in the same position but in
all other respects shall be subject to the personnel system provided for in
Section 4.02.



Section 13.02.  Departments, Offices and Agencies.



   (a)   Transfer of Powers.  If a City department, office, or agency
is abolished by this charter, the powers and duties given it by law shall be
transferred to the City department, office or agency designated in this
Charter or, if the Charter makes no provision, designated by the City Council.



   (b)   Property and Records.  All property, records, and equipment
of any department, office or agency existing when this Charter is adopted
shall be transferred to the department, office or agency assuming its powers
and duties, but, in the event that the powers or duties are to be
discontinued or divided between units or in the event that any conflict
arises regarding a transfer, such property, records or equipment shall be
transferred to one or more departments, offices or agencies designated by the
City Council in accordance with this Charter.



Section 13.03.  Pending Matters.



   All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, or legal administrative
proceedings shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of
this Charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with
by the City department, office or agency appropriate under this Charter.



Section 13.04.  State and Municipal Laws.



   All City ordinances, resolutions, orders, and regulations which are in
force when this charter becomes fully effective are repealed to the extent
that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this
Charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto.  To the
extent that the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan permit, all
laws relating to or affecting this City or its agencies, officers, or
employees which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective are
superseded to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the
effective operation of this Charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted
pursuant hereto.



PART TWO – ADMINISTRATION CODE



TITLE TWO - General Provisions



   Chap. 202.  Codified Ordinances.



   Chap. 204.  Municipal Standards.



   Chap. 206.  Wards and Boundaries.



   Chap. 208.  City Elections.



   Chap. 210.  Special Assessment Procedure.



   Chap. 212.  Purchases, Contracts and Sales.



   Chap. 214.  General Fee Schedule.



   Chap. 216.  Franchises.



Chapter 202
Codified Ordinances



202.01   Designation; citation; headings.



202.02   Amendments; numbering; alterations.



202.03   Definitions and interpretation.



202.04   Notices.



202.05   Severability.



202.06   Sections and ordinances repealed; revivor.



202.07   Exemptions from repeal.



202.08   Application of codified ordinances.



202.09   Updating and revision of codified ordinances.



202.10   Inclusion of deputy or subordinate in title of officer.



202.99   General Code penalty; civil infractions; equitable remedies;
complicity.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see CHTR. § 2.15



   Codification and printing of ordinances and resolutions - see CHTR. §
2.16



   Publication of codes of municipal ordinances - see M.C.L.A. § 117.5b



   Ordinances and resolutions - see ADM. Ch. 224



202.01  DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.



   (a)   This volume consists of all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature of the Municipality, revised, codified, arranged, numbered
and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as
such shall be known and designated as the Codified Ordinances of Ionia,
Michigan, 2001, for which designation "Codified Ordinances" may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances.



   (b)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to
such components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any
component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic
Code." Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "section"
followed by the number, such as "Section 202.01."



202.02  AMENDMENTS; NUMBERING; ALTERATIONS.



   (a)   The Codified Ordinances of Ionia may be amended at any time
and, when any amendment is adopted in such form as to indicate the intention
of Council to make the same a part thereof, such amendment or supplement
shall be incorporated in, and deemed a part of, the Codified Ordinances, so
that a reference to the Codified Ordinances shall be understood and construed
as including the Codified Ordinances of Ionia and any and all such amendments.



   (b)   All amendments enacted as a part of the Codified Ordinances
shall be integrated therewith by following the form of arrangement and plan
set forth in the original Codified Ordinances as follows:  each Code shall
be subdivided into titles and/or chapters, and each chapter shall be
subdivided into sections, which shall be numbered in accordance with the
decimal numbering system. The numbering of all sections, except penalty
sections, shall be consecutive within each chapter commencing with the first
section of Chapter 202, which shall be numbered 202.01, the first "2"
signifying Code 2, and the two figures "02" before the decimal signifying the
chapter within the Code, and the two figures "01" after the decimal
signifying the first section in Chapter 202 of the Code. Penalty sections
shall be designated "99" and shall be the last section of a chapter.



   (c)   No person shall change or amend, by additions or deletions,
any part of these Codified Ordinances, or insert or delete pages, or portions
thereof, or alter or tamper with these Codified Ordinances in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.



   (d)   These Codified Ordinances shall be amended by ordinance.  The
title of each amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances
and purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows:



      (1)   To amend any section:



AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION _________ (or SECTIONS _____________ and
__________) OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF IONIA.



      (2)   To insert a new section, chapter or title:



AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF IONIA BY ADDING
A NEW SECTION (__________ NEW SECTIONS, A NEW CHAPTER, or a NEW TITLE, as the
case may be) WHICH NEW SECTION (SECTIONS, CHAPTER or TITLE) SHALL BE
DESIGNATED AS SECTION ___________ (SECTIONS _________ AND _________) OF
CHAPTER _________ OF TITLE __________ (or proper designation if a chapter or
title is added) OF SAID CODIFIED ORDINANCES.



      (3)   To repeal a section, chapter or title:



AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL SECTION _______ (SECTIONS _________ AND ________)
CHAPTER ________, TITLE ________, (as the case may be) OF THE CODIFIED
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF IONIA.



   (e)   Amendments to these Codified Ordinances shall be published as
required by the Charter of the City of Ionia, and not less than a number of
copies of each amendment equal to the number of copies of these Codified
Ordinances in distribution shall be published in loose-leaf form suitable for
insertion in the loose-leaf copies of these Codified Ordinances.  The City
Clerk shall distribute such copies to the officers of the City having copies
of these Codified Ordinances assigned to them.  Each officer assigned a copy
of these Codified Ordinances shall be responsible for maintaining the same
and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received.  Each copy of
these Codified Ordinances shall remain the property of the City and shall be
turned over by each officer having custody thereof upon expiration of his or
her term of office to the City Clerk.



202.03  DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.



   Terms used in these Codified Ordinances, unless specifically defined
herein, shall have the meanings prescribed by State law.  In the
construction of these Codified Ordinances, or any provision thereof, the
following rules and definitions shall control, except those which are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of Council as disclosed in a particular
provision, section or chapter:



   (1)   Adopting Ordinance.  "Adopting Ordinance" means the ordinance
of the Municipality adopting the Codified Ordinances of Ionia, pursuant to
law.



   (2)   Authority.  Whenever in these Codified Ordinances authority
is given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority
may be exercised and such act may be performed, at the instance of such
officer, by a deputy or subordinate, unless contrary to law or to the clear
intent of any such particular provision.



   (3)   Calendar-Computation of Time.  The terms "month" and "year"
mean the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an
act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the
first and including the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday or a legal
holiday, in which case it shall be excluded.  If time is expressed in hours,
the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday shall be excluded.



   (4)   Conjunctions.  "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and,"
if the sense so requires.



   (5)   Corporate Limits.  Wherever in these Codified Ordinances an
act is prohibited, declared unlawful or required to be performed, directly or
by implication, such references shall imply "within the corporate limits of
the City."



   (6)   Council.  "Council" means the legislative authority of the
City.



   (7)   County.  "County" means Ionia County, Michigan.



   (8)   Gender.  Words importing the masculine shall extend and be
applied to the feminine and neuter genders.



   (9)   General Rule.  Except as otherwise provided in this section,
words and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of the
language, provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed
according to such technical or special meaning.



   (10)   Joint Authority.  Words giving authority to a board,
commission, authority or three or more officers or employees or other persons
shall be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof, unless
otherwise specifically provided.



   (11)   Keeper and Proprietor.  "Keeper" and "proprietor" mean
persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether
acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.



   (12)   Land and Real Estate.  "Land" and "real estate" include
rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.



   (13)   Law.  "Law" means all applicable laws of the United States
of America, the State of Michigan and the City of Ionia.



   (14)   Michigan Compiled Laws (M.C.L.).  Where a section of these
Codified Ordinances is followed by a reference to a section of the Michigan
Compiled Laws (M.C.L.), such reference indicates that the section is
analogous or similar to such M.C.L. section.



   (15)   Minor.  "Minor" means any person who is under the age of
eighteen years.



   (16)   Municipality or City.  "Municipality" or "City" means the
City of Ionia, Michigan.  Further, the words "the City" or "this City" shall
be construed as if the words "of Ionia" followed them and shall extend to and
include its several officers, agents and employees.



   (17)   Notice.  "Notice" means notice as described in Section
202.04.



   (18)   Number.  Words in the  plural include the singular and
words in the singular include the plural number.



   (19)   Oath.  "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation
in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed."



   (20)   Ordinance.  "Ordinance" means and includes any ordinance of
the Municipality, including any provision of these Codified Ordinances.



   (21)   Owner.  "Owner," when applied to property, includes a part
owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or any part of such
property.



   (22)   Person.  "Person" includes any individual, copartnership,
corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust and any other
group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such
group or unit.



   (23)   Premises.  "Premises," when used as applicable to property,
extends to and includes land and buildings.



   (24)   Property.  "Property" includes real and personal property
and any mixed and lesser estates or interests therein. "Personal property"
includes every kind of property except real property; "real property"
includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   (25)   Public Acts.  "Public Acts" means Acts of the State
legislature of the State of Michigan.



   (26)   Public Place.  "Public place" means any place to or upon
which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or
controlled by the City or any agency of the State or is a place to or upon
which the public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or
implied.



   (27)   Publish.  "Publish" means to print in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality the entire document or a brief summary
thereof with a listing of places where copies have been filed and times when
they are available for public inspection and purchase at a reasonable price.



   (28)   Reasonable Time.  In all cases where provision is made for
an act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance
of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (29)   Reference to Offices or Officers.  Reference in any of the
provisions of these Codified Ordinances to any office or officer of the City,
State or County shall include any person authorized by law to perform the
duties of such office or officer.



   (30)   Residence.  "Residence" means an abode in which a person
permanently resides.



   (31)   Responsibility.  Whenever any act is prohibited by a
provision of these Codified Ordinances or by any rule or regulation adopted
thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing,
securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act.



   (32)   Shall and May.  "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.



   (33)   Sidewalk.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between
the curb lines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines, which is intended
for the use of pedestrians.



   (34)   State.  "State" means the State of Michigan.



   (35)   Street, Highway and Alley.  "Street," "highway" and "alley"
mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right of way, or
owned in fee by the City, County or State, of every way or place, of whatever
nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" means any
such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a
property.



   (36)   Tenant and Occupant.  "Tenant" and "occupant," as applied to
buildings or land, shall extend and be applied to any person holding a
written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or any part of, a
building or land, alone or with others.



   (37)   Tenses.  The use of any verb in the present tense includes
the future.



   (38)   Time.  Whenever any time established in the Codified
Ordinances for the taking of any action expires on a Sunday or a legal
holiday, such time shall not expire on such day but shall expire on the next
week day.



202.04  NOTICES.



   (a)   Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections,
dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of
which, if performed by the City, may be assessed against the premises under
the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, shall be served:



      (1)   By delivering the notice to an owner personally or by
leaving the same at his or her residence, office or place of business with
some person of suitable age and discretion; or



      (2)   By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail
to such owner at his or her last known address; or



      (3)   If an owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some
conspicuous place on the premises for five days before the act or action
concerning which the notice is given.



   (b)   Notice to any part owner, joint tenant or tenant in common
shall be deemed to be notice to all such part owners, joint tenants or
tenants in common.



   (c)   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or
tear down any official notice or placard posted by any City officer unless
permission is given by such officer to remove such notice or placard.



202.05  SEVERABILITY.



   It is the legislative intent of Council in adopting these Codified
Ordinances that all provisions and sections of these Codified Ordinances be
liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the City. Should any provision or section of
these Codified Ordinances be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding
shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining
provisions or sections, it being the intent that these Codified Ordinances
shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section
thereof.



   The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any
section of these Codified Ordinances, whether or not the wording of this
section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance.



202.06  SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED; REVIVOR.



   (a)   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
Municipality, and parts of the same, in conflict with any of the provisions
of these Codified Ordinances, are hereby repealed.



   (b)   The repeal of a repealing provision does not revive the
provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



202.07  EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL.



   The repeal provided for in Section 202.06 shall not affect:



   (a)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before
the adoption of these Codified Ordinances;



   (b)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the
payment of money by or to the Municipality, or authorizing the issuance of
any bonds of the Municipality, or any evidence of the Municipality's
indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the Municipality;



   (c)   The administrative ordinances and resolutions of Council not
in conflict or inconsistent with any provision of these Codified Ordinances;



   (d)   Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of Council on any person;



   (e)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing, naming, relocating
or vacating any street or other public way;



   (f)   Any ordinance or resolution or part thereof providing for the
establishment of positions, for salaries or compensation;



   (g)   Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any
judgment rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these Codified Ordinances;



   (h)   Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing taxes or
assessments;



   (i)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing or changing the
boundaries of the Municipality; or



   (n)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by Council after the
adoption of these Codified Ordinances.



202.08  APPLICATION OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES.



   These Codified Ordinances shall apply to acts performed within the
jurisdiction of the City.  Acts performed outside the City shall be governed
by these Codified Ordinances up to the limits prescribed by law, where the
law confers power on the City to regulate such acts outside the City.



202.09  UPDATING AND REVISION OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES.



   (a)   By contract or by City personnel, supplements to these
Codified Ordinances shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or
directed by Council.  A supplement to these Codified Ordinances shall
include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by
Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by
the supplement and all changes made thereby to these Codified Ordinances, and
shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period.  The
pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into
these Codified Ordinances and will, where necessary, replace pages which have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be prepared so
that, when they have been inserted, these Codified Ordinances will be current
through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.



   (b)   In preparing a supplement to these Codified Ordinances,
portions of these Codified Ordinances which have been repealed shall be so
indicated by the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) by use of an editor's note detailing
how such portion was repealed. 



   (c)   When preparing a supplement to these Codified Ordinances, the
codifier may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to
embody them into these Codified Ordinances.  For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
chapters, sections, subsections and other subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
chapters, sections, subsections and other subdivisions of these Codified
Ordinances printed in the supplement, and make changes thereto;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, sections and
other subdivisions to be inserted in these Codified Ordinances, and, where
necessary to accommodate new material, change existing chapter, section or
other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same
meaning to "this chapter", "this section" or "this subsection," etc., as the
case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of these Codified Ordinances which embody the
substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into these Codified
Ordinances); and



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into these Codified
Ordinances, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning
or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in these Codified Ordinances, except as otherwise provided by the
City.



202.10  INCLUSION OF DEPUTY OR SUBORDINATE IN TITLE OF OFFICER.



   Whenever, by the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, any officer
of the City of Ionia is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or
duty, the title of said officer shall mean and include such officer or his or
her deputy or authorized subordinate.



202.99  GENERAL CODE PENALTY; CIVIL INFRACTIONS; EQUITABLE REMEDIES;
COMPLICITY.



   (a)   Misdemeanors.



      (1)   Unless a violation of these Codified Ordinances or any
ordinance of the City is specifically designated in these Codified Ordinances
or any other ordinance as a Municipal civil infraction, the violation shall
be deemed to be a misdemeanor.



      (2)   The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) (plus costs of prosecution), or
imprisonment not exceeding ninety-three days, or both, unless a specific
penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by these Codified Ordinances
or any other ordinance.



   (b)   Civil Infractions.



      (1)   The sanction for a violation which is a Municipal civil
infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by these Codified
Ordinances or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses or other
sanctions, as authorized in Chapter 87 of Act 236 of the Public Acts of 1961,
as amended , and other applicable laws.



      (2)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular
Municipal civil infraction violation by these Codified Ordinances or any
other ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs and other sanctions, for each
infraction.



      (3)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated
violations by a person of any requirement or provision of these Codified
Ordinances or any ordinance.  As used in this section, "repeat offense"
means a second (or any subsequent) Municipal civil infraction of the same
requirement or provision committed by a person within any one-year period
(unless some other period is specifically provided by these Codified
Ordinances or any other ordinance) and for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible.  Unless otherwise
specifically provided by these Codified Ordinances or any other ordinance for
a particular Municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a
repeat offense shall be as follows:



         A.   The fine for any first repeat offense shall be not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs.



         B.   The fine for any second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000), plus costs.



   (c)   Violations Deferred; Separate Offenses.



      (1)   A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made
or declared to be unlawful or an offense by these Codified Ordinances or any
other ordinance, and any omission or failure to act where the act is required
by these Codified Ordinances or any other ordinance.



      (2)   Each day on which any violation of these Codified
Ordinances or any other ordinance continues and each act of violation
constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions
as a separate offense.



      (3)   The penalty provided in this section, unless another
penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of
these Codified Ordinances, whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the
amendatory clause.



   (d)   Equitable Remedies; Surcharges.



      (1)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the City
may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to
restrain, prevent or abate any violation of these Codified Ordinances or any
City ordinance.



      (2)   The imposition of any penalty provided for in this
section shall be in addition to any surcharges levied for a violation of or
noncompliance with the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, or a
provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these Codified
Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under
authority of either, or under authority of State law, and shall be in
addition to any equitable remedy provided by a provision of these Codified
Ordinances or a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference
in these Codified Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or
made under authority of either, or under authority of State law, including
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



   (e)   Complicity.  Every person concerned in the commission of an
offense under these Codified Ordinances, whether he or she directly commits
the act constituting the offense or procedures, counsels, aids or abets in
its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted, tried or found responsible, and
on conviction shall be punished, as if he or she had directly committed such
offense.



Chapter 204
Municipal Standards



204.01   Definitions.



204.02   Amendment or revision.



204.03   Municipal Standards to govern.



204.04   Standards to be followed.



204.05   Fees and charges.



204.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   State Seal – see Mich. Const. Art. 3, § 3; M.C.L.A. §§ 2.41 et seq.



   Seal of municipal sewage disposal authority – see M.C.L.A. § 124.284



   Seal of municipal water supply authority – see M.C.L.A. § 124.284



   Weights and measures – see M.C.L.A. §§ 290.601 et seq., 750.561 et
seq.



204.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms "owner" or "developer" or "contractor" when used in this chapter shall
mean a natural person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other
entity who proposes subdivision, or other land development and/or Municipal
improvements serving the public interest, who may have an ownership interest
therein or who may act as agent with respect thereto for an entity having
such ownership interest.



(Ord. 439.  Passed 9-5-06.)



204.02  AMENDMENT OR REVISION.



   The City of Ionia Municipal Standards dated December, 2010, is hereby
adopted in its entirety and replaced the Municipal Standards dated July
2006.  The complete City of Ionia Municipal Standards is hereby published by
the City and is available at City Hall for public distribution at a
reasonable charge.



(Ord. 439.  Passed 9-5-06; Ord. 484.  Passed 2-1-11.)



204.03  MUNICIPAL STANDARDS TO GOVERN.



   The Municipal Standards shall govern the design and construction of
subdivisions and land development, and Municipal improvements, and are in
addition to existing and future requirements of local zoning ordinances,
subdivision control ordinances and State Land Division Act, Act No. 288 of
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended, and other applicable State
and local ordinances, codes and regulations governing residential and
commercial developments and Municipal improvements.



(Ord. 439.  Passed 9-5-06.)



204.04  STANDARDS TO BE FOLLOWED.



   Every person who shall as owner, developer, or contractor with respect
to land situated within the City proposed to design and/or undertake land
subdivision, or land development, or who may make, alter, repair or affect
Municipal property or systems serving the public interest within the City,
shall obtain a copy of the Municipal Standards and shall follow all standards
therein appropriate to such design, development or other such project.
Whenever the Municipal Standards shall refer to other officially recognized
detailed technical codes, such codes shall be followed by the owner,
developer, and/or contractor in the context set forth therein. The City shall
make available for sale to the owner, developer or contractor a copy of such
other codes upon request.



(Ord. 469.  Passed 9-5-06.)



204.05  FEES AND CHARGES.



   The owner, developer, or contractor shall deposit with the City
Treasurer amounts sufficient to cover the expenses set forth in the Municipal
Standards Booklet for construction plan review and construction
administration and inspection.



(Ord. 469.  Passed 9-5-06.)



204.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for
an infraction, subject to payment of a fine as set forth in Section 202.99.
Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as set
forth in Section 202.99



(Ord. 469.  Passed 9-5-06.)



Chapter 206
Wards and Boundaries



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 206.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Boundaries of City - see CHTR. § 1.02



   Wards of City - see CHTR. § 6.03



   Boundaries of Downtown Development Authority - see ADM. 282.02



   Boundaries of zoning districts - see P. & Z. 1246.02, 1246.03



   Boundaries of Flood Plain Overlay District - see P. & Z. 1264.03



Chapter 208
City Elections



208.01   Odd year elections.



208.02   Terms of City officers.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Election of Council - see CHTR. § 2.02(c)



   Elections generally - see CHTR. Art. VI



   Canvass of votes in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.12, 117.15



   Boards of election commissioners generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.21
et seq.



   Compensation of boards of election commissioners - see M.C.L.A. §§
168.28, 168.682



   Canvass of votes generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.801 et seq.



   Voting places – see P. & Z. 1286.08(c)



208.01  ODD YEAR ELECTIONS.



   Pursuant to Act 262 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, the date
for the holding of the Municipal election for the City of Ionia shall be the
Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November of every odd numbered year. 



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



208.02  TERMS OF CITY OFFICERS.



   Pursuant to Act 262 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, Section
644j (2), the officers elected shall take office on January 1, following the
election, for such terms as are set forth in the City Charter.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 210
Special Assessment Procedure



210.01   Definitions.



210.02   Authority to assess.



210.03   Initiation by petition.



210.04   Survey and report.



210.05   Council determination to proceed.



210.06   Preparation of special assessment roll.



210.07   Filing of special assessment roll.



210.08   Hearing to review special assessment roll.



210.09   Changes and corrections in assessment roll.



210.10   Payment of special assessments.



210.11   Installment payments.



210.12   Delinquent special assessments.



210.13   Creation of lien.



210.14   Additional assessments; refunds.



210.15   Additional procedures.



210.16   Collection of special assessments.



210.17   Special assessment accounts.



210.18   Reassessment for benefits.



210.19   Combination of projects.



210.20   Division of parcels.



210.21   Deferred payments of special assessments.



210.22   Hazards and nuisances.



210.23   Single lot assessments.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Special assessments - see Mich. Const. Art. 9, § 6; CHTR, Art. XI;
M.C.L.A. §§ 104.8, 211.741 et seq.



   Assessment roll - see CHTR. § 8.02



210.01  DEFINITIONS.



As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Cost," when referring to the cost of any local public
improvement, includes the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of
rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, legal fees, interest on
special assessment bonds for not to exceed one year, and all other costs
incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor
and the financing thereof.



   (b)   "Local public improvement" means any public improvement which
is of such a nature as to benefit especially any real property or properties
within a district in the vicinity of such improvement. 



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.02  AUTHORITY TO ASSESS.



   The Council shall have the power to assess and re-assess whole costs or
any part thereof of any local public improvement to a district in the manner
hereinafter provided. 



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.03  INITIATION BY PETITION.



   Local public improvements may be initiated by petition signed by record
owners of land constituting more than fifty percent of the total assessed
value of the land in the proposed district, all as shown by the last
preceding general tax records of the City. Such petition shall contain a
brief description of the property owned by the respective signatories
thereof, and if it shall appear that the petition is signed by owners of more
than fifty percent of the aggregate assessed value of the proposed district,
the Clerk shall certify the same to the Council. The petition shall be
addressed to the Council and filed with the Clerk and shall in no event be
considered directory but is advisory only.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.04  SURVEY AND REPORT.



   Before the Council shall consider the making of any local improvement,
the Council shall require the City Manager to prepare or cause to be prepared
a report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and
detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a
description of the assessment district or districts and the land or lands
which should be included in the special assessment district or districts, and
such other pertinent information as will permit the Council to decide the
cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or
proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property
especially benefitted, what part, if any, should be paid by the City
at-large, and the number of installments in which assessments may be paid.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.05  COUNCIL DETERMINATION TO PROCEED.



   Upon receipt of the report required in Section 210.04, the Council may
decide to proceed with the improvement and to defray all or part of the cost
thereof by special assessment on the lands especially benefitted. In
addition, by that resolution, the Council shall approve the plans and
specifications for the improvement, set forth the nature thereof, designate
the limits of the special assessment district to be affected and describe the
land to be assessed, the part or portion of the cost of the public
improvement to be paid by the lands specially benefitted thereby and the part
or portion, if any, to be paid by the City at-large for benefit to the City
at-large.  Council shall direct the Assessor to make a special assessment
roll of the part or proportion of the cost to be borne by the lands specially
benefitted according to the benefits received and to report the same to the
Council. 



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.06  PREPARATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   The Assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and
parcels of land within the designated district benefitted by the proposed
improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount
benefitted thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the
detailed estimate of cost as approved by the Council.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.07  FILING OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   The City Assessor shall file a certified completed assessment roll with
the City Clerk for presentation to the Council for review and certification
by it.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.08  HEARING TO REVIEW SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the Council, by 
resolution, shall accept the assessment roll and order it to be filed in the
office of the Clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place the
Council will meet to hear objections to the improvement and to review the
special assessment roll, and shall direct the Clerk to give notice of a
public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested
persons to be heard. The notice shall contain all information required by law
and shall be given by publication once at least ten full days prior to the
date of the hearing in a newspaper published or circulated within the City
and by first-class mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in
property to be assessed, as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of
the City, mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The
hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or
special meeting of the Council. At the hearing, all interested persons or
parties shall present, in person or in writing, their objections, if any, to
the improvement and the assessments against them. The Assessor shall be
present at every meeting of the Council at which a special assessment is to
be reviewed.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.09  CHANGES AND CORRECTIONS IN ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   The Council shall meet at the time and place designated for the hearing
on the improvements and review of such special assessment roll, and at such
meeting, or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections
thereto submitted in writing.  The Council may correct the roll as to any
special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other
errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution, annul the assessment roll
and direct that new proceedings be instituted.  The same proceedings shall
be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. 
After hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the
Council deems justified, the Council may, by resolution, determine to proceed
with the public improvement, determine the necessity thereof and set forth
the nature thereof, designate the limits of the special assessment district
to be affected and describe the lands to be assessed, and finally determine
the part or proportion of the cost of the public improvement to be paid by
the lands specially benefitted thereby and the part or portion, if any, to be
paid by the City at-large for benefit to the City at-large.  If the Council
determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll and that
assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall pass a
resolution which recites such determinations, confirms such roll, places it
on the file in the office of the Clerk and directs the Clerk to attach the
Clerk's warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten days, and directs the
Assessor to spread and the Treasurer to collect the various sums and amounts
appearing thereon as directed by the Council.  The roll shall have the date
of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and
conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies unless
contested in the manner provided by law, and subject to adjustment to conform
to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in Section 210.14. 



(Ord 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.10  PAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the
Council shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter,
shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.11  INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.



   The Council may provide for the payment of special assessments in
installments.  Such installments shall not exceed twenty in number, the
first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll or on such date as
the Council may determine and the deferred installments shall be due annually
thereafter, or, in the discretion of the Council, shall be due annually on
such other date as the Council may fix or may be spread upon and made a part
of each annual City tax roll thereafter until all are paid.  Interest shall
be charged on all deferred installments at a rate not to exceed seven percent
per annum or such higher rate of interest as may be permitted by the general
laws of the State of Michigan, commencing on such date on or after
confirmation as may be fixed by the Council and payable with each
installment.  The full amount of all or any deferred installments, with
interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of
the due dates thereof. If the full assessment or the first installment
thereof shall be due upon confirmation, each property owner shall have sixty
days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of said assessment
or the full amount of any installments thereof, without interest or
penalty.  Following said sixty-day period, the assessment or first
installment thereof shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent and the
same penalties shall be collected on such unpaid assessments or first
installments thereof as are provided by law to be collected on delinquent
general City taxes.  Deferred installments shall be collected without
penalty until sixty days after the due date thereof, after which time such
installments shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on said
installments shall be collected as are provided by law to be collected on
delinquent general City taxes.  After the Council has confirmed the roll,
the City Treasurer shall notify by mail each property owner on said roll that
said roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and the terms of
payment.  Failure on the part of the City Treasurer to give said notice or
of such owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any special
assessment roll of the City or any assessment thereon, nor excuse the payment
of interest or penalties.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.12  DELINQUENT SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   Any assessment or part thereof remaining unpaid on the first day of
April following the date when the same became delinquent shall be reported as
unpaid by the Treasurer to the Council.  Any such delinquent assessment,
together with all accrued interest, shall be transferred and reassessed on
the next annual City tax roll in a column headed "Special Assessments," with
a penalty of four percent upon such total amount added thereto, and when so
transferred and reassessed upon said tax roll shall be collected in all
respects as provided for the collection of City taxes.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.13  CREATION OF LIEN.



   Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon
from the date of confirmation of the roll shall become a debt to the City
from the persons to whom they are assessed, and, until paid, shall be and
remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as
the lien created by general law for state, county and village taxes, and the
lands upon which the same are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor the
same as are lands upon which delinquent village taxes constitute a lien. 



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.14  ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS; REFUNDS.



   The Clerk shall, within sixty days after the completion of each local
or special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify
the same to the Assessor, who shall adjust the special assessment roll to
correspond therewith.  Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by
less than five percent, the same shall be reported to the Council, which may
place the excess in the City treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata
according to the assessment.  If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary
by five percent or more, the entire excess shall be credited to owners of
property as shown by the City assessment roll upon which such assessment has
been levied, pro rata according to the assessment.  No refunds of special
assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provision of any
outstanding obligation or bond secured, in whole or in part, by such special
assessments.  In the case of assessments due in installments, the Council
may order the refund given by credit against the installments last coming
due.  When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the
cost of the improvement for which it was made, the Council may make an
additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed against any one
parcel of land shall not exceed the benefits received by said lot or parcel
of land.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.15  ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES.



   In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be
insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the
Council shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures
required.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.16  COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   In the event that bonds are issued in anticipation of the collection of
special assessments as hereinbefore provided, all collections on each special
assessment roll, or combination of rolls, shall be set in a separate fund for
the payment of the principal and interest on the bonds so issued in
anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall be used
for no other purpose.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.17  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACCOUNTS.



   Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local
improvements shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any
money borrowed therefor.  Except as provided in Section 210.14, each special
assessment account may be used only for the improvement project for which the
assessment was levied, expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment
of the principal and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund
excessive assessments if refunds are authorized.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.18  REASSESSMENT FOR BENEFITS.



   Whenever the Council shall deem any special assessment invalid or
defective for any reason whatever or if any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in
whole or part, the Council shall have the power to cause a new assessment to
be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made,
whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed, and whether
any part of the assessment has been collected, or not.  All proceedings on
such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the manner
as provided for the original assessment.  If any portion of the original
assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied
upon the reassessment, and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed
satisfied.  If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected,
the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.19  COMBINATION OF PROJECTS.



   The Council may combine several districts into one project for the
purpose of effecting a saving in the costs.  There shall be established for
each district separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the same.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.20  DIVISION OF PARCELS.



   Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment thereon
has been confirmed and divided into installments, the City Assessor shall
apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided,
and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment
roll.  The City Treasurer shall, within ten days after such appointment,
send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known
address by first-class mail.  Said apportionments shall be final and
conclusive of all parties unless protest, in writing, is received by the City
Treasurer within twenty days on the mailing of the aforesaid notice.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.21  DEFERRED PAYMENTS OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   The Council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments
from persons who, in the opinion of the Council and the City Assessor, by
reason of poverty, are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof.  In all
such cases, as a condition to the granting of such deferred payments, the
City shall require mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary
payable on or before his or her death, or, in any event, on the sale or
transfer of the property.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.22  HAZARDS AND NUISANCES.



   When any lot, building or structure within the City, because of the
accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age
or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in
the opinion of the Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to
the health and safety of the inhabitants of the City or those of them
residing or habitually going near such lot, building or structure, the
Council may, after investigation, give notice to the owner of the land upon
which such hazard or nuisance exists, or the owner of the building or
structure itself, specifying the nature of the hazard or nuisance and
requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down or remove the same promptly
and within a time to be specified by the Council, which shall be commensurate
with the nature of the hazard or nuisance.  If, at the expiration of the
time limit in said notice, said owner has not complied with the requirements
thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or
structure itself is not known, the Council may order such a hazard or
nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the City which is
qualified to do the work required, and the collection of costs of such
abatement against the lot, premises or description of real property upon
which said hazard or nuisance was located.



(Ord. 368.  Passed 3-27-95.)



210.23  SINGLE LOT ASSESSMENTS.



   When any expense shall have been incurred by the City upon or in
respect to any single property, which expense is chargeable against said
property and owner thereof under the provisions of these Codified Ordinances
and is not of that class required to be pro-rated among the several lots and
parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor,
material and service for which such expense was incurred, with a description
of the property upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the
name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the Treasurer, who shall
immediately charge and bill the owner, if known.  The Treasurer at the end
of each quarter shall report to the City Council all sums so owing to the
City and which have not been paid within thirty days after mailing of the
bill therefor.  The Council shall, at such times as it may deem advisable,
direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all such
charges reported to it together with a penalty of ten percent.  Such roll
shall be filed with the Clerk who shall advise the Council of the filing of
the same, and the Council shall thereupon set a date for the hearing of
objections to such assessment roll.  The assessment roll shall be open to
public inspection for a period of seven days before the Council shall meet to
review the roll and hear complaints.  The City Clerk shall give notice in
advance by publication of the opening of the roll to public inspection and of
the meeting of the Council to hear complaints and shall also give like notice
to the owners of the property affected by first class mail at their addresses
as shown on the current general assessment roll of the City, at least ten
days prior to the date of such hearing.  Such special assessments and all
interest and charges thereon shall, from the date of confirmation of the
roll, be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character
and effect as a lien created by general law for State and County taxes, until
paid.  The same penalty and interest shall be paid on such assessments, when
delinquent from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the
Council, as are provided by the City Charter to be paid on delinquent general
City taxes.  Such assessments, with penalties and interest, shall be added
by the Treasurer to the next general City tax roll or general County and
school tax roll, as shall be convenient, and shall thereafter be collected
and returned in the same manner as are general City taxes.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 212
Purchases, Contracts and Sales



212.01   Definitions.



212.02   Purchasing Agent.



212.03   General purchasing policy.



212.04   Purchases or contracts under $2,001.



212.05   Purchases or contracts over $2,001.



212.06   Subdivision of contracts.



212.07   Emergency purchases.



212.08   Inspection of materials.



212.09   Sale of property.



212.10   Cooperative purchases.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Deferred payment contracts - see CHTR. § 12.15



   Discrimination in State contracts - see M.C.L.A. §§ 37.2209, 37.2605



   Sale of municipally owned property - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4e, 117.5



   Contracts with home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4f, 117.4g,
117.5



   Purchases by City Housing Commission - see ADM. 278.07



212.01  DEFINITIONS.



   In the interpretation of this chapter the following definitions shall
apply except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   (a)   The City Council of the City of Ionia, City Manager and City
Clerk shall be referred to as Council, Manager and Clerk, respectively.



   (b)   The word "contract" shall include contracts for services,
subject to the exclusion hereinafter mentioned, and shall include any type of
service; leases for grounds, buildings, offices or maintenance of equipment,
machinery and other City owned personal property. The term "contract" shall
not include professional and other contract services which may be unique and
not subject to competition.



   (c)   The word "Agent" means the Finance Director (Comptroller) or
any other officer or employee designated by the Council to act as Purchasing
Agent.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.02  PURCHASING AGENT.



   The Agent shall prepare rules concerning purchasing, the necessary
forms therefor and a "Purchasing Manual". Copies of said Manual shall be
issued to all departments of the City, to the members of the Council and to
the Manager. Said rules, forms and Manual shall be in effect, except as and
when amended by the majority vote of the Council.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.03  GENERAL PURCHASING POLICY.



   Competitive prices for all purchases and public improvements shall be
obtained and the purchase made from, or the contract awarded to, the lowest
competent bidder.



   In addition:



   (a)   Formal sealed bids shall be obtained in all transactions
involving the expenditure of two thousand and one dollars ($2,001) or more
(or such other amount which may be established by the Council by resolution).



   (b)   When other considerations are equal, contracts shall be
awarded to local vendors.



   (c)   If the lowest competent bids are for the same amount, the
Agent shall negotiate with the low bidders for a reduced bid and shall make
or recommend the purchase which shall appear to be to the advantage of the
City.



   (d)   Competitive bidding may not be required in the following cases:



      (1)   Where the subject of the contract is other than a public
work or improvement and the product or material contracted for is not
competitive in nature and/or no advantage to the City would result from
requiring competitive bidding and the Council by resolution authorizes
execution of a contract without competitive bidding.



      (1)   In the employment of professional services.



      (2)   Where the City elects to use City forces for work
suitable for contracting, provided such work is authorized by the Council.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.04  PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS UNDER $2,001.



   Purchases of supplies, materials or equipment, the cost of which is
less than two thousand and one dollars ($2,001) (or such other amount which
may be established by the Council by resolution) may be made in the open
market by the Agent, but such purchase shall be based on competitive prices
and shall be awarded to the lowest competent bidder, except as otherwise
provided herein.



   (a)   The Agent may solicit prices verbally, by telephone or by
written communication; provided that where bids are solicited by written
communication, a copy of such request for bids shall be posted in the City
Hall.



   (b)   In determining the competency of a bidder the Agent shall be
guided by his or her judgment of the ability of the bidder to provide the
required material or services in compliance with the specifications set
forth. If the purchase is not made from the lowest bidder, a statement of the
reasons for placing the order with a higher bidder shall be prepared by the
Agent and filed with the purchase order; provided, that when the amount of
the transaction shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more (or such other
amount which may be established by the Council by resolution) the Agent shall
report such purchase to the Council with a copy of the required statement.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.05  PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS OVER $2,001.



   Any expenditure for supplies, materials, equipment, construction
projects or contracts obligating the City, where the amount of the City
obligation is in excess of two thousand and one dollars ($2,001) (or such
other amount which may be established by the Council by resolution) must be
approved by the Council.



   (a)   Sealed bids shall be requested by the Agent by mailing a copy
of the specifications or requirements to such qualified vendors as may be
known to him or her, and by posting a copy of the request in the City Hall.



   (b)   Unless fixed by the Council, the Agent, with the concurrence
of the Manager, shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited
with any bid and, in the case of construction contracts, the amount of labor
and material or performance bonds to be required of the successful bidder.
Such security shall be in the form of a certified or cashiers check or bond
written by a surety company authorized to do business in Michigan.



   (c)   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place
designated in the notice requesting bids. Bids shall be opened by or in the
presence of the Agent and at least one other City employee. Immediately
following opening the bids shall be examined, tabulated, and made available
for inspection.



   (d)   The full tabulation of all bids shall be submitted to the
meeting of the Council next following the opening of said bids, together with
the recommendation of the Agent. The Council in its discretion shall accept
the lower bid, reject all bids, or determine the low bid to be unsatisfactory
and make the award to the lowest competent bidder.



   (e)   After the opening of the submitted bids, such bids may not be
withdrawn without forfeiture of the bid deposit. Deposits of security
accompanying the three low bids shall be retained until the contract is
awarded and signed; other deposits shall be returned to the unsuccessful
bidders immediately after the bids have been tabulated. If any successful
bidder fails or refuses to enter into the



   (f)   contract awarded to him or her within ten days after being
notified of such an award, or to file any bond required within the same time,
the deposit accompanying his or her bid shall be forfeited to the City and
the Council may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lowest
bidder or readvertise the project.



   (g)   At the time the contract of a construction project is executed
by the contractor, he or she shall file a bond executed by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Michigan, assuring payment of all
just debts incurred in the performance of the contract, including wages and
material bills, and shall file a performance bond when one is required in the
bid specification. Said contract shall also file evidence of public liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Manager, and shall also protect
the City from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of
negligence of the contractor or his or her employee. 



   (h)   (Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.06  SUBDIVISION OF CONTRACTS.



   (a)   No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the
requirements of this chapter.



   (b)   The Agent and every officer and employee of the City are
expressly prohibited from accepting directly or indirectly, from any person,
company, firm, or corporation doing business or contemplating doing business
with the City, any rebate, gift, money or anything of value. 



   (c)   (Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.07  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   In the event of any emergency or an apparent emergency endangering the
public peace, health and/or safety of the City, the Agent, the Manager or any
department head may purchase directly any supplies, materials or equipment
which he or she deems immediately necessary.  Within one week from the time
of purchase, the purchaser shall file, in writing, with the Agent a detailed
explanation of the necessity for such purchase or purchases and the Agent
shall submit said statement to the Council no later than the next regular
meeting of the Council. 



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.08  INSPECTION OF MATERIALS.



   The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials,
supplies and equipment shall rest with the Manager, provided that he or she
may delegate such responsibility to a department head. 



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.09  SALE OF PROPERTY.



   Whenever any City property, real or personal, is no longer needed for
corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale. Personal
property not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) in value may be sold for
cash by the Purchasing Agent upon approval of the Manager after receiving
quotations or competitive bids therefor for the best price obtainable.
Property with a value in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) may be sold
after advertising and receiving competitive bids, after approval of the sale
has been given by the Council. 



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



212.10  COOPERATIVE PURCHASES.



   The Council or the Agent shall have the power to enter into purchase
contracts with and from other governmental agencies, should there be an
opportunity for a saving to the City and/or where the Council determines that
it would be in the best interests of the City, provided, however, that the
Council shall give its prior approval to such purchases, and provided,
further, that all such purchases shall be in compliance with the provisions
of these Codified Ordinances and the City Charter. 



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



CHAPTER 214
General Fee Schedule



214.01   Fees in the Administration Code.



214.02   Fees in the Traffic Code.



214.03   Fees in the General Offenses Code.



214.04   Fees in the Business Regulation and Taxation Code.



214.05   Fees in the Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code.



214.06   Fees in the Planning and Zoning Code.



214.07   Fees in the Building and Housing Code.



214.08   Fees in the Fire Prevention Code.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Transient merchants, license fees - see B. R. & T. 868.08



   Water rates - see S.U. & P. S. 1044.03



   Sewer rates - see S.U. & P.S. 1044.04



   Fees in Zoning Code - see P. & Z. 1244.04, 1272.04



214.01  FEES IN THE ADMINISTRATION CODE.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  At the time of the preparation of these Codified
Ordinances, no fees were provided for in the Administration Code.)



214.02  FEES IN THE TRAFFIC CODE.



   (a)   Bicycle Licenses.  The fee for a bicycle license, as provided
for in Section 420.07 of the Traffic Code, is fifty cents ($0.50).



   (b)   Bicycle Impounding Fee.  The fee for impounding a bicycle, as
provided for in Section 420.10(c), is three dollars ($3.00).



(Ord. 462.  Passed 10-7-08.)



214.03  FEES IN THE GENERAL OFFENSES CODE.



   This section is reserved for future legislation.



214.04  FEES IN THE BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE.



   (a)   Transient Merchant's or Peddler's License.



      (1)   The fee for a transient merchant's or peddler's license,
as provided for in Section 868.08, is:



         Two days or less   $  25.00



         One week or less   75.00



         Six months or less   200.00



      (2)   For every ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in merchandise
for sale, a six hundred dollar ($600.00) refundable bond is required.



   (b)   The fee for a sidewalk café application shall be $0 per
application.



(Res. 10-2001-01.  Passed 10-2-01; Res. Unno.  Passed 12-4-07.)



214.05  FEES IN THE STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE.



   (a)   Street Permits.  The fee for a permit issued pursuant to
Chapter 1020 (Streets Generally), as provided for in Section 1020.03 of the
Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code, is twenty-five dollars ($25.00).



   (b)   Sidewalk Permits.  The fee for a permit to construct, rebuild
or repair a sidewalk, as provided for in Section 1022.02, is fifteen dollars
($15.00).



   (c)   Water and Sewer Rates and Charges.



      (1)   Water Supply System Rates and Charges.  Rates and
charges for services and use of the water supply system shall be as set forth
below, provided that such rates and charges may be revised from time to time
by ordinance of the City Council:



         A.   Facilities maintenance charges:



            000 to 100,000 gallons         -  1
REU   -$24.00/qtr



            100,000 gal. to 300,000 gallons      -  5
REU   -$120.00/qtr



            300,000 gal. to 1 million gallons      -13
REU   -$312.00/qtr



            1 million gal. to 2 million gallons      -45
REU   -$1,080.00/qtr



            2 million gal. to 10 million gallons      -90
REU   -$2,160.00/qtr



            10 million gallons +             -usage
divided by 22,000 gallons x $24.00/qtr/REU charge.



         B.   Commodity rate: All water service shall be charged
for on the basis of water consumed as determined by the meter installed by
the Department in the premises of water users.  The commodity rate shall be
three dollars ($3.00) per thousand metered gallons.



         C.    Fire sprinkler standby fee: An annual fee of two
thousand dollars ($2,000) which can be applied in one payment or divided into
quarterly payments as determined by the City.



         D.   Water tap fees. 



            1.   City of Ionia, Easton Township, Ionia
Township - one thousand dollars ($1,000) minimum.  All costs shall be
recovered, such as road cuts, taps, meter and yoke, etc. with five hundred
dollars ($500.00) remaining to the City Water Fund for future improvements.



            2.   In addition to the regular tap fee, a fee of
two dollars and thirty-seven cents ($2.37) per square foot shall be charged
as an Urban-Rural Development Recovery Fee with one dollar and seventy-six
cents ($1.76) of the resulting sum going to the City for Community
Development/past investment and the remaining sixty-one cents ($0.61) to the
Township.  The Urban-Rural Development Recovery Fee is the cost associated
with providing service to new developments that have not paid for the
developed water supply system. The Urban-Rural Development Recovery Fee is
designed to reimburse the System for past investment that has been paid for
by existing users and is based on Current Project Value.



         E.   Cross Connection Inspection Fee:



            1.   A quarterly fee shall be charged by the City
to cover its cost for conducting cross connection inspections at locations
requiring back flow preventers or prevention, or having chemical application,
food processing or non-domestic usage according to the following schedule:



               a.   Locations requiring annual
inspections:      $15.50/quarter



               b.   Locations requiring bi-annual
inspections:   $7.75/quarter



               c.   Locations requiring tri-annual
inspections:   $4.00/quarter



            2.   Those locations which are currently charged
the fire sprinkler standby fee referenced in (c)(1)C. of this section shall
be exempt from the cross connection inspection fee.



      (2)   Sanitary Sewer System Rates and Charges.  Rates and
charges for service and use of the Sanitary Sewer System shall be as set
forth below, provided that such rates and charges may be revised from time to
time by ordinance of the City Council:



         A.   Facilities maintenance charges:



            000 to 100,000 gallons         -  1
REU   -$44.00/qtr



            100,000 gal. to 1 million gallons      -  5
REU   -$220.00/qtr



            1 million gal. to 2 million gallons      - 45
REU   -$1,980.00/qtr



            2 million gal. to 4 million gallons      - 90
REU   -$3,960.00/qtr



            4 million gal. to 8 million gallons      -180
REU   -$7,920.00/qtr



            8 million gal. to 10 million gallons      -360
REU   - $15,840.00/qtr



            10 million gallons +            -usage
divided by 22,000 gallons x $44.00/qtr/REU.



         B.   Commodity rate:  All sewage disposal service shall
be charged for on the basis of water consumed.  The commodity rate shall be
four dollars ($4.00) per thousand metered gallons.



         C.   Sewer tap fees:  City of Ionia - $1,500 minimum;
Easton Township - $1,000 minimum; Ionia Township - $1,000 minimum; Berlin
Township - $40.00 (inspection fee only - all properties have laterals).  All
costs shall be recovered, such as road cuts, tap costs, labor, etc.



         D.   Discharge permit application fees.  All discharge
permit applicants shall be assessed an application fee for reimbursement of
the City’s costs of reviewing and processing the application and for
administration of the permit.  For Non- Categorical permits, the application
fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200) per year multiplied by the number of
years of the permit.  For categorical permits, the application fee shall be
$500 per year multiplied by the number of years of the permit.



         E.   Pretreatment charges and fees.  All permitted
users shall be assessed a surcharge for reimbursement of actual costs to
operate the City’s pretreatment program at a rate of two hundred and twenty
dollars ($220) per quarter.



         F.   Extra strength surcharges.



            1.   Any discharge of BOD between 300 mg/L and 490
mg/L may be charged at a rate of up to $0.10 per pound.



            2.   Any discharge of suspended solid between 300
mg/L and 570 mg/L may be charged at a rate of up to $0.20 per pound.



            3.   Any discharge of total phosphorus between 5.0
mg/L and 10.0 mg/L may be charged at a rate of up to $4.40 per pound.



            4.   Any discharge of ammonia nitrogen between 20
mg/L and 52 mg/L may be charged at a rate of up to $0.20 per pound.



         G.   Other charges.  The City may adopt other
reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs for setting up
administering and operating the City’s pretreatment program, which may
include:



            1.   Fees for monitoring, inspection and
surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing an
industrial user’s discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by
industrial users.



            2.   Fees for reviewing and responding to
accidental discharge procedures and construction.



            3.   Fees for filing appeals and related legal
expenses.



            4.   Other fees as the City may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines
and penalties chargeable by the City.



      (3)   Deposits.



         A.    Property owners.  Property owners shall be exempt
from paying a utility deposit fee. In the case of delinquencies resulting in
shut-off, the delinquent amount shall be applied to the tax bill of the
property. Unpaid balances shall follow the property regardless of whether the
owner has changed at tax payment time. In addition, a property owner must
show his or her Homestead Affidavit Certificate issued on the property to
verify that he or she is indeed the property owner. No exception shall be
made to the affidavit.



         B.   Renters/business renters.  Renters shall be
assessed a fee of one hundred twenty-four dollars ($124.00), a four dollar
($4.00) processing cost and one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for a
deposit on utility service. Such one hundred twenty dollar ($120.00) fee
shall be retained by the City until the renter leaves the property. Such
deposits, when service is discontinued, shall be applied against any unpaid
balance. Any remaining amount shall be returned to the person making the
deposit.



         C.    Nonresidents. Nonresident property owners shall
not be assessed a deposit fee, provided the township for which they pay
property taxes has signed agreement on file with the City to bill any
delinquency against the taxes levied on the property. If such agreement is
not on file, a charge of one hundred twenty-four dollars ($124.00), (one
hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for deposit, and four dollars ($4.00) for
administration) shall be paid prior to issuance of any service. The four
dollar ($4.00) fee is not returnable. The one hundred twenty dollar ($120.00)
deposit shall be applied against the final bill on a property and any
remaining amount returned to the property owner. No deposit shall be returned
until a final reading/disconnect is issued on a property.



         D.    Nonresident renters.  Nonresident renters shall
be charged a fee of one hundred twenty-four dollars ($124.00), (one hundred
twenty dollars ($120.00) for deposit, and four dollars ($4.00) for
administration). Such deposit shall be retained by the City until service is
discontinued, at which time the deposit shall be placed against any
outstanding charges with the balance returned to the renter.



      (4)   Project Value. 



         A.   Based on the advice and determinations of the
City's engineers, the City Council finds that the City has made an investment
of one million two hundred ninety-two thousand and twenty-eight dollars and
sixty-four cents ($1,292,028.64) in the system, which includes accumulated
depreciation.  The City Council further finds that the current value of the
system shall, at any time, be equal to the then present value of one million
two hundred ninety-two thousand and twenty-eight dollars and sixty-four cents
($1,292,028.64) based on the annualized rate of inflation determined by the
United States Consumer Price Index.



         B.   As used in this chapter, “Current Project
Value” shall mean, as of any date of determination, the Project Value
(defined herein) increased to its then-present value.  The City’s engineer
shall calculate and determine Current Project Value by increasing each
component of Project Value to its value as of such date of determination,
using the annualized rate of inflation as determined by the United States
Consumer Price Index.



         C.   As used in this chapter, “Project Value” shall
mean the dollar amount of past investment in the System, taking into account
accumulated depreciation.  Project Value, as determined by the City's
engineer, is equal to one million two hundred ninety-two thousand and
twenty-eight dollars and sixty-four cents ($1,292,028.64).



   (d)   Storm Water Management Fees and Development Fees. The
following fee structure for implementation and enforcement of Sections
1043.06 et seq., are as follows:



      (1)   General storm water/drainage permit   $ 50.00



      (2)   Taps into the City storm water system   $500.00  for
11,000 square foot lot; larger lots subject to storm water ordinance and
applicable fees



      (3)   Large parcel storm water review fees (greater than 5
acres)



         A.   Storm water permit   $500.00



         B.   Initial deposit (for review by engineer,
calculations, etc.)   $1,000.00



            Note: When this amount is expired, no further action
will take place until another deposit is made. Funds pay for engineering,
attorney fees, public hearings, etc. incurred for the specific permit.



      (4)   Development reviews (Townships).



         A.   Utility site plan review permit fee:  $500.00



         B.   Initial deposit:  $2,000.00



         This fee and deposit does not include applicable tap fee. 
Chargeable items:



         C.   Staff time;



         D.   Engineering reviews by the City Engineer on water,
sewer, storm;



         E.   Any attorney fees associated with developments.



Note: The purpose of this fee is to cover the City’s costs in reviewing
development that will utilize the City’s water system as well as the
collective sanitary sewer collection system. Attorney fees, staff time, and
engineering studies shall be reimbursed to the City. At such point as the
deposit amount is used, no further work will progress until another deposit
is made to the City.  In no case shall the City or Townships subsidize such
reviews or conduct such reviews without a signed Utility Site Plan Review
Permit. In addition, all development shall be recorded in a data base format
that can be utilized by the City’s Geographic Information System. Failure
to provide data and as-builts in this format shall result in the City
performing the work and billing the developer/account. If sufficient funds do
not exist, final connections, taps and occupancy permits shall not be
granted.  No oral order, objection, claim, or notice by any party shall
affect or modify any of the requirements of the Municipal Standards or other
related ordinances and regulations.



(Res. 07-2002-01R. Passed 7-2-02; Res. 07-2003-03.  Passed 8-5- 03; Res.
04-27-04.  Passed 5-4-04; Res. 12-2004-03.  Passed 12-7-04; Res. Unno. 
Passed 4-19- 05; Ord. 433.  Passed 3-8-06; Ord. 438.  Passed 6-7-06; Ord.
451. Passed 6-5-07; Ord. 458.  Passed 6-3-08; Ord. 466.  Passed 6-2-09;
Ord. 477. Passed 6-1-10; Ord. 488.  Passed 6-7-11; Ord. 493.  Passed
6-5-12; Ord. 501.  Passed 6-4-13; Ord. 520.  Passed 6-2-15; Ord. 527. 
Passed 6-7-16; Ord. 533.  Passed 6-6-17; Ord. 537.  Passed 6-5-18.)



214.06  FEES IN THE PLANNING AND ZONING CODE.



   (a)   Fees for planning and zoning reviews are as follows:



      (1)   Planned Unit Development   $ 250.00



      (2)   Special Land Use      $ 250.00



      (3)   Site Condominium      $ 250.00



      (4)   Plat Development      $ 400.00, plus engineering
fees of 1% of total cost of the plat



      (5)   Site Plan Review      $ 250.00



      (6)   Zoning Variance      $ 250.00



      (7)   Re-Zoning         $ 370.00



      (8)   Street Vacating      $ 280.00



   (b)   Application fee for land division:



      (1)   Lot division/lot split      $75.00 plus $15 per
each resulting lot



      (2)   Lot reconfiguration      $75.00



      (3)   Lot combination      $75.00



   (c)   Medical marihuana facility operators:   $5,000.00



      (Res. 03-2001-04.  Passed 3-6-01; Res. Unno.  Passed 12-4-07;
Res. Unno.  Passed 3-5-19.)



214.07  FEES IN THE BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE.



(EDITOR’S NOTE: Section 214.07 was repealed in its entirety by Ord. 470,
passed 1-5-10)



214.08  FEES IN THE FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  At the time of the preparation of these Codified
Ordinances, no fees were provided for in the Fire Prevention Code.)



CHAPTER 216
Franchises



EDITOR'S NOTE:  This chapter has been established to provide a place for a
synopsis of ordinances relating to the granting of franchises by the City.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Franchises generally - see CHTR. Art. IX



   Public utility franchises - see CHTR. §§ 9.05 et seq.



   Purchases, contracts and sales - see ADM. Ch. 212



   Cable television franchises - see B.R. & T. Ch. 808









Ord. No.   Date   Description





361   12-7-93   A cable television franchise with C-TEC Cable Systems
of Michigan, Inc.





382   12-1-98   Consenting to merger of Cable Michigan, Inc., and
Avalon Cable of Michigan, Inc., and to transfer of control of the cable
television franchise granted by the City.





-  -   7-27-04   Extended franchise agreement with Charter
Communications.




TITLE FOUR – Legislation



   Chap. 220.   Council.



   Chap. 222.   Mayor.



   Chap. 224.   Ordinances and Resolutions.



Chapter 220
Council



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 220.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Council generally - see CHTR. Art. II



   Submission of capital program to - see CHTR. § 5.10(a)



   Action on capital programs - see CHTR. § 5.11



   Legislative body in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.3



Chapter 222
Mayor



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 222.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Mayor generally - see CHTR. § 2.03



   Mayors in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.3



   Powers and duties re emergency preparedness - see ADM. 256.03(a)



Chapter 224
Ordinances and Resolutions



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 224.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Ordinances generally - see CHTR. §§ 2.12 et seq.



   Revenue resolutions - see CHTR. § 5.06



   Ordinances for special assessments - see CHTR. § 11.2



   Ordinances in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.5b



   Enforcement - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Enactment - M.C.L.A. § 117.4j



   Codified Ordinances - see ADM Ch. 202



TITLE SIX - Administration



   Chap. 230.  Administration Generally.



   Chap. 232.  City Manager.



   Chap. 234.  City Clerk.



   Chap. 236.  City Attorney



   Chap. 238.  Treasurer.



   Chap. 240.  Assessor.



   Chap. 242.  Public Safety Department.



   Chap. 244.  Building Inspection Department.



   Chap. 246.  Recreation Department.



   Chap. 248.  Finance Department.



   Chap. 250.  Transportation Department.



   Chap. 252.  Public Works Department.



   Chap. 254.  Public Utilities Department.



   Chap. 256.  Department of Emergency Management (Repealed).



   Chap. 260.  Employees Generally.



CHAPTER 230
Administration Generally



230.01   Establishment of departments; heads; duties and scope.



230.02   Provisions relating to all departments.



230.03   Administrative manual.



230.04   Payment of monies.



230.05   Approval of legal documents.



230.06   Bonds.



230.07   Grants.



230.08   Vacancies in office.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Interference with administration of City - see CHTR. § 2.05(c)



   Fees in Administration Code - see ADM. 214.01



   Administration of General Offenses Code - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 604



230.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENTS; HEADS; DUTIES AND SCOPE.



   The City of Ionia shall be served by a number of departments which
shall be established and monitored by ordinance. Each department shall have a
head who shall report to the City Manager. From time to time the Council may
find need to change the duties or scope of the departments and has the
exclusive right to so do by ordinance.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



230.02  PROVISIONS RELATING TO ALL DEPARTMENTS.



   All departments of the City shall comply with the following:



   (a)   All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest
practices in their particular fields and shall inaugurate, with the approval
of the City Manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the
public.



   (b)   Reports of activities and compliance with goals and objectives
set by the Council and Mayor shall be provided on a regular basis.



   (c)   Each department head shall be responsible for the preservation
of all public records under his or her jurisdiction and shall provide a
system of filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports,
correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall
be destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and
approval of the City Manager.  Such data shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



230.03  ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL.



   The City Manager is authorized to prepare for adoption by Council an
administrative manual consistent with the provisions of the City Charter and
these Codified Ordinances. Policies affecting the operation of the services
of the City shall become part of this manual following adoption by the
Council.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



230.04  PAYMENT OF MONIES.



   All money belonging to the City shall be paid out upon the presentation
of a valid warrant approved by the City Manager and issued in accordance with
the Charter by checks drawn by the Finance Director and countersigned by the
Manager and Mayor.



230.05  APPROVAL OF LEGAL DOCUMENTS.



   The Mayor shall sign, the City Clerk shall attest to, the City Manager
shall approve as to substance, and the City Attorney shall approve as to
form, all contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the City, unless
otherwise provided for by law, the Charter, ordinance or these Codified
Ordinances.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



230.06  BONDS.



   (a)   Surety bonds, conditioned as required by the Charter, shall be
filed by the following officers of the City in not less than the amounts
indicated:



      (1)   Finance Director   $50,000.



      (2)   City Manager      $50,000.



      (3)   City Clerk      $50,000.



   (b)   All other officers of the City and employees (except the Mayor
and Council) shall file a blanket bond of five thousand dollars ($5,000).



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



   (c)   All bonds provided for herein shall be filed with the City
Attorney.



230.07  GRANTS.



   The City of Ionia shall have a person or agency responsible for
assisting, developing, and seeking State and Federal grants.  Such grants
shall be designed to assist the City in achieving its long-range goals of
economic development, affordable housing, and property improvements.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



230.08  VACANCIES IN OFFICE.



   In case of vacancy in office or during the absence of any
administrative officer, the City Manager may designate an interim acting head
or perform personally the functions of the office, until such vacancy is
filled.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 232
City Manager



232.01   Establishment of office; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Manager generally - see CHTR. Art. III



   Direction of departments, offices and agencies - see CHTR. § 401(b)



   Changing salary or emoluments during term of office - see M.C.L.A.§
117.5



   Removal and replacement of street trees - see S.U. & P. S. 1024.04



232.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE; DUTIES. 



   There shall be a City office known as the office of City Manager.  The
City Manager shall supervise and coordinate the work of administrative
officers of the City of Ionia except those specifically provided for by
Charter.  The duties of the City Manager shall include, but not be limited
to:



   (a)   Appointment of department heads.  When necessary, the Manager
shall be authorized to hire, suspend and/or terminate personnel.  In
addition, the City Manager shall oversee the hiring and firing of all other
City personnel below the department head level.  The City Manager may
authorize department heads to act in his or her stead for the carrying out of
personnel policies, goals and objectives established by the City Council.



   (b)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the City, except for hospital and library functions
and except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law.



   (c)   Attend all City Council meetings.  The City Manager shall not
have the right to vote but may take part in the discussion at the meetings.



   (d)   See that all laws, provisions of the Charter, and acts of the
City Council subject to enforcement by the City Manager or by officers
subject to the Manager's direction and supervision are faithfully executed.



   (e)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the City Council.




   (f)   Submit to the City Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administration activities of the City as
of the end of each fiscal year.



   (g)   Make other reports as the City Council may require concerning
the operations of City departments, offices, and agencies subject to the City
Manager's direction and supervision.



   (h)   Keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial
condition and future needs of the City.



   (i)   Make recommendations to the City Council concerning the
affairs of the City.



   (j)   Provide staff support services for the Mayor and Council
members.



   (k)   Act as street administrator and grant contact person involving
infrastructure projects.



   (l)   Serve as the City representative in all labor negotiations and
disputes.



   (m)   Act as liaison with township, county, state and federal
officials concerning the affairs of the City.



   (n)   Ensure City compliance with all State and Federal laws as they
pertain to the Americans With Disabilities Act, environmental regulation,
affirmative action, equal opportunity employing, etc.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 234
City Clerk



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 234.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Clerk generally - see CHTR. § 2.08



   Filing charters or amendments thereto - see M.C.L.A. § 117.24



   Filing of initiative petitions - see M.C.L.A. § 117.25



   Apportionment of wards; copy of apportionment plan - see M.C.L.A. §
117.27a



Chapter 236
City Attorney



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 236.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Attorney generally - see CHTR. § 4.03(a)



   Legal advisor - see M.C.L.A. § 87.20



   Membership on Board of Election Commissioners - see M.C.L.A. § 168.25



   Duties re animals running at large - see M.C.L.A. §§ 433.53, 433.62



   Service of process - see M.C.L.A. § 600.1925



   Action re obscenity and sex offenses - see GEN. OFF. 654.09



Chapter 238
Treasurer



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 238.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   City Treasurer generally - see CHTR. § 4.03(b)



   Finance generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 9, §§ 1 et seq.



   Deposit of public funds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 129.11 et seq.



   Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 132.2, 133.6, 135.7



   Municipal Finance Act - see M.C.L.A. §§ 133.5, 133.6



   Collection of municipal income taxes - see M.C.L.A. § 141.671



   Public money - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.489 et seq.



Chapter 240
Assessor



240.01   Establishment of office; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Finance generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 9, §§ 1 et seq.



   City Assessor generally - see CHTR. § 4.03(c)



   Tax Assessors in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.3



   Deposit of public funds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 129.11 et seq.



   Muncipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 132.2, 133.6, 135.7



   Municipal Finance Act - see M.C.L.A. §§ 133.5, 133.6



   Public money - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.489 et seq.



240.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE; DUTIES.



   There shall be a City office known as the office of the Assessor.  The
Assessor shall coordinate the activities associated with property record
collection and computation.  The duties of the office of Assessor include:



   (a)   Assess all real and personal property as required by the State
and local laws.



   (b)   Compile, prepare, review and amend all records on a regular
basis to reflect the continuing valuation changes in the City of Ionia.



   (c)   Assist with the preparation of special assessment rolls, tax
increment financing plans, industrial tax abatements, and other documents as
may be required by the Mayor or Council.



   (d)   Provide all necessary reporting documents to the County
Equalization Department, State Tax Tribunal, and other agencies as required.



   (e)   Assist the Board of Review with evaluating property taxes and
keeping of records for the Board of Review.



   (f)   Assist other departments as needed or requested and seek
compliance with all other duties as contained in Act 2 of the Public Acts of
1969, as amended. 



(Ord 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 242
Public Safety Department



242.01   Establishment; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Firemen's Retirement System - see M.C.L.A. §§ 38.551 et seq.



   Arrests - see M.C.L.A. § 117.34



   Jurisdiction of police outside City limits - see M.C.L.A. § 117.34



   Borrowing money for fire protection - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4a



   Fire stations - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4e



   Action re obscenity and sex offenses - see GEN. OFF. 654.01



   Authority re transient merchants - see B.R. & T. 868.09(c)



242.01  ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.



   (a)   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Department
of Public Safety. The duties of the Department shall be to:



      (1)   Plan, coordinate and effect the provision of fire and
police services to the residents of the City.



      (2)   Enforce all applicable State, Federal and local statutes.



      (3)   Process and serve all warrants and subpoenas as directed
by the court.



      (4)   Review all peddler and tax license applications.



      (5)   Develop and establish a fire suppression system.



      (6)   Develop and maintain planning for major disturbances,
natural disasters, or any other emergency situation.



      (7)   Develop and implement fire and crime prevention programs.



      (8)   Investigate all criminal activity as well as fire
situations to determine illegal activity or to determine cause.



      (9)   Effect hazardous materials response systems to deal with
such materials within the City.



   (b)   Persons employed by the Public Safety Department shall meet
all applicable State and Federal regulations as they pertain to training,
ability and personal behavior.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 244
Building Inspection Department



244.01   Establishment; duties.



244.02   Community Development Director as Building Inspector.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Building Code in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.3



   Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds - see
M.C.L.A. § 117.4j



   State Construction Code - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.



   Building permits - see ADM. 214.07(a); P. & Z. 1242.05, 1242.06; B. &
H. Ch. 1450



   Community Development Department - see ADM. Ch. 258



244.01  ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Building Inspection
Department, which shall have the following duties:



   (a)   Enforcement of the codes of the City, the State of Michigan
and the Federal government, as they relate to all buildings in the City.



   (b)   Review of all plans and documents for construction in the City.



   (c)   Issue all building permits for the City, after first ensuring
that all applicable codes are addressed.  Such permits shall be compiled for
tax purposes as well as for a permanent record of improvements.



   (d)   Issue all orders to remove hazardous structures, to stop
building if it is in violation of any applicable standard and to adhere to
applicable codes of the City.



   (e)   Inspect all rental properties to ensure that they meet minimum
standards as set by various government agencies.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



244.02  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR AS BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Community Development Director shall serve as the Building
Inspector of the City.



Chapter 246
Recreation Department



246.01   Establishment; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Parks generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, § 23



   Recreation facilities in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4e



   Sale of park property - see M.C.L.A. § 117.5



   Misapplication of park funds - see M.C.L.A. § 123.67



246.01  ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Recreation
Department, which shall have the following duties:



   (a)   Provision of recreational activities for residents of all ages.



   (b)   Planning, development and maintenance of all recreational
areas as created by the Council.



   (c)   Planning, development and implementation of a five-year plan
of programming and park improvements.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 248
Finance Department



248.01   Establishment; Director; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Finance generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 9, §§ 1 et seq.



   Financial procedures - see CHTR. Art. V



   Borrowing - see CHTR. Art. X



   Tax Assessors in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.3



   Deposit of public funds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 129.11 et seq.



   Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 132.2, 133.6, 135.7



   Municipal Finance Act - see M.C.L.A. §§ 133.5, 133.6



   Collection of municipal income taxes - see M.C.L.A. § 141.671



   Public money - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.489 et seq.



248.01  ESTABLISHMENT; DIRECTOR; DUTIES.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Finance Department,
the head of which shall be the Director of Finance.  The duties of the
Finance Department shall include:



   (a)   Collecting, investing and documenting all monetary actions of
the City.



   (b)   Ensuring the application of all local, State and Federal laws
as they relate to the finances of the City.



   (c)   Supervising of the City computer system as well as the
development of long-range planning for the finances of the City.



   (d)   Assisting the City Manager with the preparation of the annual
budget as well as providing regular updates to the Manager, Council and the
Mayor.



   (e)   Assisting, evaluating and implementing money saving controls
for the City.



   (f)   Maintaining all investments for the City under policies
established by the City Council.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 250
Transportation Department



250.01   Establishment; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Transportation facilities in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§
117.4f, 117.4g



   Operation of transportation system beyond city limits - see M.C.L.A.
§§ 123.701 et seq.



   Mass transportation system - see M.C.L.A. §§ 124.351 et seq.



250.01  ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Transportation
Department, whose function shall be to provide bus services to the residents
of the City.  The transportation system shall provide service to all
residents regardless of race, creed, sex or ability to pay.  In addition,
the Department shall be charged with the planning and implementation of
transportation services for the City as well as other agencies wishing to
contract with the City for such services.  The Department is charged with
providing input to the City Manager and Council for financing a
transportation program.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 252
Public Works Department



252.01   Establishment; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4d et seq.



   Approval of public works projects by Planning Commission - see M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.39, 125.40



   Approval of public works by Planning Commission and Council – see P.
& Z. 1202.08



252.01  ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Public Works
Department, which shall be charged with the following duties:



   (a)   Maintenance and improvement of all roadways, sidewalks and
other surfaces used for transportation located in the public rights-of-way.



   (b)   Maintenance, in coordination with the Recreation Department,
of all City parks and cemeteries.



   (c)   Development of a five-year plan for improvement of all City
utility lines and the responsibility of carrying out the same as directed.



   (d)   Maintenance, planning and planting of all trees in the public
rights-of-way and on City properties.



   (e)   Collection and removal of all tree limbs, brush and leaves as
directed by the Manager and Council.



   (f)   Development and implementation of a five-year plan for the
maintenance and replacement of City vehicles.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 254
Public Utilities Department



254.01   Establishment; duties.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Utilities generally - see CHTR. Art. IX



   Utility fees - see ADM. 214.05



   Utility poles - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.07



   Utilities in streets - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.19



   Tree removal for line clearance - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.05



254.01  ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Public Utilities
Department, which shall have the following responsibilities:



   (a)   Developing and maintaining all City water source areas.



   (b)   Developing and maintaining all City wastewater treatment
facilities.



   (c)   Developing and maintaining all City storm water treatments as
may be required.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



CHAPTER 256
Department of Emergency Management (Repealed)



EDITOR'S NOTE: This chapter, formerly titled "Department of Emergency
Preparedness" was re-titled "Department of Emergency Management" and
re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 2002-02, passed January 8, 2002. This
chapter was subsequently repealed by Ordinance 531, passed April 11, 2017.



CHAPTER 258
Community Development Department



258.01   Establishment; composition.



258.02   Responsibilities of Director.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4d et seq.



   Community planners - see M.C.L.A. §§ 338.1351 et seq.



   Director as Building Inspector - see ADM. 244.02



   Authority of Director re Zoning Code - see P. & Z. 1242.03, 1242.04



258.01  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Community
Development Department, consisting of a Community Development Director, to be
appointed by the City Manager, and such other employees as Council shall from
time to time determine.



258.02  RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTOR.



   The Community Development Director shall carry out the responsibilities
of the following officers of the City:



   (a)   The Building Inspector;



   (b)   The Zoning Administrator;



   (c)   The Planning Director;



   (d)   The Code Enforcement Officer;



   (e)   The Rental Inspection Officer.



CHAPTER 260
Employees Generally



EDITOR'S NOTE:  Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to
compensation and benefits are not codified.  Copies of the latest relevant
legislation may be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.



Resolution 12-2002-01, passed December 2, 2002, approved the General City
Policy Manual, the amendment to the City Safety Policy for Benzene, the
amendment to the Personnel Policy for Mail, and the amendment to the City
Personnel Policy for Insurance. Copies of the latest relevant policies may be
obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.



260.01   Adoption of Michigan Employees Retirement System.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Personnel system - see CHTR. §§ 4.02, 13.01(c)



   Merit principle and system - see CHTR. §§ 4.02(a), 4.02(b)



   Municipal Employees Retirement System - see M.C.L.A.  §§ 38.601 et
seq.



   Compensation and salaries in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A.  §§
117.3, 117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33



   Civil service - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Recall - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Shortening or extending term of office - see M.C.L.A.  § 117.5



260.01  ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   There is hereby adopted the Michigan Employee Retirement System (MERS)
for all of the City's covered employees.  Covered employees shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the MERS Board.  Benefits to be provided
employees shall be a negotiable item in contract talks and shall be in
accordance with plans offered by the MERS program.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Authorities



   Chap. 270.  City Planning Commission.



   Chap. 272.  Board of Zoning Appeals.



   Chap. 274.  Board of Ethics.



   Chap. 276.  Board of Review.



   Chap. 278.  City Housing Commission.



   Chap. 280.  Local Officers Compensation Commission.



   Chap. 282.  Downtown Development Authority.



   Chap. 284.  Housing Board of Appeals.



   Chap. 286.  Local Development Finance Authority.



   Chap. 288.  Parks and Recreation Commission.



CHAPTER 270
City Planning Commission



EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the City Planning Commission are
codified in Chapter 1220 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.



CHAPTER 272
Board of Zoning Appeals



EDITOR'S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Board of Zoning Appeals are
codified in Chapter 1244 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.



Chapter 274
Board of Ethics



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 274.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Conflicts of interest generally - see CHTR. § 7.01(a)



   Board of Ethics - see CHTR. § 7.01(b)



   Conflicts of interest with City Housing Commission members - see ADM.
278.05



Chapter 276
Board of Review



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 276.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Real Estate Tax Board of Review - see CHTR. §§ 4.03(d), 8.03



   Income Tax Board of Review - see B.R. & T. 880.34, 880.45



Chapter 278
City Housing Commission



278.01   Continuation.



278.02   Membership; compensation; expenses.



278.03   Meetings; rules; record; quorum; officers and employees.



278.04   Powers and duties.



278.05   Interest of members or employees in contracts.



278.06   Annual report.



278.07   Deeds, contracts, leases and purchases.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Dilapidation and nuisances - see CHTR. § 12.02



   Municipal housing commissions - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.653 et seq.



   Adoption, promulgation and publication of rules - see M.C.L.A. §
125.694b



   Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects - see M.C.L.A. §§
125.731 et seq.



   Fair housing - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 624



278.01  CONTINUATION.



   The City Housing Commission, heretofore established pursuant to Act 18
of the Public Acts of 1933 (Ex. Sess.), as amended, is hereby continued. 



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



278.02  MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION; EXPENSES.



   In accordance with Section 4 of Act 18 of the Public Acts of 1933 (Ex.
Sess.), as amended, the City Housing Commission shall consist of five members
to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Members
are not required to be residents of the City. Each of said members shall
serve for a term of five years and until his or her successor shall be
appointed for staggered terms. Members shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 441.  Passed 12-5-06.)



278.03  MEETINGS; RULES; RECORD; QUORUM; OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   The City Housing Commission shall meet at regular intervals, said
meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and shall
keep a record of the proceedings. Three members shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. A President and Vice-President shall be elected
by the Commission. The Commission may appoint a Director who may also serve
as Secretary, and such other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The
Commission shall prescribe the duties of all of its officers and employees
and may, fix their compensation. The Commission may, from time to time as
necessary, employ engineers, architects and consultants.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-19-94; Ord. 441.  Passed 12-5-06.)



278.04  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Housing Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (a)   To determine in what areas of the City it is necessary to
provide proper sanitary housing facilities for families of low income and for
the elimination of housing conditions which are detrimental to the public
peace, health, safety, morals and/or welfare.



   (b)   To purchase, lease, sell, exchange, transfer, assign and
mortgage any property, real or personal, or any interest herein, or acquire
the same by gift, bequest or under the power of eminent domain; to own, hold,
clear and improve property; to engage in or to contract for the design and
construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, extension, and/or
repair of any housing project or projects or parts thereof; to lease and/or
operate any housing project or projects.



   (c)   To control and supervise all parks and playgrounds forming a
part of such housing development, but may contract with existing departments
of the City for operation or maintenance of either or both.



   (d)   To establish and revise rents of any housing project or
projects, but shall rent all property for such sums as will make them
self-supporting, including all charges for maintenance and operation, for
principal and interest on loans and bonds, and for taxes.



   (e)   To rent only to such tenants as are unable to pay for more
expensive housing accommodations.



   (f)   To call upon other City departments for assistance in the
performance of its duties, but said departments shall be reimbursed for any
added expense incurred therefor.



   (g)   Such other powers relating to said housing facilities project
as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council or as may
be necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 441.  Passed 12-5-06.)



278.05  INTEREST OF MEMBERS OR EMPLOYEES IN CONTRACTS.



   No member of the City Housing Commission or any of its officers or
employees shall have any interest directly or indirectly in any contract for
property, materials or services to be acquired by said Commission.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



278.06  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The City Housing Commission shall make an annual report of its
activities to the City Council and shall make such other reports as the City
Manager may from time to time require.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



278.07  DEEDS, CONTRACTS, LEASES AND PURCHASES.



   All deeds, contracts, leases or purchases entered into by the Housing
Commission shall be in the name of the Housing Commission.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 441.  Passed 12-5-06.)



Chapter 280
Local Officers Compensation Commission



280.01   Establishment.



280.02   Purpose.



280.03   Membership.



280.04   Terms of office.



280.05   Filling of vacancies.



280.06   Compensation; expenses.



280.07   Organization; meetings.



280.08   Determination of salaries.



280.09   Precedence of chapter.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Compensation of Mayor and Council - see CHTR. § 2.04



   Compensation and salaries in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§
117.3, 117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33



280.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established, in and for the City, a Local Officer's
Compensation Commission for the City pursuant to Act 8 of the Public Acts of
1972, as amended, being Section 5C of Section 117.5 of the Compiled Laws of
1948, as amended, State of Michigan.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Local Officers Compensation Commission is to
determine the salaries of all local elected officials.  The Commission may
at the request of the Mayor act as an advisory commission in recommending
salaries for the appointed officers of the City of Ionia. 



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.03  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Commission shall consist of five members, who are registered
electors of the City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by a majority of the City Council.  However, no member or
employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of
government or member of the immediate family of such member or employee shall
be eligible to be a member of the Commission.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.04  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The members of the Local Officers Compensation Commission shall be
initially appointed as follows:



   One member for a term of five years;



   One member for a term of four years;



   One member for a term of three years;



   One member for a term of two years;



   One member for a term of one year.



   Annually, thereafter, the Mayor, with the approval of the Council,
shall appoint one member of said Commission for a term of five years. 
Members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.05  FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   Vacancies occasioned by removals, resignations or otherwise, shall be
reported to the City Council and shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.06  COMPENSATION; EXPENSES.



   The members of the Local Officers Compensation Commission shall receive
no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.07  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.



   Immediately after their appointment, the members of the Local Officers
Compensation Commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their
members Chairperson and electing such other officers as they may deem
necessary.  They shall also have the power to adopt such by-laws and
regulations as they deem necessary for the carrying on of the business of the
Commission. 



   A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for conducting its business.  However, the Commission shall take no action
or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members
appointed and serving on the Commission.



   The Commission shall meet for not more than fifteen session days in
1973 and every odd-numbered year thereafter.  A "session day" means any
calendar day in which the Commission meets and a quorum is present.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.08  DETERMINATION OF SALARIES.



   The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall have the power to and
shall determine the salaries of all elected officials of the City.  The
determination of said salaries shall become effective thirty days after being
filed with the City Clerk, unless rejected by a vote of two-thirds of the
City Council.  In case of such rejection, the existing salary shall
prevail.  The Commission shall make its determination within forty-five
calendar days of its first meeting.



   The Commission shall not be responsible for review, approval or
accounting for routine expense allowances or other expenses paid to elected
officials in addition to salary.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



280.09  PRECEDENCE OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall supersede and take precedence over all existing
Charter provisions and other provisions of the Codified Ordinances relating
to either the fixing of salaries of elected officials and/or establishing a
procedure for the fixing of said salaries.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



Chapter 282
Downtown Development Authority



282.01   Determination of necessity.



282.02   Establishment; powers, duties and authority; boundaries.



282.03   Downtown Development Authority Board.



282.04   Director; bond.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Municipal bonds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4g,
117.5, 117.14a, 117.35a



   Improvements in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4d et seq.



   Business area redevelopment projects - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.981 et seq.



   Department of Economic Expansion - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1201 et seq.



   Economic Expansion Council - see M.C.L.A. § 125.1207



   Regional Economic Development Commission - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1231
et seq.



   Economic development corporations - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1601 et seq.



   Downtown Development Authority - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 et seq.



282.01  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.



   It is hereby determined to be necessary and in the best interests of
the public to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax
valuation where possible in the Business District of the City, to eliminate
the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth, by
establishing and providing for the operation of the City of Ionia Downtown
Development Authority, pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as
amended.



(Ord. 283.  Passed 5-5-81.)



282.02  ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY; BOUNDARIES.



   The City of Ionia Downtown Development Authority is hereby established
pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended. The Authority
shall have all powers, duties and authority prescribed in said Act, as the
same may from time to time be amended. The Authority's boundaries within the
City shall be as follows:



   Being a part of the City of Ionia, Michigan described as:  Commencing
at the Northeast corner of Lot 2 of Smiths Addition to the City of Ionia for
the place of beginning; thence West to the Northwest corner thence South
along the East line of N. State Rd. to the centerline of vacated Mills St.,
thence East along the centerline of Mills St. to a point in line with the
West line of Lot 10 of Mills Second Addition; thence South to the Southwest
corner of Lot 10; thence East to a point 130 ft. West of the West line of
Hall St.; thence North 128 ft.; thence West 43.25 ft. to the centerline of
Mills St. (as vacated); thence North along the centerline of the N-S Mills
St. to the intersection of the E-W vacated Mills St.; thence Northwest to a
point which is 378 ft. North of the intersection of the South line of Section
18, T7N, R6W and 11.5 Rods West of the West line of Hall St.; thence East
parallel to the South line of said Section 18 to a point on the centerline of
Hall St., thence South along the centerline of Hall St. to the centerline of
Lincoln Ave. (State Hwy. M-21); thence East along the centerline of Lincoln
Ave. to the centerline of Dexter St. (State Hwy. M-66); thence South along
the centerline of Dexter St. to a point in line with the North line of Lot
142 of Supervisor Voelker's Add.; thence West along the North line of Lot 142
to the Northwest corner; thence South along the West line of Lots 142, 140
and 139 to a point on the South line of Lot Line of Lot 139, said point being
205 ft. West of the Southeast corner of Lot 139; thence South along the West
line of Lot 135 to the Southwest corner; thence East along the South line of
Lot 135 a distance of 50 ft.; thence South to a point on the South line of
Lot 134 at a point 50 ft. East of the Southwest corner; thence South 26 ft.;
thence West 50 ft. to a point on the West line of Lot 131; thence South along
the West line of Lots 131 and 130 to the Southwest corner of Lot 130; thence
East along the South line of Lot 130 to a point 132 ft. West of the Southeast
corner of said Lot 130; thence North parallel with the East line of Lot 130
to a point 13 ft. South of the North line of Lot 130; thence East parallel
with the North line of Lot 130 to the East Line of Lot 130; thence South
along the East lines of Lots 130, 126, 125 and 124 of Supervisor Voelker's
Addition to the Northeast corner of Lot 1 of Lovell and Dye's Addition;
thence South along the East line of Lot 1 to the Northeast corner of Lot 8;
thence West to the Northwest corner of Lot 8; thence South along the West
line of Lot 8 to a point 1/2 way between the Northwest and the Southwest
corner of said Lot 8; thence East 14 ft; thence South parallel with the West
line of Lot 8 to a point on the South line of Lot 8; thence South to the
Northwest corner of Lot 9; thence South along the West line of Lots 9 and 10
to a point 58 ft. North of the Southwest corner of Lot 10; thence West
parallel with the South line of Lot 11 to a point on the West line of Lot 11;
thence South to the Southwest corner of Lot 11; thence East to the Southeast
corner of Lot 11; thence South along the West line of Lot 19 extended to the
centerline of Main St.; thence West along the centerline of Main St. to a
point in line with the East line of Lot 24 of Supervisor Voelker's Addition;
thence South along the East line of Lot 24 to a point 114.5 feet South of the
Northeast corner of said Lot 24; thence West parallel to the North line of
Lot 24 to a point 7 ft. 8 inches West of the West line of Lot 24; thence
North parallel with the West line of Lot 24 to the centerline of West Main
St.; thence West along the centerline of West Main St. to a point in line
with the East line of Lot 29 of Supervisor Voelker's Addition; thence South
along the East line of Lot 29 to a point 25 ft. North of the Southeast corner
of said Lot 29; thence West parallel to the South line of Lot 29 to a point
on the West line of Lot 29; thence North along the West line of Lot 29 to the
Southeast corner of Lot 31; thence West along the South line of Lots 31 and
32 to the Southwest Corner of Lot 32; thence North along the West line of Lot
32 to the centerline of W. Main St.; thence West along the centerline of West
Main St. to a point in line with the East line of Lot 252 of Supervisor
Voelker's Addition; thence South to the Southeast corner of Lot 252; thence
West to the Southwest corner of said Lot 252; thence South along the East
line of Lot 253 to the Southeast corner; thence West to the Southwest corner
of said Lot 253; thence North along the West line of Lot 253 to a point in
the centerline of West Main St.; thence West along the centerline of West
Main St. to a point in line with a point on the North line of Lot 256, said
point being 40.5 ft. East of the Northwest corner; thence South parallel with
the West line of 256 to the South line thereof; thence West along the South
line of Lot 256 and part of Lot 257 to a point 8 ft. 5 inches East of the
Southwest corner of Lot 257; thence North parallel with the West line of Lot
257 to the centerline of West Main St.; thence West along the centerline of
West Main St. to a point in line with a point on the North line of Lot 258
described as being 40 ft. 8 inches East of the Northwest corner of Lot 258;
thence South parallel with the West line of Lot 258 to the South line of Lot
258; thence West along the South line of Lots 260, 258 and 259 to a point 8
ft. 5 inches West of the Southwest corner of Lot 258; thence North parallel
with the West line of Lot 258 to a point on the centerline of West Main St.;
then West along the centerline of West Main St. to a point in line with the
East line of Lot 260; thence South to the Southeast corner of Lot 260; thence
West along the South Line of Supervisor Voelker's Addition and the
continuation thereof to a point on the East line of Lot 261; thence South 171
ft. along the East line of Lot 261 to the Southeast corner of Lot 261; thence
West 79.5 ft. along the South line of Lots 261 and 262 to the Southwest
corner of Lot 262; thence South along the East line of Lot 263 and the
continuation of the East line of Lot 263 to the South line of the Central
Michigan Railroad Main track; thence Westerly along the South line of the
C.M.R.R. to a point on the West line of land owned by the Ionia Free Fair
Association; thence South along the West line of land owned by the Ionia Free
Fair Association to the Center of the Grand River; thence Easterly along the
meandering Center of the Grand River and/or the North bank of the Grand
River, as the case may be, to the West bank of Prairie Creek; thence North
along the West bank of Prairie Creek to the centerline of the Central
Michigan Railroad; thence West along the centerline of the Central Michigan
Railroad to a point which is 50 feet South of the following described
point:  Commence at a point on the West line Section 21, T7N, R6W and the
centerline of East Main St., thence, East along the centerline of East Main
St., a distance of 1,240 ft; thence South 01°33' East 486.29 ft. to the
point intended to describe; thence North 50 feet to the North line of the
Central Michigan Railroad Main track; thence North 01°33' West 486.29 ft. to
a point on the centerline of East Main St.; thence East along the centerline
of Main St. to a point described as follows:  Commence at the intersection
of Beardsley Rd. and East Main St.; thence North 75°58'00" East 562.45 ft.
along the centerline of East Main St. to a point of curvature of a curve to
the right, said curve having a radius of 404.44 ft.; thence South 82°45'34"
East 210.01 ft. on a long chord of said curve to a point on the centerline of
East Main St.; thence East along the centerline of East Main St. 30.22 ft. to
the point intending to describe; thence North 11°12'50" East 183.89 ft.;
thence North 28°55'50" East 247.42 ft.; thence South 70°51'30" East 167.53
ft. to the West bank of Prairie Creek; thence Northerly along the West bank
of Prairie Creek to the North-South 1/4 line of Section 16, T7N, R6W, Ionia
Township; thence North 02°25'52" West 697.94 ft.; thence South 87°58'49"
West 1,388.80 ft. along the South line of the North 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of Sec.
16 to a point on the centerline of Bluewater Highway (M-21); thence Westerly
along the centerline of said Highway to a point on the West line of Section
16, T7N, R6W; thence South 01°03'25" West 658.62 ft. to the Southwest corner
of Section 16; thence North 78°32'31" East 33.19 ft.; thence South
05°09'52" East 326.74 ft. on the East line of Third St.; thence North
78°32'31" East 495.19 ft. to the centerline of Second St. (vacated); thence
South 05°09'52" East 165.19 ft. on the centerline of Second St. (vacated);
then North 78°32'31" East 599 ft. to the centerline of Beardsley Rd.; thence
South along the centerline of Beardsley Rd. to a point in line with the North
line of Lot 64 of the Places Addition to Prairie Creek; thence West along the
North line of Lots 64, 63, 62 and 61 to the Northwest corner of Lot 61;
thence South along the Eastline of Lots 61 and 4 to the centerline of East
Main St.; thence West along the centerline of East Main St. to a point which
is 559.57 ft. Easterly of the West line of Section 21 as measured along the
centerline of East Main St.; thence South 11°49' East 165 ft; thence South
78°11' West 247.5 ft.; thence North 11°49' West 165 ft. to the centerline
of E. Main St.; thence South 78°11' West along the centerline of East Main
St. to the West line of Section 21, T7N, R6W; thence South 00°06' East 990
ft. along the West line of Section 21; thence South 70°36' West 801.27 ft.;
thence North 545.6 ft. to a point on the South line of the Central Michigan
Railroad Main track; thence South 84°49' West 574.34 ft. along the South
line of said Railroad; thence South 86°31' West on the South line of the
Central Michigan Railroad to a point described as:  Commencing at the
Southeast corner of Southwest 1/4 of Northeast 1/4 of Section 20, T7N, R6W;
thence North 83°30' West 1,038.5 ft.; thence North 01°30' East 792.2 ft. to
the point intending to describe; thence South 01°30' West 792.2 ft.; thence
South 83°30' East 1,038.5 ft. to the Southeast corner of the Southwest 1/4
of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 20; T7N, R6W; thence South on the East line
of the Southwest quarter of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 20 to the North line
of the former Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad Main line; thence West along said
North line to a point on the North-South 1/4 line of Section 20, T7N, R6W;
thence North along said line to the Northeast corner of Lot 58 of Merritt's
Addition; thence West along the North line of Lots 58, 59 and 60 to the
Northwest corner of Lot 60; thence South along the West line of Lot 60 to the
Southwest corner; thence West to the Southeast corner of Lot 62; thence North
along the West line of Lot 62 to the Northeast corner; thence West to the
Northwest corner of Lot 62; thence South to the Southwest corner; thence
Southwesterly to the Northeast corner of Lot 90; thence South along the West
line of Lots 90 and 101 to the Southwest corner of Lot 101; thence West along
the South line of Lots 102, 103 and continuing across Cleveland St. to the
Southeast corner of Lot 104 of Merritt's Addition; thence North to the
Northeast corner of Lot 104; thence West along the North line of Lots 104,
105, 106, 107, 108, 109 and 110 to the Northeast corner of Lot 111; thence
South on the East line of Lot 111, 101 ft.; thence South 89°55'30" East
17.75 ft.; thence South parallel with the East line of Lots 111 and 118, a
distance of 188 ft. to the North line of the C. & O. Railroad R/W; thence
North 71°55'24" West along the North line of said R/W to a point described
as 80 ft. West of and parallel to the East line of Lot 1 of Supervisor
Inman's Addition; thence North parallel with and 80 ft. West of the East line
of said Lot 1 to a point on the South line of Lot 3 of Supervisor Inman's
Addition; thence West along the South line of Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10 to
the Southeast corner of Lot 11; thence North along the East line of Lot 11 to
a point which is 105 ft. South of the Northeast corner of Lot 11; thence West
parallel to the North Line of Lot 11 to the centerline of Mill St.; thence
North along the centerline of Mill St. to a point on the South line of the
Central Michigan Railroad Main Line; thence West along said South line of
said Railroad to a point to the centerline of S. Jackson St.; thence North
along said S. Jackson St. centerline to the intersection of E. Adams St.;
thence West along the centerline of Adams St. to a point due North of the
West line of Lot 43 of Supervisor Covert's Addition; thence South to and
along the West line of Lot 43 extended South to the North line of the Central
Michigan Railroad Main Line; thence East along the North line of the Central
Michigan Railroad to a point which is in line with the Northerly continuation
of the East line of Lot 30 of Supervisor Hanigan and Baxter's Addition;
thence South to and along the East line of Lot said 30 to the Southeast
corner of Lot 30; thence West to the Southwest corner of said Lot; thence
North along the West line of Lot 30 to the Southeast corner of Lot 1 of Colby
and Peck's addition; thence West along the South line of Lot 1 to a point 70
feet East of the Southwest corner of Lot 1; thence North parallel with the
West line of Lot 1 to the North line of Lot 1; thence West in line with the
North line of Lot 1 to the centerline of Welton St.; thence South along the
centerline of Welton St. to a point in line with the continuation of the
North line of Lot 6 of Colby and Peck's Addition; thence West along said line
to the Northwest corner of Lot 6; thence South along the West line of Lot 6
and the East line of Lot 24 of Supervisor Hanigan and Baxter's Addition to
the Southeast corner of Lot 24; thence West to the Southeast corner of Lot 22
of said Addition; thence North to the Northeast corner of Lot 22; thence West
along the North line of Lot 22 and 12 to the Northwest corner of Lot 12 of
Supervisor Hanigan and Baxter's Addition; thence North along the West line of
Lot 60 of Lovell's Addition and the continuation of said line to the South
line of Lot 43 of Lovell's Addition, thence East along the South line of Lots
43, 44 and 45 to the West line of Colby St.; thence North in line with the
West line of Colby St. extended to the North line of the Central Michigan
Railroad line; thence West along the North line of the Railroad to the East
line of Hudson St.; thence North along the East line of Hudson St. to the
centerline of East Adams St.; thence East along the centerline of Adams St.
to a point in line with the Southerly continuation of a line which is
parallel with and 80 ft. East of the West line of Lot 5 of Lovell's Addition;
thence North parallel with the West line of Lot 5 to a point 113 ft. North of
the South line of Lot 5; thence East 51 ft.; thence South parallel with the
West line of Lot 5 and the continuation thereof to the centerline of East
Adams St.; thence East along the centerline of Adams St. to the intersection
of the centerline of Lovell's Lane (also known as Webber Ct.) thence North
along the centerline of Lovell's Lane to the centerline of East Main St.;
thence West along the centerline of East Main St. to the intersection of the
centerline of Library St.; thence North along the centerline of Library St.
to the centerline of East Washington St.; thence West along the centerline of
Washington St. to a point in line with the East line of Lot 15 of Hall's
Addition; thence North along the East line of Lot 15 to a point which is
midway between the Northeast corner and the Southeast corner thereof; thence
West in line with a point which is midway between the Northwest corner and
the Southwest corner of Lot 15 to a point 115 ft. East of the West line of
Lot 15; thence South 74 ft. parallel with the West line of Lot 15; thence
West 115 ft. to a point on the West line of Lot 15; thence North along the
East line of Lot 65 of Supervisor Carten's Addition to the Northeast corner
thereof; thence West to the Northwest corner of Lot 65; thence South along
the West line of Lot 65 to a point 123.75 ft. North of the North line of W.
Washington St.; thence West 8.25 ft.; thence South 33 ft.; thence West
parallel with the North line of West Washington St. to a point midway between
the East and West line of Lot 65 of the Original Town Plat; thence South on
the centerline of Lot 65 and the continuation thereof to the centerline of W.
Washington St.; thence West to the West line of Dye St.; thence North along
the West line of Dye St and the East line of Lot 1 of Supervisor Hutchin's
Addition to a point 94.5 feet South of the Northeast corner of Lot 1; thence
West parallel with the North line of Lot 1 to the East line of Lot 2; thence
North on the East lines of Lots 2 and 6 and the continuation thereof to the
centerline of High St.; thence West along the centerline of High St. to a
point in line with the East line of Lot 12 of Supervisor Hutchin's Addition;
thence North to and along the East lines of Lots 12, 13, 14, 15, 20 and 21 to
the Northeast corner of Lot 21; thence West to the Northwest corner of Lot
21; thence North to the Southwest corner of Lot 25; thence East to the
Southeast corner of Lot 25; thence North on the East line of Lot 25, 60.5
ft.; thence N. 84° East 97.5 ft.; thence Northeasterly to a point on the
East line of Lot 24 of Supervisor Hutchin's Addition, said point being 110
ft. North of the Southeast corner of Lot 24; thence North along the East line
of Lot 24 to the Southwest corner of Lot 22; thence East to the Southeast
corner of Lot 22 of Supervisor Amphlett's Subdivision; thence North along the
East line of Lot 22 a distance of 93.5 ft. M. or L.; thence East to the
Southwest corner of Lot 6 of Supervisor Amphlett's Subdivision; thence East
along the South line of Lot 6 to a point which is 90 ft. West of the
Southeast corner of Lot 6; thence North 10 ft.; thence East 90 ft. parallel
with the South line of Lot 6 to the East line thereof; thence North along the
East line of Lots 6, 7, 8, and 9 to the Southeast corner of Lot 10; thence
West to the Southwest corner; thence North along the West line of Lot 10 to
the centerline of Lincoln Ave. (M-21); thence East along Lincoln Ave.
centerline to a point which is in line with the East line of the West 65 ft.
of Lot 8 of C. Lovell's Addition; thence North to a point on the South line
of Lot 8 at a point 65 ft. East of the Southwest corner of Lot 8; thence
North parallel to the West line of Lot 8 to the North line of Lot 8; thence
West along the North line of Lots 8, 9 and 10 to the Northwest corner of Lot
10; thence South along the West line of Lot 10 to a point which is 32 Rods
North of the centerline of Lincoln Ave.; thence West parallel with the
centerline of Lincoln Ave. to the Northeast corner of Lot 1 of Wetterling's
Addition; thence West to the Northwest corner of Lot 1; thence South along
the West line of Lot 1 to the Southwest corner thereof; thence Westerly to a
point on the West line of Hall St., said point being 398 ft. North of the
South line of Section 18, T7N, R6W; thence West parallel with the South line
of Section 18 a distance of 11.5 Rods; thence North parallel with the West
line of Hall St. to a point on the South line of Lot 11 of Smith's Addition;
thence West along the South lines of Lots 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, and 3 to
the Southwest corner of Lot 3; thence North along the West line of Lot 3 to
the Place of Beginning.



EXCEPTING that part of the above described land lying East of the Westline of
Prairie Creek and located in the Southwest corner of Section 16, T7N, R6W.



(Ord. 283.  Passed 5-5-81.; Ord. 336.  Passed 2-6-90.)



282.03  DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BOARD.



   (b)   The City of Ionia Downtown Development Authority shall be
under the supervision and control of the Downtown Development Authority
Board, consisting of the Mayor of the City of Ionia and eight members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the City Council.  At least
five of the members shall be persons having an interest in property located
in the downtown district.  At least one of the members shall be a resident
of the downtown district, if the downtown district has 100 or more persons
residing within it.  Of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed
for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and two for four
years.  A member shall hold office until the member's successor is
appointed.  Thereafter, a member shall serve for a term of four years.  An
appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the Mayor for the unexpired
term only.  Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall
be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses.  The Chairperson of the
Board shall be elected by the Board.



   (c)   Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify
by taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.



   (d)   The Board shall adopt rules governing its procedure and the
holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the City Council. 
Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in the rules
of the Board.  Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.



   (e)   Pursuant to notice and an opportunity to be heard, a member of
the Board may be removed for cause by the City Council.  Removal of a member
is subject to review by the Circuit Court.



   (f)   All expense items of the Authority shall be publicized
monthly, and the financial records shall always be open to the public.



(Ord. 283.  Passed 5-5-81.)



282.04  DIRECTOR; BOND.



   (g)   The Downtown Development Authority Board may employ a Director
who, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall take and
subscribe to the constitutional oath, and shall furnish bond, by posting a
bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000) payable to the
Authority for the use and benefit of the Authority, approved by the Board and
filed with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 283.  Passed 5-5-81.)



Chapter 284
Housing Board of Appeals



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 284.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Dilapidation and nuisances - see CHTR. § 12.02



   Municipal housing facilities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 et seq.



   Board of tenant affairs - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.699 et seq.



   City Housing Commission - see ADM. Ch. 278



   International Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1460



Chapter 286
Local Development Finance Authority



286.01   Determination of necessity; purpose.



286.02   Establishment.



286.03   Designation of Authority District.



286.04   Board of Directors; Chairperson; rules.



286.05   Powers.



286.06   Fiscal year; adoption of budget.



286.07   Termination.



286.08   Authority District.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Business area redevelopment projects - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.981 et seq.



   Department of Economic Expansion - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1201 et seq.



   Economic Expansion Council - see M.C.L.A. § 125.1207



   Regional Economic Development Commission - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1231
et seq.



   Economic development corporations - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1601 et seq.



   Tax Increment Finance Authority Act - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1801 et seq.



   Economic and Social Opportunity Act - see M.C.L.A. §§ 400.1101 et seq.



   Downtown Development Authority - see ADM. Ch. 282



286.01  DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY; PURPOSE.



   (a)   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary for
the public welfare of the City to create a local development finance
authority pursuant to Act 281, which shall operate to eliminate the
conditions of unemployment, underemployment and joblessness and to promote
economic growth in the City.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 5-26-93.)



286.02  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (a)   The City hereby establishes a public body corporate pursuant
to Act 281, which shall be and shall be known and exercise its powers under
the title of the "Local Development Finance Authority of the City of Ionia"
("the Authority").  The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in
any court of this State and shall possess all of the powers necessary to
carry out the purpose of its corporation as provided by this chapter and Act
281.  The enumeration of a power in this chapter or in Act 281 shall not be
construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the Authority.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 5-26-93.)



286.03  DESIGNATION OF AUTHORITY DISTRICT.



   (a)   The property described in Section 286.08 is hereby designated
as the Authority District (the "Authority District").



(Res. Unno.  Passed 5-26-93.)



286.04  BOARD OF DIRECTORS; CHAIRPERSON; RULES.



   (a)   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a
Board of Directors (the "Board").  The Board shall consist of ten members,
seven of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval by the City
Council, one of whom shall be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners
of the County of Ionia, and two of whom shall be appointed by the chief
executive officer of the North LeValley School District.  Of the members
first appointed, two of the members appointed by the City Council and one of
the members appointed by the School Districts shall be appointed for a term
of four years, the members appointed by the County and two of the members
appointed by the City Council shall be appointed for a term of three years,
one of the members appointed by the City Council and one of the members
appointed by the School District shall be appointed for a term of two years,
and two of the members appointed by the City Council shall be appointed for a
term of one year.  After the first appointment, each term of a member shall
be for a duration as provided in Act 281.  A member shall qualify for and
hold office as provided in Act 281.  The Chairperson of the Board shall be
elected by the Board.  The Board shall adopt rules of procedure governing
its procedure and the holding of regular meetings consistent with the
provisions of Act 281.  The rules of procedure shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 5-26-93.)



286.05  POWERS.



   (a)   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter, the
Authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations
imposed by law and herein.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 5-26-93.)



286.06  FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (a)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on July 1 of each
year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as
may hereafter be adopted by the City Council.



   (b)   The Board shall prepare a budget annually and shall submit it
to the City Council for approval in the manner and at the time determined by
Council, which budget shall contain the information required by Council and
shall be prepared in the manner required by Council.  The Board shall not
finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved
by the City Council.  The Board may, however, temporarily adopt the budget
in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed
by revenue bonds where required to do so by the resolution authorizing the
revenue bonds.



   (c)   The Authority shall submit financial reports to the City
Council at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the City are
required to submit reports.  The Authority shall be audited annually by the
same independent auditors auditing the City and copies of the audit report
shall be filed with the City Council.



286.07  TERMINATION.



   (a)   Upon completion of its purposes, the Authority may be
dissolved by the City Council.  The property and assets of the Authority,
after dissolution and satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the
City.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 5-26-93.)



286.08  AUTHORITY DISTRICT.



   (a)   The district that is subject to the jurisdiction of the Local
Development Finance Authority of the City of Ionia is described as follows:



   (b)   Property commonly known as Nelson's Orchard, located north of
North Street and east of State Street, all in the City of Ionia, Michigan,
described as:



Real Description:  34-204-600-000-050-00



City of Ionia, Conty of Ionia, and State of Michigan, to-wit:



Part of the NW 1/4 of Section 18, T7N, R6W, Ionia County, Michigan, described
as:  BEGINNING at a point on the West line of Section 18, N 00 degrees
07'00" E 167.00 feet from the West 1/4 corner of Section 18; thence N 00
degrees 07'00" E 629.53 feet along the West section line; thence S 89 degrees
53'00" E 458.00 feet; thence N 00 degrees 07'00" E 537.03 feet; thence S 89
degrees 56'31" E 1720.31 feet along the South line of the North 85 acres of
the NW 1/4 as occupied; thence S 00 degrees 01'44" E 1319.59 feet to the
North right of way line of North Street; thence along the North line of North
Street N 89 degrees 51'00" W. 98.17 feet; thence N 00 degrees 07'00" E 150.00
feet to the North line of the recorded plat of Vohler's Addition; thence N 89
51'00" W 2082.16 feet along the North line of Vohler's Addition  to the
point of beginning.



EXCEPTING THEREFROM, Part of the NW 1/4 of Section 18, T7N, R6W, Ionia
County, Michigan, described as:  BEGINNING at a point on the West line of
Section 18, N 00 degrees 07'00" E 167.00 feet from the West 1/4 corner of
Section 18; thence N 00 degrees 07'00" E 529.53 feet along the West section
line; thence S 89 degrees 53'00" E 256.66 feet; thence S 00 degrees 07'00" W
529.53 feet; thence S 89 degrees 51'00" E 256.66 feet along the North line of
Vohler's Addition to the point of beginning.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 5-26-93.)



CHAPTER 288
Parks and Recreation Commission



288.01   Commission established.



288.02   Composition; compensation; term; vacancies.



288.03   Removal from office.



288.04   Organization.



288.05   Annual report.



288.06   Functions.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Parks - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1062



288.01  COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.



   A Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established to serve in an
advisory capacity to the City Council, the City Manager and the Parks and
Recreation Services in the city and to propose rules and regulations
governing their programs and facilities for adoption by the City Council.



(Ord. 498.  Passed 2-5-13.)



288.02  COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION; TERM; VACANCIES.



   (a)   Composition. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist
of five (5) members who represent a broad range of interests beneficial to
the city’s parks and recreation programs. One member shall be a member of
the City Council as selected by the City Council. The four (4) appointed
members shall be appointed by the Mayor, confirmed by the City Council and
shall represent, insofar as is possible, a broad range of interested
beneficial to the city’s parks and recreation programs. Persons appointed
to the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be qualified electors of the
city, except that one (1) member may be a non-qualified elector who resides
outside the municipal boundaries of the city. An employee of the city shall
not be eligible to serve as a member of the Parks and Recreation Commission.



   (b)   Compensation. All members of the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall serve without compensation.



   (c)   Term. The term of each appointed member shall be three (3)
years or until a successor takes office. The term of the member of the City
council shall coincide with the Councilmember’s term on the City Council.
Initially, terms shall be staggered so that approximately one-third of the
members terms expire each year.



   (d)   Vacancies. Vacancies occurring otherwise through the
expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the members of the City Council.



(Ord. 498.  Passed 2-5-13.)



288.03  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be subject to the
removal powers of the Mayor for failure of performance.



(Ord. 498.  Passed 2-5-13.)



288.04  ORGANIZATION.



   (a)   Officers. Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall
elect a chair, vice-chair and secretary at its first meeting of each calendar
year. The chair shall preside at all meetings of the Commission. The
vice-chair shall serve in the absence of the chair. The secretary shall
record the minutes of all meetings. The secretary need not be a member of the
Commission. The Commission shall adopt rules to govern its procedures.



   (b)   Quorum and Voting. Three (3) members of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a
majority of the members present shall be required to take action on any
matter.



   (c)   Meetings. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall meet a
minimum of four (4) times annually at the Armory Community Center, or such
other public place in the city.



(Ord. 498.  Passed 2-5-13.)



288.05  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall prepare an annual written
report concerning the operations of the Parks and Recreation Commission and a
synopsis of its activities for the preceding year. The annual report shall be
presented to the City Council during the second quarter of the calendar year.



(Ord. 498.  Passed 2-5-13.)



288.06  FUNCTIONS.



   The functions of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be as
follows:



   (a)   To be an advisory commission to the City Council, the City
Manager and the Parks and Recreation Director.



   (b)   To annually review, in conjunction with the Parks and
Recreation Director, the parks and recreation capital improvement plan
prepared by city staff and make recommendations to the City Manager as part
of the budget preparation and submittal process.



   (c)   To annually review, in conjunction with the Parks and
Recreation Director, the parks and recreation fee schedule as prepared by
city staff and make recommendations to the City Manager as part of the budget
preparation and submittal process.



   (d)   To develop a broad variety of facilities and services to meet
the needs of residents wishing to utilize community resources relating to
parks and recreation services.



   (e)   To inform and update the public about the purposes and needs
for parks and recreation services in the city.



   (f)   To coordinate opportunities for the public to be involved in
the planning and development of the city’s parks system and recreation
services.



   (g)   To seek out and plan the use of public and private financial
resources needed to enhance and expand the existing park system and
recreation services.



   (h)   To act as a liaison and to provide coordination with other
agencies to ensure a total cooperative community effort in providing
delivering recreation services.



   (i)   To provide encouragement and support to, and work in
partnership with, parent-led groups which deliver recreation services in the
community.



(Ord. 498.  Passed 2-5-13.)



TITLE TEN – Judiciary



   Chap. 290.  District Court



Chapter 290
District Court



EDITOR'S NOTE:  Violations of City law are prosecuted in the Ionia County
District Court (Judicial District 64A).  Equitable remedies are pursued in
courts of competent jurisdiction. 



There are no sections in Chapter 290.  This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Courts generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 6, §§ 1 et seq.; M.C.L.A.
§§ 600.101 et seq.



   Circuit courts generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 6, § 1; M.C.L.A. §§
600.501 et seq.



   Appeals to Court of Appeals - see B.R. & T. 880.48



   Appeals to Supreme Court - see B.R. & T. 880.48



PART FOUR – TRAFFIC CODE



   Chap. 410.  Michigan Vehicle Code.



   Chap. 420.  Bicycles, Skateboards and Rollerskates.



   Chap. 430.  Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.



   Chap. 440.  Parking.



Chapter 410
Michigan Vehicle Code



410.01   Adoption by reference.



410.02   Reference to local authorities.



410.03   Publication of notice.



410.04   Enforcement.



410.05   Application to Ionia Free Fair Grounds.



410.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §
117.4h



   Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.601 et
seq., 257.634 et seq.



   Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 et seq.



   Fees in the Traffic Code - see ADM. 214.02



410.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Michigan Vehicle Code, M.C.L. 257.1 through 257.923, as amended, is
hereby adopted by reference.



(Ord. 09-2005-04.  Passed 11-1-05.)



410.02  REFERENCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES.



   Reference in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall
mean the City of Ionia.



(Ord. 09-2005-04.  Passed 11-1-05.)



410.03  PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.



   The City Clerk shall publish this chapter in the manner required by law
and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the
Michigan Vehicle  Code and the fact that a complete copy of the Code is
available to the public at the Clerk's office for inspection, or is available
online at the Michigan legislature's website.



(Ord. 09-2005-04.  Passed 11-1-05.)



410.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Director of Public Safety shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 09-2005-04.  Passed 11-1-05.)



410.05  APPLICATION TO IONIA FREE FAIR GROUNDS.



   All streets, alleys, highways and public thoroughfares located in the
Ionia Free Fair Grounds shall be governed by the provisions of the Michigan
Vehicle Code adopted in Section 410.01.



(Ord. 09-2005-04.  Passed 11-1-05.)



410.99  PENALTY.



   The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are hereby adopted
by reference, provided, however, that the City may not enforce any provision
of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment
exceeds ninety-three days.



(Ord. 09-2005-04.  Passed 11-1-05.)



CHAPTER 420
Bicycles, Skateboards and Rollerskates



420.01   Definitions.



420.02   Application of Michigan Vehicle Code to bicycles.



420.03   Riding bicycles on sidewalks.



420.04   Bicycle license required.



420.05   Bicycle registration and license requirements.



420.06   Term of bicycle license.



420.07   Bicycle license fee.



420.08   Disposal or sale of bicycle.



420.09   Loss of bicycle tag.



420.10   Impounding of bicycles.



420.11   Second-hand bicycle dealers.



420.12   Skateboarding and roller skating.



420.13   Enforcement of chapter.



420.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §
117.4h



   Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.601 et
seq., 257.634 et seq.



   Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 et seq.



   Bicycle fees - see ADM. 214.02(a), (b)



420.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions contained in the Michigan Vehicle Code, as adopted in
Chapter 410, shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter.



420.02  APPLICATION OF MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE TO BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a street or highway shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle under the Michigan Vehicle Code, as adopted in Chapter
410, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application.



420.03  RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall:



   (a)   Ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a Business District.



   (b)   Disobey any sign erected on any sidewalk or street which
prohibits the riding of bicycles thereon.



   (c)   When riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, fail to yield the right
of way to any pedestrian or fail to give an audible signal before overtaking
and passing such pedestrian.



(1975 Code § 10.43)



420.04  BICYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place in the City without first having registered such bicycle and
secured a license therefor.



(1975 Code § 10.44)



420.05  BICYCLE REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   Application for registration and licensing of a bicycle shall
be made by the owner in writing, in duplicate, upon blank forms furnished by
the City Clerk.



   (b)   Such application shall be signed by the owner.  The
application shall state the full name and address of the owner of the
bicycle, the name of the manufacturer, the serial number of the frame
thereof, the approximate date when the owner obtained title thereto and, if
not new, when obtained, and the name and address of the person from whom it
was obtained.



   (c)   After the issuance of the registration card and tag, the City
Clerk shall endorse upon the application and the duplicate the date of
issuance and the number thereof.  The original application will be kept on
file in the office of the City Clerk, and the duplicate thereof shall be
delivered to the Chief of Police and shall be kept on file in his or her
office.  A cross index shall be kept for the Clerk's file, providing
identification by the owner's name, bicycle serial number, and license
number. 



(1975 Code §10.45)



420.06  TERM OF BICYCLE LICENSE.



   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective until the bicycle
is transferred.



420.07  BICYCLE LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for the issuance of a license hereunder shall be as established
from time to time by Council and shall be payable at the time of filing the
application for a license with the City Clerk.



420.08  DISPOSAL OR SALE OF BICYCLE.



   When any bicycle which has been registered and licensed as herein
provided, is sold, or is otherwise disposed of, the new owner shall register
his or her name and address with the City Clerk, shall pay a fee as
established from time to time by Council and shall provide the Clerk with
reliable proof of ownership, which shall consist of a bill of sale, former
registration card or written statement, signed by the prior owner.



420.09  LOSS OF BICYCLE TAG.



   The licensee shall report immediately, to the City Clerk, the loss or
destruction of the tag of the licensee and the circumstances surrounding the
loss or destruction thereof.  The City Clerk shall thereupon issue a tag
upon the payment of a fee as established from time to time by Council.



420.10  IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.



   (a)   Authority to Remove Bicycles.  Members of the Police
Department are hereby authorized to remove bicycles from a public place to a
place of safety, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated.



      (1)   When any bicycle is reasonably believed to be stolen.



      (2)   When any bicycle has been left unattended upon any
public street, alley, or sidewalk continuously for a period of forty-eight
hours, or when any bicycle is left in such a manner as to obstruct
unreasonably the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public
street, alley or sidewalk.



(1975 Code § 10.50)



   (b)   Notice.  When a bicycle is impounded under the provisions of
this section and the Police Department knows or is able to ascertain the
owner thereof, the Police Department shall, within a reasonable period of
time, give and cause to be given a notice in writing to such owner of the
fact of impoundment and the reasons therefor. 



(1975 Code § 10.51)



   (c)   Fee.  No impounded bicycle shall be discharged or removed
from the Bicycle Pound except upon the payment by the owner or his or her
authorized representative of the an impounding fee to be determined from time
to time by Council, provided, however, that no such fee shall be required for
a stolen bicycle if it is reclaimed by the owner within three days of being
notified of the impoundment and if said owner signs an affidavit that the
bicycle is stolen.  Said fee shall be paid at the City Clerk's office.



(Adopting Ordinance)



   (d)   Sale.  Any bicycle impounded under the provisions of this
section may, after one month from the date of impoundment, be sold by the
Police Department at public sale in the same manner as provided by law. 



(1975 Code § 10.53)



420.11  SECOND-HAND BICYCLE DEALERS.



   Any person in the City of Ionia who engages in the purchasing and
selling of second-hand bicycles shall be subject to the following provisions:



   (a)   He or she shall keep a book to be inspected by the Chief of
Police or his or her representative, in which shall be written, at the time
he or she shall receive any bicycle by way of purchase, trade-in or
otherwise, or at the time he or she shall sell any bicycle, a description of
the bicycle, as to make, color, serial number, whether a man's or a lady's
bicycle and other distinguishing features thereof, and the name, residence
and general description of the person from whom the bicycle was received or
to whom the bicycle was sold.  Such book and the place where such business
is carried on, and all articles of property therein, shall be subject to the
examination at any time by any police officer of the City.



   (b)   He or she shall make a report of each purchase, trade-in or
sale containing the information required in subsection (a) hereof upon a form
which shall be furnished by the Police Department for that purpose.  The
filing of such report shall be made with the Police Department within
forty-eight hours from the time of sale, trade-in or purchase of any
second-hand bicycle.



   (c)   In the event no serial number appears on said bicycle, the
dealer shall present said bicycle to the Police Department, who, after having
made a thorough inspection of said bicycle and an investigation as to the
ownership thereof, shall stamp a serial number on said bicycle.



   (d)   When the transferee of a bicycle is a dealer who holds the
same for resale, the transferee shall not be required to obtain a new
registration and license, but such transferee shall retain and have in his or
her immediate possession, at all times, the endorsed registration card and,
upon transferring his or her interest to another person, shall endorse
thereon the name and address of the new owner and shall deliver the same to
the person to whom such transfer is made.  The new owner shall then follow
the procedure as hereinabove set forth.



(1975 Code §10.54)



420.12  SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER SKATING.



   (a)   Definitions.  As used in this section:



      (1)   "Rollerskates" and "street skates" mean either a pair of
small wheels near the toe and another pair near the heel of a shoe or frame
that would attach to a shoe, or in-line skates, which are used for gliding on
a hard surface such as a floor, sidewalk, etc.



      (2)   "Skateboard" means an item consisting of a short, oblong
board with a pair of small wheels at each end, ridden on a hard surface such
as a floor, sidewalk, etc.



      (3)   "To roller skate" means to skate on any type of
rollerskates or street skates.



   (b)   Compliance Required.  No person shall roller skate or ride a
skateboard within the City without complying with this section and any and
all other applicable ordinances and statutes.



   (c)   Yielding to Pedestrians.  Whenever any person is roller
skating or riding a skateboard upon a sidewalk or other paved surface
intended for use by pedestrians, such person shall yield the right of way to
any pedestrian and shall not approach, overtake or pass such pedestrian in a
reckless or careless manner, nor pass such pedestrian except in single file
if such person is roller skating or riding a skateboard with other such
skaters or riders.



   (d)   Skating or Riding on Certain Devices or Structures.  No
person shall roller skate or skateboard on any public bench, table, planter
wall, retaining wall or other device or structure which is not intended for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or jump or step on or off such devices or
structures in the process of roller skating or riding a skateboard.



   (e)   Reckless or Dangerous Skating or Riding.  No person shall
roller skate or ride a skateboard on any sidewalk or other paved surface
intended for pedestrian use or for the parking of vehicles in a reckless or
careless manner, nor in a manner which is likely to result in injury or harm
to any person or property.



   (f)   Skating or Riding on Private Property Without Permission.  No
person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard on private property without
first obtaining permission of the owner of said property to allow such
skating or riding.



   (g)   Skating or Riding While Attached to Vehicles.  No person
shall roller skate or ride a skateboard while either the rollerskates, the
skateboard or the person is attached to any vehicle upon any street or
highway.



   (h)   Prohibitions on Public Streets and in the General Business
District.  No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard on public
streets.  No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard on public
sidewalks in the 100, 200, 300 and 400 blocks of West Main Street.



420.13  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter may be enforced by issuance of traffic violation notices.



(1975 Code § 10.55)



420.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



   Minors violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be dealt with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and
procedure.



CHAPTER 430
Commercial and Heavy Vehicles



430.01   Truck routes.



430.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §
117.4h



   Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.601 et
seq., 257.634 et seq.



   Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 et seq.



   Fees in the Traffic Code - see ADM. 214.02



   Transporting garbage and rubbish - see S.U. & P. S. Ch. 1060



430.01  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (a)   All trucks having more than three axles and weighing in excess
of 8,000 pounds gross weight are hereby required to use those streets and
roadways designated as truck routes in this section while being operated
within the City, unless exempted by this section.



   (b)   The following streets and roadways are hereby designated as
truck routes:



      (1)   Steele Street.



      (2)   Depot Street.



      (3)   Kidd Street.



      (4)   Beardsley Street.



      (5)   Main Street between Yeomans Street and Kidd Street.



      (6)   Main Street between Second Street and Prairie Creek.



      (7)   State Street between Lincoln Avenue (M-21) and the north
City limits.



      (8)   Lincoln Avenue (M-21) between the east City limits and
the west City limits.



      (9)   Dexter Street (M-66) between Lincoln Avenue (M-21) and
the south City limits.



      (10)   Adams Street between Dexter Street (M-66) and Jackson
Street.



      (11)   Jefferson Street from Railroad Street to the south end
of Jefferson Street.



      (12)   Jackson Street from Lincoln Avenue (M-21) to the south
end of Jackson Street.



      (13)   Jefferson Street from Lincoln Avenue (M-21) to the
north City limits.



      (14)   Railroad Street between Jackson Street and Mill Street.



      (15)   Webber Street between Jackson Street and Jefferson
Street.




      (16)   Washington Street between Dexter Street (M-66) and Kidd
Street.



      (17)   Cleveland Street between Main Street and the south City
limits.



      (18)   Main Street between Cleveland Street and the east City
limits.



   (c)   In addition to those street listed above, Bayard Street
between Cleveland Street and Mill Street shall be a limited truck route. 
Hours for Bayard Street shall be the hour preceding and following the opening
of school, lunch hour of school and dismissal of school.



   (d)   Special mobile equipment, emergency vehicles, public utility
vehicles and any vehicle, truck or equipment owned or operated by the City or
working under the direction of the City shall be exempt from this section.



   (e)   Trucks conducting business at the Ionia County Memorial
Hospital, 479 Lafayette Street, shall be exempt from this section.



   (f)   A police officer shall have the authority to require any
person driving or in control of any truck proceeding over a truck route or
street over which truck traffic is permitted, to proceed to any public or
private scales for the purpose of weighing and determining whether or not the
weight restrictions, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, have been
complied with.



   (g)   This section shall not prohibit the operation of trucks upon
any street which has not been designated a truck route where such use is
necessary to conduct business at a destination point inside the City,
provided, however, that streets upon which such truck traffic is permitted,
as set forth in subsection (b) hereof, are used until reaching the
intersection nearest to the destination point.



   (h)   Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the
contrary, the Public Safety Department, upon application, may exempt any
truck from this section for any reasonable period of time. 



(Ord. 353.  Passed 8-16-92.)



430.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is responsible for a civil infraction and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 202.99(b) of these
Codified Ordinances.



CHAPTER 440
Parking



440.01   Definitions.



440.02   Parking within the Downtown District.



440.03   Downtown District parking regulations.



440.04   Residential District parking regulations.



440.05   Tampering with parking signs.



440.06   Erasure or removal of control marks or devices.



440.07   Overtime parking.



440.08   Parking on private property.



440.09   Loading/unloading permits. (Repealed)



440.10   Odd/even parking.



440.11   No parking zone.



440.12   Blocking a driveway.



440.13   Not parking within parking spaces.



440.14   Parking in an alley.



440.15   Parking in front yard and on/over a sidewalk.



440.16   Parking in a prohibited zone.



440.17   Parking for a prohibited purpose.



440.18   Authority of the Public Safety Director.



440.99   Penalty; impounding.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §
117.4h



   Traffic rules and regulations generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.601 et
seq., 257.634 et seq.



   Parking generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.672 et seq.



   Uniform Traffic Code - see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 et seq.



   Municipal violations in counties of 100,000 or more - see M.C.L.A. §
725.301



   Fees - see ADM. 214.02 (c),(d),(e)



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



440.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Holiday," as used on the parking instruction, means only
those legal holidays as established by the State of Michigan on which a
majority of the business places in the parking zones are closed for the
transaction of business.  These shall include New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.



   (b)   "Downtown District" means the Central Business District of the
City and is commonly referred to the area bound by Dexter Street on the west,
Washington Street on the north, Adams Street on the south and Library
Street/Church Alley on the east.



   (c)   "Residential District" means all areas within the City not
within the Downtown District.



   (d)   "Parking" means the standing of a vehicle upon any street or
public place, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers or
when obeying traffic signals or regulations.



   (e)   "Parking lots" means those lots owned, leased, under option to
purchase, or contracted for by the City, on which vehicles are parked.



   (f)   "Vehicle" means any device by which any person or property may
be transported upon a highway.



(Ord. 349.  Passed 12-3-91; Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.02  PARKING WITHIN THE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.



   Enforcement.  The enforcement of parking regulations in the Downtown
District shall generally be in accordance with the following parameters.



   (a)   Parking may be enforced in the downtown area beginning at 8:00
a.m. and ending at 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.



   (b)   Parking hours in the Downtown District will not be enforced on
holidays or Sundays as specified in this chapter.



   (c)   Enforcement shall include the following:



      (1)   Washington Street;



      (2)   Main Street;



      (3)   Adams Street;



      (4)   Steele Street;



      (5)   Kidd Street;



      (6)   Depot Street;



      (7)   Hudson Street;



      (8)   Library Street; and



      (9)   Public parking lots located with the Downtown District.



   (d)   Parking enforcement shall be made by the Director of Public
Safety or his or her designee(s).



(Res. 09-2001-05.  Passed 9-4-01; Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.03  DOWNTOWN DISTRICT PARKING REGULATIONS.



   Time Limits.  When signs limiting parking are present in proximity to
a space or lot marked for parking in the Downtown District, no person shall
park a vehicle in excess of the time period on the sign as established by the
official signs in such District.



   (a)   Thirty-minute parking.  West side of Kidd Street between
Washington Street and Main Street.



   (b)   Two-hour parking.  The following streets are hereby
designated as two-hour parking zones:



      (1)   Main Street (both sides) from Dexter to Library Street.



      (2)   Steele Street (both sides) from Washington Street to
Adams Street.



      (3)   Depot Street (both sides) from Washington Street to
Adams Street.



      (4)   Kidd Street east side from Washington Street to Main
Street and both sides from Main Street to Adams Street.



      (5)   Library Street (both sides) from Main Street to
Washington Street.



      (6)   Washington Street from Steele Street to Library Street.



      (7)   The following City parking lots:



         A.   The parking spaces located along the east side of
the Armory Community Center parking lot;



         B.   The Steele-Adams or Knights of Columbus parking
lot, except for the ten hour parking spaces located along the south side of
the parking lot;







 



         C.   The parking spaces in the large City parking lot
north of Adams Street as identified in the drawing below.



         D.   The Depot-Adams parking lot (located at the north
east corner of Depot and Adams Streets), except for the ten hour parking
spaces located along the south side of the parking lot.



   (c)   Ten-hour parking.  The following areas are hereby designated
as ten-hour parking zones:



      (1)   The parking spaces located along the south side of Adams
Street between Dexter Street and Steele Street.



      (2)   The Depot parking lot (located along the south side of
Adams Street and contiguous to the former railroad depot).



      (3)   The Steele-Adams or Knights of Columbus parking lot, but
for the two hour spaces located along the north side of the lot.



      (4)   The Depot - Adams parking lot (located at the north east
corner of Depot and Adams Streets), except for the two hour parking spaces
located along the north side of the parking lot.



      (5)   The Steele-Washington parking lot (east and west sides).



      (6)   The spaces in the large City parking lot north of Adams
Street as identified in the drawing below.







 



      (7)   Hudson Street (both sides) from Main to Adams.



      (8)   The parking spaces located along the west side of the
Armory Community Center parking lot.



(Ord. 349.  Passed 12-3-91; Res. 09-2001-07.  Passed 9-4-01; Ord. 448. 
Passed 4-10-07; Ord. 511.  Passed 5-6-14.)



440.04  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (a)   When signs prohibiting or limiting parking to a specific time
period are erected in proximity to a space marked for parking in any
Residential District, no person shall park a vehicle in that space if parking
is prohibited or if parking is limited, park in excess of the time period as
established by the official signs in that area.



   (b)   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish time limits
and fines for the various parking areas within the City.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.05  TAMPERING WITH PARKING SIGNS.



   No person shall deface, tamper with, break or impair any parking sign
installed pursuant to the provision of this section.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.06  ERASURE OR REMOVAL OF CONTROL MARKS OR DEVICES.



   No person shall intentionally erase or remove any mark or device placed
on any vehicle for the purpose of enforcing provisions of this chapter.  A
violation of this section shall be a civil infraction.



(Ord. 349.  Passed 12-3-91; Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.07  OVERTIME PARKING.



   No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in the
name of, or operated by, such person, to be parked overtime or beyond the
period of legal parking time, as shown on the signs limiting parking time
posted in the district. 



(Ord. 349.  Passed 12-3-91; Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.08  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property in the
City without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of
the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property.  A
complaint for a violation of this section shall be made by the owner, holder,
occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.09  LOADING\UNLOADING PERMITS. (REPEALED)



   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Section 440.09 was repealed by Ordinance 462,
passed October 7, 2008.)



440.10  ODD/EVEN PARKING.



   Except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law, or at the direction of a public safety officer or
traffic control device, no person shall park a vehicle on or along the side
of any street, within the City, with odd building numbers on an even numbered
date of the month, or the side of any street in the City with even building
numbers on an odd-numbered date of the month, during the months of December
thru March, inclusive, and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.,
provided that this section shall not apply to that portion of any street
marked or posted, on either or both sides, with permanent parking
prohibitions. 



(1975 Code § 8.25)  (Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07; Ord. 529.  Passed 3-7-17.)



440.11  NO PARKING ZONE.



   The City, upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety, may
create no parking zones on public streets in order to prohibit vehicles from
parking within a portion of the public street that may otherwise be practical
for on-street parking.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.12  BLOCKING A DRIVEWAY.



   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on a public street if the
location where the vehicle is parked blocks a driveway.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.13  NOT PARKING WITHIN PARKING SPACES.



   In locations of the City where parking spaces are identified by
pavement markings placed by the City, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle
in a manner so that it is not located within the defined parking space.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.14  PARKING IN AN ALLEY.



   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in an alley and impede traffic
if the alley is signed for no parking.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.15  PARKING IN FRONT YARD AND ON/OVER A SIDEWALK.



   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle, trailer, or watercraft in a
front yard within a residential district of the City, nor on or over any
public sidewalk.



   (b)   A "front yard" for the purpose of this section means that part
of a lot, other than a driveway, between the curb or the street line and the
front line of the main building on the lot, and for a corner lot, shall
include the part of the lot between the side of the building and the curb or
the street line.



   (c)   Vehicles may be parked temporarily in the front yard when
loading and unloading, or pursuant to a handicapper permit issued for that
purpose.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.16  PARKING IN A PROHIBITED ZONE.



   In the interest of public safety, the City Council may from time to
time, through amendment of the violation schedule,  designate locations of a
public street where parking is prohibited.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.17  PARKING FOR A PROHIBITED PURPOSE.



   In the interest of public safety, the City Council may from time to
time, through amendment of the violation schedule, identify certain
activities which are prohibited from occurring within parking lanes of a
public street and within a public parking lot.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.18  AUTHORITY OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR.



   The Public Safety Director shall possess such authority necessary to
designate on-street parking spaces for use by public safety officials only
(police, fire and ambulance services) in the Downtown District as he or she
may determine necessary.



(Ord. 448.  Passed 4-10-07.)



440.99  PENALTY; IMPOUNDING.



   (a)   Civil Infraction.  Whoever violates any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable for a civil infraction under Public Acts 510 and
511 of 1978, as amended.  Adjudication of liability for a violation of this
chapter shall be pursuant to Sections R 28.1101 through R 28.1110 of the
Michigan Administrative Code as of August 1, 1979, as amended, and Michigan
law pertaining to civil infractions.



   (b)   Violations.  Whoever parks in a parking zone in violation of
this chapter shall pay fees and penalties provided for in subsection (c)
hereof at the Ionia City Hall, 114 N. Kidd Street, Ionia, Michigan.



   (c)   Violation Schedule.  The following penalties are hereby
established for violations of this  chapter:



 


Violation

 

Fine

 

After 3 days

 

After 30 days





30 minute parking
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Two-hour parking
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



No parking zone
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Obstructing traffic lane
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Blocking drive
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Odd/even
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Not within parking lines
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Parking in alley
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Parked in the front yard or on or over a sidewalk
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Prohibited zones:
(1)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant
(2)   Within intersection
(3)   Within 15 feet of an intersection, unless otherwise signed
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Parking for prohibited purpose:
(1)   Working or repairing vehicle in road
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Facing traffic
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00



Loading zone violation
 

   $ 10.00

 

   $ 20.00

 

   $ 30.00





 



 



   (d)   Driver's License Suspension.  If the owner or operator of a
vehicle which has been ticketed accumulates six or more unpaid traffic
tickets, the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee shall petition
the 64-A District Court Judge or Magistrate to issue an order prohibiting the
violator from renewing his or her operator's license in the State of
Michigan.  Such suspension shall remain in effect until all unpaid
violations are paid. 



(Ord. 349.  Passed 12-3-91; Res. 09-2001-08.  Passed 9-4-01; Ord. 448. 
Passed 4-10-07; Ord. 521.  Passed 6-2-15.)



PART SIX – GENERAL OFFENSES CODE



   Chap. 604.  Administration and Enforcement.



   Chap. 606.  Alcoholic Beverages.



   Chap. 608.  Animals.



   Chap. 612.  Controlled Substances.



   Chap. 624.  Fair Housing.



   Chap. 650.  Minors.



   Chap. 654.  Obscenity and Sex Offenses.



   Chap. 656.  Offenses Relating to Persons.



   Chap. 658.  Offenses Relating to Property.



   Chap. 664.  Peace Disturbances.



   Chap. 668.  Railroads.



   Chap. 676.  Safety, Sanitation and Health.



   Chap. 692.  Fireworks.



Chapter 604
Administration and Enforcement



604.01   Temporary detention and search.



604.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Interference with administration of City - see CHTR. § 2.05(c)



   Public Safety Department - see ADM. Ch. 242



   Action of Public Safety Department re obscenity and sex offenses - see
GEN. OFF. 654.07



604.01  TEMPORARY DETENTION AND SEARCH.



   (a)   Stopping Suspect.  Whenever a police officer of the City of
Ionia reasonably suspects, or has reasonable cause to believe, that the
behavior of an individual warrants further investigation for criminal
activity, such officer may stop, temporarily detain and question such
person.  If such police officer shall not be in uniform at the time, he or
she shall first identify himself or herself as a police officer to the person
detained.



(1975 Code § 9.161)



   (b)   Search for Weapons.  Whenever a police officer has stopped
and detained a person for questioning, pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, and
reasonably suspects, or has reasonable cause to believe, that there is danger
to himself or herself or others, he or she may conduct a limited search of
such person for dangerous weapons.  The police officer may take and keep any
such weapon or other thing found on such person, the possession of which may
constitute a crime or might endanger the police officer or others, until such
officer has completed the questioning, at which time such officer shall
either return the property so taken, if lawfully possessed, or arrest such
person and dispose of such property according to law. 



(1975 Code § 9.162)



   (c)   Violations.  No person shall refuse to stop and comply with
the order of a police officer given pursuant to the authority of this
section, or obstruct, resist, oppose, assault or threaten such officer with
bodily harm, or aid, abet or encourage others to do so, or flee from such
officer, or attempt to escape such officer's custody.



(1975 Code § 9.163)



   (d)   Exercise of Care; Stopping Vehicles.  The Ionia Police
Department and individual police officers will take special care to exercise
sound and considered judgment in the enforcement of subsections (a) through
(c) hereof, not only to honor the rights of citizens as defined by the United
States Constitution and the Constitution of the State of Michigan, but also
to safeguard the personal dignity of all those affected by it.  The driver
or occupants of a motor vehicle stopped for a routine traffic violation shall
not be searched or unduly detained, nor shall the vehicle be searched, or
impounded, if the driver's license and the vehicle registration are in order,
the vehicle is equipped as required by State law, and the driver's ability to
drive is not impaired, provided that special and unusual circumstances which
reasonably cause an officer to believe his life or person is endangered shall
justify a limited search for dangerous weapons. 



(1975 Code § 9.164)



604.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 606
Alcoholic Beverages



606.01   Open containers.



606.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Limitations on local laws penalizing intoxication, drunkenness or
incapacitation - see M.C.L.A. § 333.6523



   Intoxicating liquors generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1 et seq.



   Sales on Sundays and municipal election days - see M.C.L.A. § 436.19e



   Controlled substances - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 612



   Alcoholic beverages and minors - see GEN. OFF. 650.01



   Alcoholic beverages in parks - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.13



606.01  OPEN CONTAINERS.



   (a)   Transportation or Possession in Vehicles. No person shall
transport or possess any alcoholic liquor in a container which is open or
uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken, within the passenger compartment
of a vehicle on any street or highway. If the vehicle does not have a trunk
or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, a container which is
open, uncapped, or upon which the seal is broken, shall be encased or
enclosed. This section shall not apply to any chartered passenger vehicle
licensed by the Michigan Public Service Commission.



(1975 Code § 9.168)



   (b)   Possession in Other Places. No person shall be inside or
outside of a motor vehicle upon any public park, grounds or street, or upon
any vacant land not owned by such person, in any parking lot, or in any
non-residential building (other than a bar, tavern or eating establishment
which has been duly licensed by the State of Michigan for serving alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises), having in such person's
possession an open receptacle or container containing any alcoholic
beverage. 



(1975 Code § 9.169)



   (c)   Special Permit.  This section shall not apply to any person
who is a participant in an event for which a special permit for alcohol
possession or consumption has been issued by the City Manager, pursuant to
Section 1062.07 or similar section. A "participant" is a person who has been
invited to the event for which a special permit for alcohol possession or
consumption has been issued, is allowed on the property which is subject to
the special permit for the purpose of attending the event, or is associated
with the individual, club, organization or association which received the
special permit. Participant shall not include any person who has been asked
to leave the event by the club, organization or association which received
the special permit.



(Ord. 09-2005-01.  Passed 11-1-05; Ord. 463.  Passed 10-7-08.)



606.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty if provided.)



Chapter 608
Animals



608.01   Definitions.



608.02   Cruelty to animals.



608.03   Poisoning animals.



608.04   Birds and birds’ nests.



608.05   Domestic animals and fowl.



608.06   Dogs.



608.07   Cats.



608.08   Restrictions upon the ownership and maintenance of aggressive or
dangerous dogs.



608.09   Dangerous dog registration.



608.10   Unclean housing for animals.



608.11   Prohibited exotic, rare or dangerous animals.



608.12   Destruction or removal of prohibited animals.



608.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Animal pounds - see M.C.L.A. §§ 123.301 et seq., 750.70



   Animal diseases generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 287.2 et seq.



   Animals generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 287.2 et seq., 750.49 et seq.,
752.21 et seq.



   Dog impoundment and boarding fee - see ADM. 214.03(a)



   Animal noises - see GEN. OFF. 664.03(b)(1)



608.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings
set forth in this section:



   (a)   “Aggressive dog” shall mean a dog that exhibits menacing
behavior on public or private property, including that of its owner or
keeper.  Menacing behavior shall include, but not be limited to: charging,
scratching, toppling, teeth-baring, snapping, growling, or other predatory
mannerisms, directed at a person or other animal in a place where the person
or other animal is legally entitled to be.



   (b)   “Animal” means one or more of a kingdom of living beings
(except humans) differing from plants in capacity for spontaneous movement
and rapid motor response to stimulation, including birds.



   (c)   “Animal control officer” means any person designated by
the City to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited
to, Ionia County animal control officers.



   (d)   “City” means the City of Ionia and/or its duly elected
City Council.



   (e)   “Cruelty” means the inhumane neglect, abuse, torture,
infliction of pain or suffering, beating, underfeeding, overloading, training
or using for fighting or baiting, or abandoning of any animal.



   (f)   “Dangerous dog” shall mean a dog that bites or otherwise
causes serious injury to a person or other animal on public or private
property where the injured person or other animal is legally entitled to be,
including the property of the animal's owner or custodian.  A dog that is
intentionally trained or conditioned to fight or guard, except for dogs
trained for law enforcement or service purposes while engaged in the
activities for which they were trained, shall be considered a dangerous dog.



   (g)   “Dog” shall include the male and female of the dog family
or genus canis.



   (h)   “Domesticated animal” means any of the various animals
domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition.



   (i)   “Exotic animals” means, generally, the species of animals
which are not native to the State or the United States and/or introduced from
another country.



   (j)   “Hybrid(s)” means any animal which is the offspring of two
different varieties or species.



   (k)   “Nuisance dog” shall mean a dog running at large, on
public or private property other than that of its owner or keeper, whose
behavior constitutes a nuisance.  Nuisance behavior shall include, but not
be limited to:



      (1)   Making physical contact with a person or other animal in
a harassing manner;



      (2)   Barking; or



      (3)   Damaging inanimate personal property.



   (l)   “Owner or possessor” means any adult person who either has
right of property in any animal, or who has an animal in his care or custody,
or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises
occupied or controlled by him.



   (m)   “Ownership” when applied to proprietorship of a dog, shall
include every person having a right of property in such dog, every person who
keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his or her care, and every person who
permits such dog to remain in or about any premises occupied by him or her.



   (n)   “Person” means an adult human being aged eighteen years or
over.



   (o)   “Poisonous” means a substance which, through its chemical
action, usually kills, injures or substantially impairs an organism.



   (p)   “Possess or maintain” means the act or ability of having
or exerting control and influence over an animal regulated herein, without
regard to ownership.



   (q)   “Reasonable control” means keeping a dog on a suitable
leash and under the control of the owner or custodian or some other person
with the permission of the owner or custodian in all cases other than while
upon private property, unless the dog is confined in a closed automobile or
shipping receptacle.



   (r)   “Running at large in the City” is defined as not being
under the reasonable control of the animal's owner or person in charge and
not having a leash attached to the animal, the length of which prevents the
animal from reaching or going on to another property.



   (s)   “Unclean housing” means unclean or unwholesome to an
extent that it becomes cruelty to the animal or becomes a health problem or a
nuisance to abutting residences.



   (t)   “Unconfined” means running at large or uncontained or
unrestricted by leash, the length of which prevents the animal from reaching
or going on to another property.



   Exceptions:  A dog shall not be considered a “Nuisance”,
“Aggressive” or “Dangerous dog” where its act is caused by (a) an
illness or injury suffered by the dog at the time of the act; (b) the
negligent or reckless conduct of any person to whom the act is directed; (c)
lawful hunting while the dog is under the control of its owner or custodian;
or (d) defense of the dog's owner, or members of the owner's family or
household, or their property.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.02  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   No person shall treat with cruelty any animal or bird.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.03  POISONING ANIMALS.



   No person shall place or otherwise put any poisonous substance on any
exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger,
any domesticated animal or bird.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.04  BIRDS AND BIRDS’ NESTS.



   No person, except a public officer acting in his or her official
capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or
disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.05  DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND FOWL.



   No person shall keep or house any animals or domestic fowl within the
City except dogs, cats, birds, or other animals commonly classified as pets.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.06  DOGS.



   (a)   Running at Large; Barking or Howling.  No person owning any
dog or having any dog under his or her custody, shall permit such dog to be
in violation of any of the following restrictions:



      (1)   No person shall permit any aggressive or dangerous dog
of which he or she is the owner to be unconfined unless securely muzzled and
led by a leash. 



      (2)   No person who is the owner of any female dog shall
permit or allow such female dog to go or reach beyond the premises of such
owner when said dog is in heat.



      (3)   No person who is the owner of any dog four months of age
or older shall permit it to be unconfined unless under the reasonable control
of some person.



      (4)   No person who is the owner of any dog required to be
licensed shall permit it to be unconfined at any time unless licensed as
required by law and unless wearing its license tag and evidence of rabies
immunization.



      (5)   No person shall own any dog which, by loud or frequent
or habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall cause annoyance to the people
in the neighborhood.



      (6)   No person shall allow any dog to run at large.



      (7)   A person who owns or has custody of a dog shall prevent
the dog from engaging in nuisance behavior, i.e. from behaving as a nuisance
dog as defined in this chapter.  The owner of a dog shall prevent the dog
from barking, whining or howling in an excessive, continuous, or untimely
fashion.



      (8)   A person who owns or has custody of a dog shall prevent
the dog from engaging in aggressive or dangerous behavior, i.e. from behaving
like an aggressive or dangerous dog as defined in this chapter.



   (b)   Seizure and Impoundment.  Any dog found running at large in
the City may be seized and impounded by any public safety or animal control
officer and delivered to the Ionia County Animal Shelter. 



   (c)   Rabies Prevention.  Any person who shall have in his or her
possession a dog which has contracted rabies, which has been subjected to the
same, which is suspected of having rabies or which has bitten any person,
shall, upon demand of any public safety or animal control produce and
surrender such dog to be held for observation. 



   (d)   Exposure to Rabies; Notice.  It shall be the duty of any
person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another
dog or another animal showing the symptoms of rabies to immediately to notify
the Public Safety Department or Animal Control Department of his or her
possession of such dog.



   (e)   It shall be the duty of persons owning or possessing a dog to
pick up the dog's excrement on public property or on private property not
under his or her control or ownership and properly dispose of it.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.07  CATS.



   (a)   Nuisance.  No person shall create a nuisance by way of noise,
odor or otherwise in the keeping of any cat.



   (b)   Impounding.  Any public safety or animal control officer is
authorized to impound any cat found running at large in the City and deliver
the cat to the Ionia County Animal Shelter. 



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.08  RESTRICTIONS UPON THE OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF AGGRESSIVE OR
DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (a)   Any person who owns or possesses an aggressive dog or a
dangerous dog shall comply with, in addition to all of the other requirements
found in this Chapter, the requirements as stated in this section with
respect to that ownership and possession. At all times when such dog is
outside of any enclosed structure, fenced yard or fenced dog run, the animal
shall:



      (1)   Be under the control of a person over the age of
eighteen years; and



      (2)   Be held securely by a leash of adequate strength to
restrain the dog.



   (b)   Pens or structures utilized for harboring or keeping such dog
outside of habitable structure shall have secure sides and a secure top
attached to the sides.  If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the
sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot.



   (c)   No dog shall be found to be an aggressive dog or a dangerous
dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a
particular breed of dog prohibited.  No dog shall be found to be an
aggressive or dangerous dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by
a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises
occupied by the dog's owner or custodian, (ii) committing, at the time, a
willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the dog's owner or custodian,
or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the dog, or can be
shown to have repeatedly provided, tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog at
other times.  No police dog that was engaged in the performance of its
duties at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be an
aggressive or dangerous dog.  No dog that, at the time of the acts
complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself,
its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property,
shall be found to be an aggressive or dangerous dog. 



   (d)   If the owner of a dog found to be an aggressive or dangerous
dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible
for complying with the requirements of this Chapter.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.09  DANGEROUS DOG REGISTRATION.



   (a)   The owner of any dog found to be a dangerous dog shall, within
thirty calendar days of such determination, obtain a dangerous dog
registration certificate from the City Clerk for a fee of $200, in addition
to other fees that may be authorized by law or ordinance.  All certificates
obtained pursuant to this subsection must be renewed annually by the Public
Safety Director.  The City Clerk shall provide a copy of the dangerous dog
registration certificate and verification of compliance to the County Animal
Control Office and State Veterinarian.



   (b)   All dangerous dog registration certificates or renewals
thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to
persons eighteen years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence (i)
of the dog's current rabies vaccination, if applicable, (ii) that the dog has
been neutered or spayed, and (iii) that the dog is and will be confined in a
proper physical enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's
residence or is and will be confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the
proper enclosure is constructed.  In addition, owners who apply for
certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a
certificate or renewal unless they present satisfactory evidence that the
owner has liability insurance coverage with limits of at least $250,000 that
covers animal bites.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.10  UNCLEAN HOUSING FOR ANIMALS.



   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is,
will be, has been or  may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome to an
extent that it becomes cruelty to the animal or becomes a health problem or
nuisance to abutting residences.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.11  PROHIBITED EXOTIC, RARE OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any
person to possess or maintain within the City the following animals:



      (1)   All animals, including snakes and spiders, whose bite or
venom, is poisonous or deadly to humans.



      (2)   Apes: Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas
(Gorlilla); orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus).



      (3)   Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus).



      (4)   Bears (Ursidae).



      (5)   Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).



      (6)   Crocodilians (Crocodilus), and alligators.



      (7)   Constrictor snakes, or other poisonous reptiles.



      (8)   Coyotes (Canis latrans).



      (9)   Elephants (Elephas and Loxondonta).



      (10)   Gamecocks and other fighting birds.



      (11)   Hyenas (Hyaenidae).



      (12)   Jaguars (Panthera onca).



      (13)   Leopards (Panthera pardus).



      (14)   Lions (Panthera leo).



      (15)   Lynxes (Lynx).



      (16)   Ostriches (Sruthio).



      (17)   Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars,
mountains lions and panthers.



      (18)   Wolves (Canis lupus).



      (19)   Wolf hybrids.



      (20)   Raccoons (Procyon lotor).



      (21)   Skunks (Genus Mephitis).



      (22)   Tigers (Felis tigris).



   (b)   The prohibitions above shall not apply to pet shops licensed
by the state department of agriculture, zoological gardens licensed by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, and accredited by the American Association
for the accreditation of zoological parks and gardens, and circuses licensed
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture if:



      (1)   Their location conforms to the provision of the zoning
chapter of the City Code.



      (2)   All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.



      (3)   Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to
prevent their escape, and so as to humanely provide for their biological and
social needs.



      (4)   No person lives or resides within one hundred feet of
the quarters in which the animals are kept.



   (c)   The prohibitions above shall not apply to any person who is in
possession of an injured animal listed in this section under a valid
caregiver's permit issued by the state department of natural resources.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.12  DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED ANIMALS.



   (a)   Upon a sworn complaint that an animal is one of the species of
exotic or other animal prohibited by this Chapter, and is currently being
illegally possessed or maintained, a district court judge or magistrate shall
issue a summons to the owner ordering him to appear to show cause why the
animal should not be destroyed or removed from the City.



   (b)   Upon the filing of a sworn complaint as provided herein, the
district court or magistrate may order the owner or possessor to immediately
turn the animal over to an animal control officer, an incorporated humane
society, a licensed veterinarian, or a boarding kennel, at the owner's
option, to be retained by them until a hearing is held and a decision is made
for the disposition of the animal.  The expense of the boarding and
retention of the prohibited animal is to be borne by the owner.  After a
hearing, the court or magistrate shall issue its findings and opinion as to
whether the animal is subject to destruction or removal under this Chapter. 
If so, the court shall order the destruction  of the animal at the expense
of the City, or, in the alternative, at the court's discretion, order the
animal removed from the City under terms and conditions which ensure such
removal.



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12.)



608.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Any person who violates this Chapter may be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction violation punishable by a municipal civil
infraction fine not to exceed $500.00 and the costs of prosecution.



   (b)   As to the first or second offense, the violation shall be a
civil infraction, and upon a finding of responsibility, the violator shall be
fined as set forth below.



   (c)   As to the third or subsequent offense, the violation shall be
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the violator shall be imprisoned for not
more than ninety days, fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or
required to perform not more than 240 hours of community service.



   (d)   In addition, court costs may be levied against any person
determined to be guilty of or responsible for a violation.



Certain violations of this Chapter (Sections 608.02, 608.03, 608.06(a)(1),
608.06(a)(8), 608.08, 608.09, and 608.11), shall be a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00
and/or 90 days in jail, or both, as specified below in the Animal Control
Fine and Penalty Schedule.



   Animal Control Fine and Penalty Schedule



NOTE:  Thirty (30) days after issuance, complaint citations will be
forwarded to District Court and fines and costs may increase.



 




Civil infraction

 
Failure to obtain license
 
$50


Civil infraction
 
Failure to vaccinate
 
$50


Civil infraction
 
Failure to wear tag on dog
 
$50


Civil infraction
 
Failure to maintain proper conditions
 
$50


Civil infraction
 
Failure to remove excrement
 
$25


Civil infraction
 
Running at Large, and Nuisance Animal,
Barking dog
   1st offense
   2nd offense
   3rd offense
 


$35
$70
$140


Misdemeanor
 
Aggressive and Dangerous Animal
   1st offense
   2nd offense
   3rd offense
 
Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or 90 days in
jail, or both


Misdemeanor
 
Keeping of Animals
   1st offense
   2nd offense
 
Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or 90 days in
jail, or both


Misdemeanor
 
Cruelty
   1st offense
   2nd offense
 
Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or 90 days in
jail, or both


Misdemeanor
 
Exotic Animals
 
Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or 90 days in
jail, or both




 



(Ord. 491.  Passed 2-7-12; Ord. 494.  Passed 6-5-12.)



Chapter 612
Controlled Substances



612.01   Use or possession prohibited; exceptions.



612.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Drugs and medicine generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 335.1 et seq.



   Marihuana - see M.C.L.A. §§ 335.4, 335.59, 335.151 et seq.



   Purchase by municipal officers and employees - see M.C.L.A. § 335.55



   Intoxicating liquors generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1 et seq.; GEN.
OFF. Ch. 606



   Alcoholic beverages - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 606



612.01  USE OR POSSESSION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (a)   Definitions.  As used in this section:



      (1)   "Control1ed substance" means a drug or substance listed
in Schedule 5 of the Michigan "Controlled Substance Act of 1971", being Act
196 of the Public Acts of 1971, as amended.



      (2)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, government,
or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership or association, or any other entity.



      (3)   "Practitioner" means:



         A.   A physician, dentist, veterinarian or pharmacist as
defined in subdivisions (o), (p), (q) and (w) of Section 1 of Act 151 of the
Public Acts of 1962, as amended, being Section 338.1101 of the Compiled Laws
of 1948, or other persons licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to
distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to or administer a
controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in
the State of Michigan.



         B.   A pharmacy, hospital or other institution or place
of professional practice licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to
distribute, prescribe, dispense, conduct research with respect to or
administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or
research in the State of Michigan.



   (b)   Violations.  No person shall use or possess a controlled
substance unless the substance was obtained directly from or pursuant to a
valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of
his or her professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by the
Michigan "Controlled Substance Act of 1971", being Act 196 of the Public Acts
of 1971, as amended.



(Ord. 292.  Passed 11-1-83.)



612.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 624
Fair Housing



624.01   Findings; policy statement.



624.02   Definitions.



624.03   Discrimination prohibited.



624.04   Exclusions.



624.05   Retention of rights by owner.



624.06   Pursuit of additional remedies.



624.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Civil Rights Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 37.1 et seq.



   Housing generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 et seq.



   Discrimination in government housing - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.146,
750.147



   City Housing Commission - see ADM. Ch. 278



624.01  FINDINGS; POLICY STATEMENT.



   It is hereby found that the population of the City of Ionia consists of
people of many races, colors, religions, ancestries and national origins,
that discrimination in housing violates the public policy of the City and
that such discrimination in housing is injurious to the public health, safety
and general welfare of the City of Ionia and its inhabitants.



(Ord. 261.  Passed 10-12-78.)



624.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.  When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in
the singular number include the plural number.  The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.



   (a)   "Discriminate" and "discrimination" include any difference in
treatment of individuals or groups in the sale, lease, rental, or financing
of housing units or real estate or housing accommodations because of race,
color, creed, religion, ancestry, national or sectional origin, sex, marital
status or handicap.



   (b)   "Financial institution" means any person or firm regularly
engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans on real
property.



   (c)   "Handicap" means a determinable physical or mental condition
of an individual or a history of such condition which may result from
disease, accident, condition of birth, or functional disorder which
constitutes a physical or mental limitation.



   (d)   "Michigan Civil Rights Commission" means the Civil Rights
Commission created by the Constitution of 1963.



   (e)   "National origin" includes the national origin of an ancestor.



   (f)   "Owner" includes the lessee, lessor, sublessee, sublessor,
assignee, assignor, managing agent or other person having the right of
ownership or possession or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing
accommodation or any part thereof.



   (g)   "Person" includes an individual, association, corporation,
joint apprenticeship committee, joint stock company, labor union, legal
representative, mutual company partnership, receiver, trust, trustee, trustee
in bankruptcy, unincorporated organization, any other legal or commercial
entity, the state or any other governmental entity or agency.



   (h)   "Real estate broker or salesperson" means a person, whether
licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a
consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real
property; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or
who holds himself or herself out as engaged in these activities; who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by
mortgage or other encumbrances upon real property; or who is engaged in the
business of listing real property in a publication or a person employed by or
acting on behalf of any of these.



   (i)   "Real property" includes buildings, structures, real estate,
lands, tenements lease-hold, interest in real estate corporation,
condominiums and hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal or any interest
therein.



(Ord. 261.  Passed 10-12-78.)



624.03  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



   (a)   No person, whether the owner of real property, or a lessor,
lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or salesperson, builder, advertiser or
financial or lending institution, or any agent of the foregoing, shall refuse
to negotiate for a real estate transaction with another person because of
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or handicap.



   (b)   No person, whether the owner of real property, or a lessor,
lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or salesperson, builder, advertiser or
financial or lending institution, or any agent of the foregoing, shall refuse
to engage in a real estate transaction with another person because of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or handicap.



   (c)   No person shall induce, directly or indirectly, or attempt to
induce, directly or indirectly, the sale, rental or listing for sale or
rental of real property by representing that a change has occurred or will or
may occur with respect to the religion, racial, color or national origin
composition of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is
located; nor shall any representations be made to any prospective purchaser
or tenant that any block, neighborhood or area has, will or might undergo a
change with respect to the religion, race, color or national origin
composition of the block, neighborhood or area, for the purpose of
discouraging the purchase of property in a particular area.



   (d)   No person, by threat, intimidation, coercion or physical
force, shall induce or attempt to sell to any person owning an interest or
leasing an interest in real property in the City of Ionia to sell, rent or
lease, or not to sell, rent or lease, such real property to any person
because of such person's race, religion, color, national origin, sex, marital
status, age or handicap.



(Ord. 261.  Passed 10-12-78.)



624.04  EXCLUSIONS.



   Section 624.03 shall not apply:



   (a)   To the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living
independently of each other, if the owner or lessor or a member of his or her
family resides in one of the housing accommodations.



   (b)   To the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling
by the owner or lessor if he or she or a member of his or her family resides
therein.



   (c)   To the sale or rental by the owner or lessor of a housing
accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not
more than two families living independently of each other which was not in
any manner listed or publicly advertised for sale or rental.



   (d)   To the rental of a housing accommodation for not more than
twelve months by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him or her and
maintained as his or her home for at least three months immediately preceding
occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily vacated while being maintained as
the owner's or lessor's legal residence.



   (e)   With respect to the age provisions only, to the sale, rental
or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of Federal, State
or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations otherwise
intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of
providing housing accommodations for persons fifty years of age or older.



(Ord. 261.  Passed 10-12-78.)



624.05  RETENTION OF RIGHTS BY OWNER.



   Nothing in this chapter shall require anyone owning or possessing an
interest in real property to offer the property to the public at large before
selling or renting such interest, nor shall this chapter prohibit the owner,
lessor, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or financial or lending
institution or the agents of the foregoing, from refusing to enter into a
real estate transaction with a person who does not have the legal capacity to
enter into a self-binding contract.



(Ord. 261.  Passed 10-12-78.)



624.06  PURSUIT OF ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation to the right
of access by an individual to remedies before the Michigan Civil Rights
Commission or before any court of competent jurisdiction in the State on an
individual basis, or to prohibit the cooperation between the City of Ionia
and the Michigan Civil Rights Commission. 



(Ord. 261.  Passed 10-12-78.)



624.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 650
Minors



650.01   Sales of alcoholic beverages; possession in motor vehicles.



650.02   Purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages.



650.03   Curfew.



650.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Malicious destruction of property by minors - see M.C.L.A.§ 600.2913



   Coin-operated amusement devices and minors - see B.R. & T. 814.05



650.01  SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; POSSESSION IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (a)   Sales to Minors.  No person, either directly or indirectly,
by himself or herself, clerk, agent, servant or employee, shall at any time
sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person unless such
person shall have attained the age of twenty-one years; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor to
a minor upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed
physician.



   (b)   Possession in Motor Vehicle.  No person under the age of
twenty-one years shall purchase or knowingly possess, transport or have under
his or her control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless said
person is employed by a licensee of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission
and is possessing, transporting or having such alcoholic liquor in a motor
vehicle under his or her control during regular working hours and in the
course of his or her employment.  This subsection shall not apply to
alcoholic liquor possessed by a minor under authority of and pursuant to a
prescription of a duly licensed physician.



(Ord. 367.  Passed 3-23-95.)



   (c)   Definitions.  The meaning of "alcoholic liquor,” when used
in this chapter, shall be as defined in Act 8 of the Public Acts of 1933
(Extra Session), as amended.



(Ord. 293.  Passed 11-1-83.)



650.02  PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (a)   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic
liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt
to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this section.  A minor
who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the
following fines and sanctions:



      (1)   For the first violation a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), and may be ordered to participate in substance
abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as
defined in Section 6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6107,
and designated by the Administrator of Substance Abuse Services, and may be
ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening
and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c)
hereof.



      (2)   For a violation of this subsection following a prior
conviction or juvenile adjudication for a violation of this subsection or
Section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, a fine of not more than two
hundred dollars ($200), and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse
prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as
defined in Section 6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6107,
and designated by the Administrator of Substance Abuse Services, to perform
community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at
his or her own expense as described in subsection (c) hereof.



      (3)   For a violation of this subsection following two or more
prior convictions or juvenile adjudications  for a violation of this
subsection or Section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may be ordered to participate
in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation
services as defined in Section 6107 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368,
MCL 333.6107, and designated by the Administrator of Substance Abuse
Services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection
(c) hereof.



   (b)   A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor,
or notwithstanding subsection (a) hereof a minor who uses fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three days or a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or both.



   (c)   The court may order the person convicted of violating
subsection (a) hereof to undergo screening and assessment by a person or
agency as designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in
Section 6103 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6103, in order
to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative
services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment
programs.



   (d)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or
chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsection (a) or
(b) hereof as provided in Section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA
300, MCL 257.319.



   (e)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor
has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit to a
preliminary chemical breath analysis.  A peace officer may arrest a person
based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath
analysis.  The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other
acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to
determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor.  A
minor who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as
required in this subsection is responsible for a State civil infraction and
may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00).



   (f)   A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less
than eighteen years of age who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL
722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to
consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a)
hereof shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the
person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian,
or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency.  The
notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than forty-eight
hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who
allegedly violated subsection (a) hereof is less than eighteen years of age
and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6.  The notice may
be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice,
including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by
first-class mail.  If an individual less than seventeen years of age is
incarcerated for violating subsection (a) hereof, his or her parents or legal
guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection.



   (g)   This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing
alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed under State law if the alcoholic
liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption.



   (h)   This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of
the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation
of this section.



   (i)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled
in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in
an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty
member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is
solely educational and is a requirement of the course.



   (j)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection
with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited
by this section.



   (k)   Subsection (a) hereof does not apply to a minor who
participates in either or both of the following:



      (1)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and
with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an
employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.



      (2)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of a State or local agency as a
party of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase
or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of
the State or local agency and was not part of the undercover operation.



   (l)   The State or local agency shall not recruit or attempt to
recruit a minor for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of
a violation of subsection (a) hereof. 



(M.C.L.A. 436.1703)



650.03  CURFEW.



   (a)   Minors Under Twelve.  No minor child under the age of twelve
years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway,
alley, park or other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., unless the child is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult
person over the age of twenty-one years delegated by a parent or guardian to
accompany said child. 



(1975 Code § 9.191)



   (b)   Minors Under Fifteen.  No minor child under the age of
fifteen shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway,
alley, park or other public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., except where the child is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some
adult person over the age of twenty-one years delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany the minor, or where the minor child is upon an errand
or other legitimate business directed by his or her parent or guardian. 



(1975 Code § 9.192)



   (c)   Minors Under Seventeen.  No minor child under the age of
seventeen years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street,
highway, alley, park, or other public place between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m., except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or
some adult person over the age of twenty-one years delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany said minor child, or where the minor is upon an errand
or other legitimate business directed by his or her parent or guardian.



(1975 Code § 9.193)  (Ord. 444.  Passed 1-2-07.)



   (d)   Aiding Underage Children to Violate Law.  No person of the
age of seventeen years or over shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or
encourage any minor under the age of seventeen years to violate any of the
provisions of subsections (a) to (c) hereof, or shall harbor any such child
in any other public place or on its premises, contrary to the provisions of
subsections (a) to (c) hereof.



(1975 Code § 9.194)



   (e)   Parents, Guardians, Etc.  No parent, guardian or other person
having the legal care or custody of any minor child under the age of
seventeen years shall allow or permit such minor child while in his or her
legal custody, to loiter, idle or congregate in or upon any public street,
highway, alley, park, or other public place, contrary to any of the
provisions of subsections (a) to (c) hereof.



(1975 Code § 9.195)



   (f)   Juvenile Arrest Procedure.  Arrests and prosecutions of
minors under the age of seventeen years for violations of this section shall
be in accordance with Section 14 and the other provisions of Chapter XIIA
(M.S.A. 27.3178 (598.1) et seq.) of Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, as
amended. 



(1975 Code § 9.196)



   (g)   Definitions of Words and Phrases.  The following words and
phrases used in this section are defined as follows:



      (1)   The word "loiter," as used herein, shall include
aimlessly driving, or riding in or on any automobile, motorcycle, motor
driven cycle or any other motor driven vehicle, on the streets, alleys,
highways or public thoroughfares of the City without an immediate and
predetermined destination.



      (2)   The phrase "other public places" shall include privately
owned places of business, and the premises thereof, serving the public or
open to the public, such as restaurants, laundromats, gas stations, theaters
and other places of public amusement.



      (3)   The word "harbor" shall include the tacit or express
permission to said child by the owner, proprietor, occupant or any of their
agents to remain on or about the premises for a time longer than reasonably
necessary for said child to transact such business as he or she may there
have.



(1975 Code § 9.197)



650.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



   Minors violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be dealt with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and
procedure.



CHAPTER 654
Obscenity and Sex Offenses



654.01   Definitions.



654.02   Lewd films and theaters declared a nuisance.



654.03   Nude dancing establishments declared a nuisance.



654.04   Massage parlors and model studios declared a nuisance.



654.05   Head shops declared a nuisance.



654.06   Liability; abatement of nuisance.



654.07   Action by Public Safety Department.



654.08   Forfeiture of revenues from public nuisances; cost of abatement;
recovery of costs.



654.09   Action by City Attorney.



654.10   Public nudity.



654.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Indecency and immorality - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.335 et. seq.



   Prostitution - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.448 et seq.



   Obscenity and coin-operated amusement devices - see B.R. & T. 814.05



654.01 DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:



   (a)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE - A drug, substance or immediate
precursor as defined in Schedules 1 through 5 of part 72 of Act 368 of the
Public Acts of 1978, as amended.



   (b)   DANCING - To move with the feet or body rhythmically with or
without musical accompaniment.



   (c)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA - Any objects, devices, instruments,
apparatus or contrivances, whose primary and traditionally exclusive use is
involved with the illegal use of any and all controlled substances under the
laws of Michigan.



   (d)   HEAD SHOP - Any business, the operation of which involves the
sale, lease, trade, gift or display for sale of any and all types of drug
paraphernalia.



   (e)   IMMEDIATE PRECURSOR - A substance which under the regulations
of the Michigan Department of Health is a principal compound commonly used or
produced primarily for use, and which is an immediate chemical intermediary
used or likely to be used in the manufacture of a controlled substance.



   (f)   KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE - Having knowledge of
the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or
demonstration which appears in the film or publication or having knowledge of
the acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution which occur on the premises.



   (g)   LEWD MATTER - Any matter which the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, would find, when considered as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest and which depicts or describes patently
offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or
exhibition of the genitals or genital area.  Nothing herein contained is
intended to include or prescribe any matter which, when considered as a whole
and in the context in which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.



   (h)   MASSAGE - Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of
the human body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of
rubbing, stroking, kneading or any similar treatment accomplished by hand or
by the use of any instrument.



   (i)   MASSAGE PARLOR - Any building or structure or portion thereof,
located within the City of Ionia, which is open to members of the general
public, with or without payment of a fee, at which massage services are
offered.



   (j)   MATTER - A motion-picture film or a publication, or both.



   (k)   MODEL STUDIO:



      (1)   Any premises on which there is conducted the business of
furnishing figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being
observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn,
sculpted, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who pay a
fee or other consideration, compensation or gratuity for the right or
opportunity so to depict the figure model or for admission to or for
permission to remain upon or as a condition for remaining upon the premises;
or



      (2)   Any premises where there is conducted the business of
furnishing or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration,
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be observed
or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted,
photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.



      (3)   Exception. The term "model studio" does not include:



         A.   Any studio which is operated by any state
university or college, or any junior college or public school, or any
governmental agency, wherein the person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating it has met the requirements established by the State of
Michigan for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized
thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary diploma.



         B.   Any premises where there is conducted the business
of furnishing, providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in paragraph (k)(3)A. hereof.



         C.   Any studio operated by a tax exempt, nonprofit
corporation devoted to the development of art and its appreciation.



   (l)   MOTION-PICTURE FILM - Includes any film or plate negative;
film or plate positive; film designed to be projected on a screen or other
surface for exhibition; films, glass slides or transparencies, either in
negative or positive form, designed for exhibitions by projection on a screen
or other surface; and video tape or any other medium used to electronically
reproduce images on a screen or other surface.



   (m)   NUDE - Completely without clothing, or showing the human male
or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque
covering or showing the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple or showing the several
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   (n)   PERSON - Any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.



   (o)   PLACE - Includes, but is not limited to, any building,
structure or space, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether
permanent or not, or the ground itself.



   (p)   SALE - A passing of title or right of possession from a seller
to a buyer for valuable consideration, including, but not limited to, any
lease or rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any
valuable consideration is received for the use of or transfer of possession
of lewd matter.



   (q)   TRADITIONALLY EXCLUSIVE USE - A use which is primary and
inherent as opposed to secondary and incidental, and which is associated with
certain knowledge or beliefs derived from statements of contemporary persons
and handed down through a considerable period of time.



654.02  LEWD FILMS AND THEATERS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   (a)   Any and every place in the City of Ionia where lewd films are
publicly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of exhibition, and any and
every place in the City of Ionia where a lewd film is repeatedly publicly
exhibited or possessed for the purpose of exhibition, or where lewd films are
publicly disseminated or sold, or possessed for such dissemination, is a
public nuisance.



   (b)   Any and every lewd film which is publicly exhibited or
possessed for such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance under
subsection (a) above is a public nuisance per se.



   (c)   From and after service on the place, or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of
this chapter and an order of summary abatement provided for in Section
654.07, all moneys paid thereafter as an admission price to such exhibitions
are also declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.



654.03  NUDE DANCING ESTABLISHMENTS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   (a)   Every dancing or night club establishment permitting nude
dancing, by either males or females, for pay or without pay, is a public
nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented.



   (b)   From and after service on the place, or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of
this chapter and an order of summary abatement provided for in Section
654.07, all moneys or other valuable consideration paid for services rendered
are also declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared nuisance.



654.04  MASSAGE PARLORS AND MODEL STUDIOS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   (a)   Every massage parlor or model studio which, in the regular
course of business, is used for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution, and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon which
acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution are held or occur, is a public
nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented.



   (b)   From and after service on the place, or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of
this chapter and an order of summary abatement provided for in Section
654.07, all moneys or other valuable consideration paid for services rendered
are also declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared nuisance.



654.05  HEAD SHOPS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   (a)   Any and every place in the City of Ionia in which drug
paraphernalia constitutes a part of the stock in trade is a public nuisance.



   (b)   Any and every item of drug paraphernalia possessed at a place
which is a public nuisance under subsection (a) hereof is a public nuisance
per se.



   (c)   From and after service on the place, or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of
this chapter and an order of summary abatement provided for in Section
654.07, all valuable consideration received for the sale of such drug
paraphernalia is also declared to be a public nuisance as personal property
used in conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.



654.06  LIABILITY; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   (a)   Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and
correct copy of this chapter and an order of summary abatement provided for
in Section 654.07 hereof, any and every person who shall own, legally or
equitably, lease, maintain, manage, conduct or operate a place in the City of
Ionia which is declared to be a public nuisance, as set forth and stated in
Sections 654.02 through 654.05, is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of
such nuisance for the purpose of this chapter and is thereafter responsible
for its maintenance and shall be liable therefor.



   (b)   The places and subject matter declared to be public nuisances
under Sections 654.02 through 654.05 shall be abated as provided for herein.



654.07  ACTION BY PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT.



   (a)   Upon a specific finding that a public nuisance, as defined in
Sections 654.02 through 654.05, exists in the City of Ionia, the Public
Safety Department, in applying the provisions of this chapter to such
nuisance, shall:



      (1)   Declare the fact that such nuisance exists.



      (2)   Set forth the description or legal description and
street address of the place which constitutes the nuisance.



      (3)   Set forth the evidentiary facts considered by the Public
Safety Department in arriving at its factual determination.



   (b)   In the case of a motion-picture film or films, such facts
shall include a recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts which
the Public Safety Department finds are patently offensive; the basis for the
finding by the Public Safety Department that such film or films are
displayed, sold or held for sale at any place found by the Public Safety
Department to be a public nuisance; and the basis of the finding by the
Public Safety Department that such film or films constitute a part of the
stock in trade of such place of business or other place.



   (c)   In the case of a nude dancing establishment, such facts shall
include a recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts which the
Public Safety Department finds are patently offensive; the basis for the
finding by the Public Safety Department that such nude dancing is being
performed, or taking place; and the basis of the finding by the Public Safety
Department that such nude dancing occurred in the course of business.



   (d)   In the case of a massage parlor or model studio, such facts
shall include a recitation of the particular acts of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution which have occurred and the basis for the finding by the Public
Safety Department that such acts occurred in the course of business.



   (e)   In the case of drug paraphernalia, such facts shall include a
recitation of the particular drug paraphernalia or types of drug
paraphernalia considered by the Public Safety Department, and those which the
Public Safety Department finds to be patently offensive. The basis for the
finding by the Public Safety Department that such drug paraphernalia is
displayed, sold or held for sale at any place found by the Public Safety
Department to be a public nuisance and the basis of the finding by the Public
Safety Department that such drug paraphernalia constitutes a part of the
stock in trade of such place of business or other place.



   (f)   The Public Safety Department shall also order all persons
described in Section 654.06(a) hereof to summarily abate such public nuisance
within twenty-four hours of service of such order on any such subject matter,
or to cease to use the place where the nuisance is declared to exist, or to
terminate the use of said premises for the purposes of lewdness, assignation
or prostitution, or to cause the same to be terminated.



   (g)   The Public Safety Department shall also order the City
Attorney to proceed to do all things necessary to abate such public nuisance
through judicial proceedings and to conclude such proceedings as
expeditiously as is permissible under the law, including requesting the court
to advance such proceedings on the calendar of the court.



   (h)   The Public Safety Department shall also inform and give notice
to persons designated in Section 654.06(a) that:



      (1)   The Public Safety Department has determined that a
public nuisance presently exists at such place and address and that, under
Section 654.06(a) of this chapter, they are deemed to have knowledge thereof
and are responsible therefor.



      (2)   In the event that the order of the City has not been
complied with within twenty-four hours, the Public Safety Department will
order the City Attorney, as provided for under Section 654.06, to initiate
proceedings to abate the nuisance, and the costs of such civil abatement
action filed, including investigative costs, court costs, attorneys' fees and
other expenses, will be made a special assessment against the parcel of land
upon which such nuisance is being maintained, and upon their determination in
such court action, such costs, in a separate legal procedure, will be made a
lien against such property and a personal obligation against any person,
firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity deemed to be in
violation of this chapter.



      (3)   All lewd motion-picture films or drug paraphernalia
being used in conducting and maintaining such public nuisance are contraband
and are subject of forfeiture.



      (4)   From and after service on the place or its manager or
acting manager or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct
copy of this chapter, any and all moneys paid as an admission price to or for
the exhibition of such lewd motion-picture films, and any and all moneys paid
as an admission price to the establishment permitting nude dancing, and any
and all valuable consideration received for the sale of drug paraphernalia,
and any and all moneys or other valuable consideration received for services
rendered in such massage parlors or model studios, shall be deemed to be a
public nuisance as personal property used in conducting and maintaining such
nuisance and, as such, are subject to forfeiture.



   (i)   The Public Safety Department shall also order that a true and
correct copy of this chapter be delivered forthwith in any manner normally
used to effectuate personal service of process to all persons of record
having any legal or equitable interest in the real property and to the
regular or acting manager or person in charge of the place therein declared a
public nuisance.



654.08  FORFEITURE OF REVENUES FROM PUBLIC NUISANCES; COST OF ABATEMENT;
RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (a)   Upon judgment for the City of Ionia in legal proceedings
brought pursuant to this chapter, an accounting shall be made by such
defendant or defendants of all moneys and valuable consideration received by
them which have been declared to be a public nuisance under Sections 654.02
through 654.05.  Such moneys or their equivalent, and any valuable
consideration received, shall be forfeited to the General Fund of the City of
Ionia as property of City of Ionia if any valuable consideration received is
not money.



   (b)   The cost of abatement shall include the following:



      (1)   Investigative costs.



      (2)   Court costs.



      (3)   Reasonable attorneys' fees arising out of the
preparation for and trial of the cause and appeals therefrom and other costs
allowed on appeal.



      (4)   Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and of all
other papers filed in such proceeding.



   (c)   Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment
against the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is maintained.  Upon its
determination in a civil action, such shall, by a separate legal proceeding,
be made a lien against such property, and a personal obligation against any
person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity and shall
be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary Municipal
taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary
Municipal taxes.  All laws applicable to the levy, collection and
enforcement of Municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.



654.09  ACTION BY CITY ATTORNEY.



   Upon a specific finding by the Public Safety Department of the fact
that a public nuisance exists at a particular location, the City Attorney,
with the approval of Council, is authorized to take whatever action is
appropriate.



654.10  PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (a)   Public Purpose.  It is hereby deemed to be in the best
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Ionia, Michigan, that the City Council, by ordinance, prohibit public nudity,
as defined below, within the boundaries of the City of Ionia.  This section
is adopted by authority granted to the City of Ionia as a Home Rule City by
Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended.



   (b)   Definition of "Public Nudity".  For purposes of this section,
"public nudity" shall be defined as "knowingly or intentionally displaying in
a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person,
including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission
fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque and
nontransparent covering of the nipple and areola.  A woman's breast feeding
of a baby does not under any circumstances constitute nudity irrespective of
whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding.



   (c)   Public Nudity Prohibited.  No person shall commit the act of
public nudity as defined in subsection (b) hereof. 



(Ord. 380.  Passed 7-7-98.)



654.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
the general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 656
Offenses Relating to Persons



656.01   Threatening or harassing telecommunications.



656.02   Assault and assault and battery; domestic assault.



656.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Malicious destruction of property by minors - see M.C.L.A. § 600.2913



   Minors curfew - see GEN. OFF. 650.02



656.01  THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.



   No person shall maliciously use any service provided by a
communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate,
threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person or disturb the peace and
quiet of any other person by any of the following:



   (a)   Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property
in the course of a telephone conversation.



   (b)   Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph
message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has
suffered death or has been the victim of a crime or of an accident.



   (c)   Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection
between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other
equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby
interfering with any communication service.



   (d)   Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language, or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone
conversation.



(Ord. 319.  Passed 3-1-88.)



656.02  ASSAULT AND ASSAULT AND BATTERY; DOMESTIC ASSAULT.



   (a)   A person who assaults or assaults and batters an individual is
guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.



   (b)   An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her
spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in
common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household, is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.



   (c)   This section does not apply to an individual using necessary,
reasonable, or physical force in compliance with Section 1312 of the Revised
School Code, 1975 PA 451, M.C.L.A. 380.1312.



(Ord. 03-2002-01. Passed 3-5-02.)



656.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 658
Offenses Relating to Property



658.01   Larceny.



658.02   Stolen, embezzled or converted property.



658.03   Retail fraud.



658.04   Trespass.



658.05   Billposting.



658.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Real estate generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 554.1 et seq.



   Malicious destruction of property by minors - see M.C.L.A. § 600.2913



   Theft generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.356 et seq.



   Malicious destruction of property - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.377a, 750.377b



   Malicious destruction of trees and shrubs - see M.C.L.A. § 750.382



658.01  LARCENY.



   No person shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing or taking
without authority the property of another, including any money, goods,
chattels, bank notes or drafts, or any other form of property.  However,
such person shall be prosecuted under this section only where the value of
the property stolen shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less.



658.02  STOLEN, EMBEZZLED OR CONVERTED PROPERTY.



   (a)   No person shall buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the
concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property
knowing the money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. 
However, such person shall be prosecuted under this section only if the
property purchased, received, possessed or concealed is of a value of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or less.



(Adopting Ordinance)



   (b)   A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or
personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of a dealer or
collector, who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or
delivering the stolen, embezzled or converted property to the dealer or
collector has a legal right to do so, or who buys or receives stolen,
embezzled or converted property which has a registration, serial or other
identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the
property, shall be presumed to have bought, embezzled or converted such
property.  This presumption may be rebutted by proof.



(Ord. 364.  Passed 3-7-95.)



658.03  RETAIL FRAUD.



   No person shall commit retail fraud, which, as used in this section,
means to do any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity:



   (a)   While a store is open to the public, to alter, transfer,
remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property, or
to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the
resulting difference in price is less than two hundred dollars ($200.00).



   (b)   While a store is open to the public, to steal property of the
store that is offered for sale at a price of less than two hundred dollars
($200.00).



   (c)   With intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not
paid for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of
the property, obtained or attempted to be obtained, is less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00).



658.04  TRESPASS.



   No person shall willfully enter upon the land or premises of another
without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner
or occupant or the agent or representative of the owner or occupant, nor
shall any person who is upon the land or premises of another, upon being
notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
representative of the owner or occupant, without lawful authority neglect or
refuse to depart therefrom. 



(1975 Code § 9.146)



658.05  BILLPOSTING.



   (a)   On Public Property.  No person shall attach, place, paint,
write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or any other matter upon any
lamppost, electric light, railway, telegraph or telephone pole, shade tree,
fire hydrant or any thing within any park.  Public officers posting any
notice required or permitted by law shall be excepted from the provisions of
this section. 



(1975 Code § 9.28)



   (b)   On Private Property.  No person shall attach, place, paint,
write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or other matter upon any
building, wall, fence, gate, post or tree without first having obtained the
written permission of the owner or occupants of the premises and having
complied with all the provisions of these Codified Ordinances pertaining
thereto. 



(1975 Code § 9.29)



658.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 664
Peace Disturbances



664.01   Disorderly conduct.



664.02   Conduct on school property.



664.03   Noise control.



664.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Disorderly conduct generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.167 et seq.



   Gambling - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.301 et seq.



   Prostitution - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.448 et seq.



   Barking or howling dogs - see GEN. OFF. 608.05(b)



664.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (a)   "Public Place" Defined.  The term "public place," as used in
this chapter, shall mean any street, alley, park, public building, place of
business or assembly open to or frequented by the public and any other place
which is open to the public view or to which the public has access. 



(1975 Code § 9.131)



   (b)   Prohibited Acts.  No person shall:



      (1)   Commit an assault, or an assault and battery on any
person.



(1975 Code § 9.132(1))



      (2)   Be intoxicated in a public place, while either
endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or acting in
a manner that causes a public disturbance.



(Ord. 253.  Passed 1-10-78.)



      (3)   Engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral or obscene
conduct in any public place.



      (4)   Discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol or bow and
arrow in the City, except as provided below:



         A.   When lawfully acting in the defense of persons or
property or the enforcement of law;



         B.   When at a duly established range, the operation of
which has been approved by the City Council;



         C.   When discharged by a police officer or conservation
officer in the line of duty;



         D.   The discharge of bow and arrow and shotgun,
normally referred to in gauges, with shot for hunting purposes may be
permitted on a privately owned parcel of land of twenty acres or more with
the permission of the property owner, and at the discretion of the Director
of Public Safety, subject to the following conditions:



            1.   For the purposes of this subsection, "shot"
shall be defined as a round fired from a shotgun, normally referred to in
gauges, which discharges multiple pellets from one shell.



            2.   All hunters shall be licensed to hunt with a
bow and arrow or shotgun by the State of Michigan;



            3.   All hunters shall observe all State of
Michigan regulations and other requirements regarding transportation,
possession and use of bow and arrows and shotguns for hunting.



            4.   Cross bows are not permitted.



            5.   Hunters shall observe all safety
considerations and shall not hunt within a distance of 300 feet from any
public street or property line of any contiguous parcel located within the
City.



            6.   A maximum of five hunting permits may be
issued to the owner of land that meets this criteria at any given time.



            7.   The Director of Public Safety shall proscribe
such administrative rules as necessary to implement and administer the
provisions of this subsection which shall include the authority of the
Director to administratively revoke permits issued at any time for good
cause. 



(Ord. 452.  Passed 10-2-07.)



      (5)   Fire, discharge, display or possess any fireworks except
of the type and under the conditions permitted by Chapter 39 of the Penal
Code of the State of Michigan.



      (6)   Engage in peeping in the windows of an inhabited place.



      (7)   Beg in any public place.



      (8)   Bathe in any body of water in a naked state, or with his
or her person so much undressed that there shall be an indecent exposure of
the body.



      (9)   Use any indecent, immoral or insulting language to, or
in the presence or hearing of, any other person, or manifest any indecent or
insulting behavior in the City in the presence, view or hearing of any other
person.



      (10)   Engage in fortunetelling or pretend to tell fortunes
for hire, gain or reward.



      (11)   Make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his
or her person.



      (12)   Willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any
manner deface any property not his or her own, or any public school building,
or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light, street
sign, traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, parking meter or shade
tree belonging to the City or located in the public places of the City; mark
or post hand bills on, or in any manner mar the walls of, any public
building, or fence, tree or pole within the City; destroy, take, or meddle
with any property belonging to the City; remove the same from the building or
place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority; or
disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any City water meter without
proper authority.



      (13)   Destroy, injure or in any manner deface any drinking
fountain located in the City, or throw or deposit any substance therein, or
in any manner pollute the water in the basin of any fountain or detach the
cups or other parts of such drinking fountain.



      (14)   Insult, accost, molest or otherwise annoy, either by
word of mouth, sign or motion, any person in any public place.



      (15)   Engage in any disturbance, fight, or quarrel in a
public place.



      (16)   Collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage or
abet the collection of persons in crowds for illegal or mischievous purposes
in any public place.



      (17)   Jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley,
park or public building.



      (18)   Loiter on any street or sidewalk or in any park or
public building or conduct oneself in any public place so as to obstruct the
free and uninterrupted passage of the public.



      (19)   Play any ball game in any public street or sidewalk or
otherwise obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups
thereon, for any purpose.



      (20)   Engage in any act of prostitution.



      (21)   Attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate
of any place where prostitution, gambling or the illegal sale of intoxicating
liquor, or where any other illegal or immoral business or occupation, is
permitted or conducted.




      (22)   Engage in prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of
intoxicating liquor or any other illegal or immoral business or occupation. 
Proof of recent reputation for engaging in prostitution, gambling, illegal
sale of intoxicating liquor, or other illegal or immoral occupation or
business shall be prima facie evidence of being engaged or occupied therein.



      (23)   Solicit or accost any person for the purpose of
inducing the commission of any illegal or immoral act.



      (24)   Knowingly transport any person to a place where
prostitution or gambling is practiced, encouraged or allowed for the purpose
of enabling such person to engage in gambling or in any illegal or immoral
act.



      (25)   Keep or maintain a gaming room, gaming table, or any
gaming device used for gaming; or knowingly suffer a gaming room, gaming
table or any gaming device to be kept, maintained, played or sold on any
premises occupied or controlled by him or her.



      (26)   Disturb thc public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous
or vulgar conduct.



      (27)   Permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by
him or her to be a resort of noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons.



      (28)   Obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any member of the
Police Department, or any peace officer in the discharge of his or her duties
as such.



      (29)   Wander about the streets, either by day or night, or
loiter in any public building, without any lawful means of support or without
being able to give a satisfactory account of oneself.



      (30)   Prowl about any alley or the private premises of any
other person in the nighttime, without authority or the permission of the
owner of such premises.



      (31)   Spit on any sidewalk or on the floor or seat of any
public carrier, or on any floor, wall, seat or equipment of any place of
public assemblage.



      (32)   Disturb any school, meeting or congregation lawfully
assembled, whether religious, political or otherwise.



      (33)   Flirt, willfully annoy or make or extend offensive
advances or invitations by word or act to any person to whom he or she is
unknown, in any public place. 



(1975 Code § 9.132(3) to (33))



664.02  CONDUCT ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   (a)   Vandalism.  No person shall damage, destroy or deface any
public, private or parochial school building, or any building occupied by any
public, private or parochial school, or the grounds, out-buildings, fences,
trees, shrubs or other appurtenances thereto, or any personal property
located in any such school building or located on property used for such
school purposes. 



(1975 Code § 9.151)



   (b)   Disturbances.  No person shall willfully or maliciously make
or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the
peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or parochial school is
disturbed.



(1975 Code § 9.152)



   (c)   Indecent Language and Conduct.  No person shall use profane,
indecent or immoral language or engage in indecent or immoral conduct in any
public, private or parochial school building or in any building occupied by
any public, private or parochial school or the grounds thereto or on any
property adjacent to any building occupied by any public, private or
parochial school. 



(1975 Code § 9.153)



   (d)   Extortion.  No person shall by violence, threat of violence,
coercion or intimidation, force, or attempt to force, any public, private or
parochial student or other person to give or lend any money, property or
other thing of value to any person at any time.



(1975 Code § 9.154)



   (e)   Borrowing.  No person shall borrow or attempt to borrow any
money, property or other thing of value from any student in any public,
private or parochial school or on the property of any public, private or
parochial school or during any time when any such student is going to or
returning from any regularly scheduled session of any such school, without
first obtaining the written consent of the principal of such school or such
other person designated by the principal to issue such written consent. 



(1975 Code § 9.155)



   (f)   Order to Leave Premises.  Any person creating a disturbance
in any private, public or parochial school or on the property of any public,
private or parochial school shall leave immediately when so directed by the
principal of such school or by such other person designated by the
principal. 



(1975 Code § 9.156)



   (g)   Unauthorized Entry.  No unauthorized person shall enter and
remain in any school property whether public, private or parochial for any
reason whatever unless such person has received written consent from the
principal or such other person designated by the principal to be in any such
public, private or parochial school building or upon such school property. 
An unauthorized person shall mean any person who is not a regularly enrolled
student in the school building or school grounds entered, or a parent or
guardian of such student, or a teacher or other employee in such school
building. 



(1975 Code § 9.157)



664.03  NOISE CONTROL.



   (a)   Declaration of Nuisance.  All loud or unusual noises or
sounds and annoying vibrations which offend the peace and quiet of persons of
ordinary sensibilities are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 



(1975 Code § 9.20)



   (b)   Specific Offenses.  Each of the following acts is declared
unlawful and hereby prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to
be exclusive, namely:



      (1)   Animal and bird noises.  The keeping of any animal or
bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any person.



      (2)   Construction noises.  The erection (including
excavating therefor), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and
the excavation of streets and highways, on Sundays, and other days except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit therefor is
first obtained from the City Manager.



      (3)   Sound amplifiers.  Use of any loudspeaker, amplifier or
other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for
any purpose, except one which is non-commercial in character and when so used
shall be subject to the following restrictions.



         A.   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.



         B.   Operations are permitted for four hours each day,
except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be
authorized.  The permitted four hours of operation shall be as designated by
the Chief of Police.



         C.   Sound amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles
shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is
mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour, except when
said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic.



         D.   Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of
hospitals, schools or churches.



         E.   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it
will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound
amplifying equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud,
raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of
audibility.



      (4)   Engine exhausts.  The discharge into the open air of
the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or
motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively
prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom.



      (5)   Handling merchandise.  The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.



      (6)   Blowers.  The discharge into the open air of noise from
a compressor, blower or power fan unless the noise from such compressor,
blower or fan is muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise.



      (7)   Hawking.  The hawking of goods, merchandise or
newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner.



      (8)   Horns and signal devices.  The sounding of any horn or
signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not
in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching or
apparently out of control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion,
or, if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being
applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of
any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.



      (9)   Radios and musical instruments.  The playing of any
radio, television set, phonograph or musical instrument in such a manner or
with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. of the following day, or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling,
hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.



      (10)   Shouting and whistling.  Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public
streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day,
or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any school, place of worship or
office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any
persons in the vicinity.



      (11)   Whistle or siren.  The blowing of any whistle or
siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of fire or danger. 



(1975 Code § 9.21)



   (c)   Exceptions.  None of the terms or prohibitions of subsection
(b) hereof shall apply to or be enforced against:



      (1)   Emergency vehicles.  Any police or fire vehicle or any
ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business.



      (2)   Highway maintenance and construction.  Excavations or
repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the City or the
State of Michigan, during the night, when the public safety, welfare and
convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 



      (3)   (1975 Code § 9.22)



664.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 676
Safety, Sanitation and Health



676.01   Littering.



676.02   Blight.



676.03   Abandoned motor vehicles.



676.04   Public nuisances.



676.05   Nuisances enumerated.



676.06   Nuisances prohibited.



676.07   Abatement of blight and nuisances.



676.08   Cost of abatement; lien.



676.99   Penalty.



CROSS REFERENCES



Health and sanitation generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 4, § 51; M.C.L.A.
§§ 325.1 et seq., 327.1 et seq., 750.466 et seq.



State Housing Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 et seq.



Nuisance abatement; damages and expenses - see M.C.L.A. § 600.2940



Nuisances generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 600.3801 et seq.



Collection, disposal and recycling of garbage and rubbish - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1060



Fireworks - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 692 and S.U. & P.S. 1062.15



International Property Maintenance Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1460



International Fire Code - see F.P. Ch. 1610



676.01  LITTERING.



   (a)   Definitions.  In the interpretation of this section, the
following definitions shall apply, except where the context clearly indicates
that another meaning is intended:



      (1)   “Garbage” shall mean decaying animal and vegetable
wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.



      (2)   “Litter” shall mean garbage, refuse, and rubbish as
defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as
herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare.



      (3)   “Refuse” shall mean all decaying and non-decaying
solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles, junk and solid market and industrial wastes.



      (4)   “Rubbish” shall mean non-decaying solid wastes
consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.



(1975 Code § 9.41)



   (b)   Litter in Public Places.  No person shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the City
except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles.



(1975 Code § 9.42)



   (c)   Sweeping Litter Into Gutters.  No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway.  Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.



(1975 Code § 9.44)



   (d)   Duty to Keep Sidewalks Clean.  Persons shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their home or business free of litter.



(1975 Code § 9.45)



   (e)   Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter.  The owner or
person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the
premises free of litter.



(1975 Code § 9.47)  (Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.02  BLIGHT.



   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to prevent, reduce
or eliminate potential blight in the City by the prevention or elimination of
certain environmental causes of blight or blighting factors which exist, or
may exist in the future, in the City.



(1975 Code § 9.221)



   (b)   Causes of Blight; Prohibitions.  The following uses,
structures and activities are causes of blight which, if permitted to exist,
will result in undesirable neighborhoods.  No person shall maintain or
permit to be maintained any of these causes of blight upon any property in
the City, owned, leased, rented or occupied by such person:



      (1)   Trailers, contractors equipment, boat hulls.  The
storage in the open of trailers in disrepair, contractor’s equipment in
disrepair or boat hulls in disrepair.  For the purpose of this section, the
term “trailers in disrepair, contractor’s equipment in disrepair or boat
hulls in disrepair” shall mean such trailers, equipment or boats as are
inoperable or partially dismantled.  “Inoperable” means incapable of
being operated or propelled under its own power by reason of dismantling,
disrepair or other cause.  “Partially dismantled” means a part which is
ordinarily a component has been removed or is missing.



      (2)   Building materials.  The storage in the open of
building materials, unless there is a valid building permit issued for
construction upon said property, and the storage of materials are intended
for use in connection with such construction.  “Building materials”
shall include, lumber, bricks, concrete blocks, plumbing materials,
electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar,
concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other materials used in constructing
any structures.



      (3)   Storage of accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or
refuse unless temporarily stored for removal.  The term “junk” shall
include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, household appliances stored in
the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other material or other cast-off
material of any kind whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable
use.



      (4)   Any structure or part of any structure which, because of
fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer
habitable, if a dwelling, or useful for any other purpose for which it may
have been intended.



      (5)   The existence of any vacant dwelling or garage or other
outbuilding, unless such buildings are kept securely locked, with windows
kept glazed or neatly boarded up, and are otherwise protected to prevent
entrance thereto by vandals.



      (6)   Any partially completed structure, unless such structure
is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid building permit.



      (7)   The accumulation of dirt, litter or debris on the
property.



      (8)   Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and
furnishings, tires, or shopping carts stored on the property.



      (9)   Vehicle parts, or other articles of personal property
which are abandoned or left in a state of partial construction or repair for
an unreasonable period of time.



      (10)   Inoperable, unlicensed or unregistered vehicles as
identified in Section 676.04.



      (11)   Refrigerators, freezers, or similar equipment providing
enclosed spaces.  An abandoned, unattended or discarded refrigerator,
freezer, airtight container, tank with an open access hole and any other
property which substantially encloses a space if placed anywhere outdoors in
a manner which could result in injury or death.



(1975 Code § 9.222)  (Ord. 444.  Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.03  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (a)   Declaration of Nuisance.  No person shall store, maintain,
keep, or authorize or permit the storage, maintenance, or keeping of any
abandoned or junk motor vehicle on any private property under his ownership,
tenancy or control.  Any motor vehicle which, for a period of ten
consecutive days or more does not have an engine in running condition, four
inflated tires, a battery, and current license plates and is otherwise
legally roadworthy (i.e. operational lights and turn signals, windshield,
etc.), or which is in fact abandoned by its owner, or which for any reason is
not operable and is not repairable, shall be deemed to be abandoned or a junk
motor vehicle under this section.



   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the storage of such motor
vehicles within a fully enclosed building or by a licensed junk dealer.  Nor
shall it be a violation for a new or used automobile dealer or licensed
commercial garage or repair shop to store disabled vehicles upon premises
which conform to all applicable zoning ordinances.



   (b)   Enforcement.  This section shall be enforced under the
direction of the Public Safety Director.  The Public Safety Department shall
have the same authority to impound abandoned or junk motor vehicles
prohibited herein as provided for vehicles abandoned on the public streets
under applicable law.  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein,
the Director of Public Safety, upon written application, may exempt from the
provisions of this section for any reasonable period of time, any historic or
classic vehicle, any vehicle in the process of restoration or repair, or any
vehicle which by reason of special circumstances is deemed by the Director
not to be a junk or abandoned motor vehicle.



   (c)   Abandoned Vehicle Procedures.



      (1)   As used in this section, “abandoned vehicle” means a
vehicle which has remained on public property or private property for a
period of 48 hours after the Public Safety Department has affixed written
notice to the vehicle.



      (2)   If a vehicle has remained on public or private property
for a period of time so that it appears to the Public Safety Department to be
abandoned, the Department shall do all of the following:



         A.   Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.



         B.   Affix a written notice to the vehicle.  The
written notice shall contain the following information:



            1.   The date and time the notice was affixed.



            2.   The name and badge number of the Public
Safety Department officer affixing the notice.



            3.   The date and time the vehicle may be taken
into custody and stored at the owner’s expense until disposition through
procedures set forth in M.C.L.A. 257.252.



            4.   The year, make, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle, if available.



      (3)   If the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours after the
date the notice was affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the Public
Safety Department may have the vehicle taken into custody.



      (4)   Once a vehicle has been taken into custody, the owner
may reclaim the vehicle by obtaining a release from the Public Safety
Department after showing that the vehicle has proper registration and
insurance.  Upon doing so, the owner can reclaim the vehicle from the
custodian after paying all accrued charges from the custodian.



      (5)   Once a vehicle has been taken into custody, the vehicle
will be immediately entered into LEIN (Law Enforcement Information Network)
as abandoned and procedures set forth in M.C.L.A. 257.252 will be followed as
it pertains to abandoned vehicles.



(Ord. 444.  Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.04  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (a)   Declaration of Nuisance.  Whatever annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public
decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway,
navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life
or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.  Public nuisances
shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is prohibited by any provision
of this section.  No person shall commit, create or maintain any public
nuisance. 



(1975 Code § 9.1)



   (b)   Nuisances Per Se.  The following acts, services, apparatus
and structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances:



      (1)   Stagnant water.  The maintenance of any pond, pool of
water or vessel holding stagnant water.



      (2)   Depositing of foreign substances.  The throwing,
placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public
place, square or sidewalk; or in any private place or premises where such
throwing, placing, depositing or leaving is dangerous or detrimental to
public health; or likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents
and/or vermin; by any person; of any animal or vegetable substance, dead
animal, fish, shell, tin cans, bottles, glass or other rubbish, dirt,
excrement, filth, rot, unclean or noxious water, liquid or gaseous fluids,
hay, straw, soot, garbage, swill, animal bones, hides or horns, rotten soap,
grease or tallow, offal, or any other offensive article or substance whatever.



      (3)   Pollution.  The pollution of any stream, lake or other
body of water by, or the depositing into or upon any highway, street, lane,
alley, public street or square, or into any adjacent lot or grounds of, or
depositing or permitting to be deposited, any refuse, foul or noxious liquid
or water or creamery or industrial waste; or forcing or discharging into any
public or private sewer or drain any steam, vapor or gas.



      (4)   Noxious fumes.  The emission of noxious fumes or gas in
such quantities as to render occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person
of ordinary sensibilities.



      (5)   Street and sidewalk obstructions.  Any use of the
public streets and/or sidewalks which causes large crowds to gather,
obstructing the free use of the streets and/or sidewalks.



      (6)   Structures and unfilled excavations.  All buildings and
other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise and all
excavations remaining unfilled or uncovered for a period of 90 days or
longer, and which are so situated so as to endanger the safety of the
public.  All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public
place, or so situated, left or operated on private property as to attract the
public.



      (7)   Loaded trucks/tracking.  The owning, driving or moving
upon the public streets and alleys of trucks or other motor vehicles which
are constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of their load or contents
to blow, fall or be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public or private place; or which deposit from their wheels, tires or other
parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place dirt,
grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind.  However, under
circumstances determined by the City Manager to be in the public interest, he
or she may grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of this
division conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition at
least once daily and execution of an agreement by such person to reimburse
the City for any extraordinary maintenance expense incurred by the City in
connection with such violation. 



(1975 Code § 9.7)  (Ord. 444.  Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.05  NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying
or having charge or possession of any property in the City to maintain or
permit to be maintained such property in such manner that any of the
following conditions are found to exist thereon, except as may be allowed by
any other provision of law:



   (a)   Clotheslines or clothes hanging in front yards or front and
side balconies and porches.



   (b)   Trash, garbage or refuse cans, bins, boxes or other such
containers stored in front or side yards and visible from a public street
except as permitted by Chapter 1060, Garbage and Rubbish Collection, Section
1060.04.



   (c)   Packing boxes, lumber, salvage materials, or other debris kept
in the open on the property.



   (d)   Attractive nuisances dangerous to children including
abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, and appliances,
refrigerators and freezers, hazardous pools, ponds and excavations in any
location.



   (e)   Overgrown vegetation and other nuisances dangerous to public
health, safety and welfare, or obstructing necessary view of drivers on
public streets or private driveways.



   (f)   Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds or other
vegetation constituting unsightly appearance or dangerous to public safety
and welfare.



   (g)   Graffiti or other words, letters or drawings which remain on
the exterior of any building or fence.



   (h)   Storing an unlicensed and/or unregistered motor vehicle,
mobile home, recreational vehicle, utility trailer, semi-trailer or pole
trailer anywhere on a property in the open.



   (i)   Storing a licensed and/or registered motor vehicle, mobile
home, recreational vehicle, utility trailer, semi-trailer, pole trailer,
unmounted camper top, truck top, snowmobile, farm tractor, un-trailered boat
in the front yard of a property other than in the driveway of the property.



   (j)   Buildings which are abandoned, dilapidated, boarded up,
partially destroyed, or left in a state of partial construction and such
buildings which are unpainted or where the paint on the building exterior is
mostly worn off.



   (k)   Buildings without doors, window glass or window screens.



   (l)   Storage of firewood in a front or side yard and the storage of
firewood that is not stacked neatly.



   (m)   Personal property, belongings, furnishings or equipment left
in the right-of-way or between the front of the principal building and the
right-of-way.  Personal property, including, but not limited to, interior
furnishings, toys and portable recreational equipment, shall be deemed to be
abandoned, of no value and unlawful if placed at or left for more than 24
hours on any public right-of-way or on any part of a property lying between
the front of the principal building and a public right-of-way.  Personal
property placed in the public right-of-way pursuant to a court-ordered
eviction is subject to immediate removal 48 hours after being placed in the
right-of-way.



   (n)   Dumpsters.



      (1)   Dumpsters intended primarily for garbage, which are
visible from a public street, alley or sidewalk, shall be screened pursuant
to the standards contained in Title Six - Zoning, of the City Code.



      (2)   Dumpsters intended primarily for construction debris
shall be declared a public nuisance if permitted to remain more than 90 days
in a calendar year.



   (o)   Dead tree or any portion thereof, or any dying tree that
presents a hazard to any member of the public or to property, as contained in
Chapter 1024 of the City Code.



   (p)   Bush, shrub, tree vegetation or parts thereof growing upon
private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any street,
park, sidewalk, public improvement, street lighting or public place in the
City.  In addition, any brush, shrub, tree, vegetation growing on private
property within the City, afflicted with any dangerous and infectious insect
infestation or tree disease.



   (q)   Any grass, weeds or undergrowth higher or longer than six
inches subject to the following exceptions:



      (1)   On portions of undeveloped property behind a wooded tree
line.



      (2)   On portions of undeveloped lands more than 25 feet from
a public sidewalk or street open to the public.



      (3)   On portions of undeveloped platted lots more than 25
feet from a public sidewalk or street open to the public and from a
neighboring lot line.



(Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.06  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall create, maintain or permit to be maintained a public
nuisance in the City.



(Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.07  ABATEMENT OF BLIGHT AND NUISANCES.



   Where no other procedure is made specifically applicable by other
provisions of the City Code, any structure, condition or activity prohibited
by this chapter may be abated by the City Manager, or his or her designee, in
accordance with the following procedure.  The City Manager, or his or her
designee, shall investigate the existence of the alleged condition of blight
or nuisance to determine whether or not the blight or nuisance exists and to
further determine the person who has created or is committing or maintaining
such condition of blight or nuisance.  The City Manager, or his or her
designee, shall then give written notice to the person responsible for the
creation, commission or maintenance of such blight or nuisance, specifying
the nature of the blight or nuisance, the corrective action to be taken to
abate the blight or nuisance, and the time limit for abatement of such
condition of blight or nuisance, which shall be a reasonable period of time
but not to exceed 30 days from the date of the notice. Such notice shall be
delivered either to the party responsible by first class United States mail
or delivered directly to the person responsible.  The City Manager, or his
or her designee, may grant an extension of time of not more than 30 days if
so necessary.  If the condition of blight or nuisance is not abated within
the period of time provided given to the person responsible for the creation,
commission or maintenance of the problem, the City Manager, or his or her
designee, shall make arrangements to have the blight or nuisance abated.



(Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.08  COST OF ABATEMENT; LIEN.



   The costs incurred by the City of abating blight or a nuisance,
including any administrative expense so determined by the City Manager, or
his or her designee, shall become at once a debt to the City from the persons
to whom they are assessed and the amount assessed if unpaid for a period of
60 days shall on May 1 following, become a lien on the property that
benefitted from the abating of the nuisance in the same manner as permitted
by general law for state and county taxes, until paid.



(Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



676.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating or causing, or
permitting to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction.



   (b)   Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of an infraction
under the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable upon a first
conviction of a fine not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a
second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction
within a one-year period by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).



   (c)   Each person, firm, or corporation shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any
provision of this section is committed, continued, or permitted by such
person and shall be punishable accordingly.



   (d)   The City Manager is authorized to designate those particular
officers or employees of the City who shall be authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 503.  Passed 6-4-13.)



CHAPTER 692
Fireworks



692.01   Definitions.



692.02   Governance.



692.03   Use of low impact fireworks.



692.04   Use of consumer fireworks.



692.05   Use of fireworks under the influence.



692.06   Determination of violation; seizure.



692.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fireworks in parks - see S.U. & P.S. 1062.15



   International Fire Prevention Code - see FIRE PREV. Ch. 1610



692.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   “Consumer fireworks” shall mean fireworks devices that are
designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to
comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16
CFR parts 1500 and 1507. “Consumer fireworks” does not include low-impact
fireworks.



   (b)   “Firework” or “fireworks” shall mean any composition
or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed
for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion,
deflagration, or detonation.



   (c)   “Low-impact fireworks” shall mean ground and handheld
sparkling devices.



   (d)   “Minor” shall mean an individual who is less than 18 years
of age.



(Ord. 495.  Passed 8-7-12.)



692.02  GOVERNANCE.



   The sale, discharge, storage, transportation and distribution of
fireworks in the City of Ionia shall be governed by the Michigan Fireworks
Safety Act, Act 256 of 211.



(Ord. 495.  Passed 8-7-12.)



692.03  USE OF LOW IMPACT FIREWORKS.



   The use of low impact fireworks shall be permitted year-round.



(Ord. 495.  Passed 8-7-12.)



692.04  USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   Consumer fireworks use in the City of Ionia is limited to the day
before, the day of, and the day after, a federal holiday, subject further to
the following:



   (a)   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to a minor.



   (b)   A minor shall not use, possess, explode or cause to explode
any consumer fireworks, as defined herein, within the city.



   (c)   A minor shall not buy, purchase, acquire or obtain any
consumer fireworks, as defined herein, within the city.



   (d)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks upon another person's property or within 15 feet of another
person's property without such property owner's permission. No person shall
ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, public
street or public right-of-way, school property, or church property without
permission. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks
closer than ten feet from any building or structure on his or her property
and on adjoining properties.



   (e)   For purposes of this chapter, federal holidays are: New Year's
Day, Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., Washington's Birthday, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving
and Christmas.



   (f)   On the day before, the day of, and the day after a federal
holiday, no person shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.



(Ord. 495.  Passed 8-7-12; Ord. 506.  Passed 9-10-13.)



692.05  USE OF FIREWORKS UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   No person shall use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while
under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a
combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, as the terms are
defined in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, Act 300 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1949, as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 495.  Passed 8-7-12.)



692.06  DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION; SEIZURE.



   If a public safety officer determines that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, the officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the
violation. Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for
violating this chapter, the city may dispose of or destroy any consumer
fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution.



(Ord. 495.  Passed 8-7-12.)



692.99  PENALTY.



   Persons who violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a civil infraction and
subject to a fine of up to $500.



(Ord. 495.  Passed 8-7-12; Ord. 506.  Passed 9-10-13.)



PART EIGHT– BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE



TITLE TWO – Business Regulation



   Chap. 802.  Licensing in General.



   Chap. 804.  Sidewalk Cafés.



   Chap. 806.  Video Service Provider Right-of-Way Management.



   Chap. 808.  Cable Television System Franchises.  (Repealed)



   Chap. 810.  Cable Television Rate Regulation.  (Repealed)



   Chap. 812.  Telecommunications Rights-of-Way.



   Chap. 814.  Coin-Operated Amusement Devices.



   Chap. 832.  Junk Dealers.  (Repealed)



   Chap. 848.  Outdoor Assemblies.



   Chap. 850.  Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers.



   Chap. 858.  Renting of Residential Property.



   Chap. 860.  Retail Wheel Electric Providers.



   Chap. 866.  Taxicabs. (Repealed)



   Chap. 868.  Transient Merchants.



   Chap. 871.  Tattoo Parlors.  (Repealed)



Chapter 802
Licensing in General



802.01   Application of chapter.



802.02   License required.



802.03   Multiple businesses.



802.04   State licensed businesses.



802.05   License application.



802.06   License year; fee.



802.07   Conditions for issuance of license.



802.08   Required certification.



802.09   Compliance with fire regulations.



802.10   Finding of good moral character.



802.11   Compliance with Zoning Code.



802.12   Bonds.



802.13   Late renewal of license.



802.14   License issuance.



802.15   Exempt persons.



802.16   License suspension or revocation.



802.17   "Cause" defined.



802.18   License renewal.



802.19   License exhibition.



802.20   Exhibition of certificate on vehicles and machines.



802.21   Displaying invalid license.



802.22   Transferability of licenses; misuse; revocation.



802.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Outdoor advertising licensing and permits - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Coordinated collection of State license fees - see M.C.L.A. § 205.1



   Liability insurance for municipalities - see M.C.L.A. § 691.1409



802.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall govern the licensing of the various trades,
businesses, professions and activities regulated in this Title Two of Part
Eight - the Business Regulation and Taxation Code, except to the extent that
the same is governed by other provisions of this Title Two.



802.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or
carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which any
license is required by any provision of this Business Regulation Code without
first obtaining a license therefor from the City in the manner provided for
in this chapter.  Any person duly licensed on the effective date of this
Business Regulation Code shall be deemed licensed hereunder for the balance
of the current license year. 



(1975 Code § 7.1)



802.03  MULTIPLE BUSINESSES.



   The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting
or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains
within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or
privileges which are required by this Business Regulation Code to be
licensed, shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is
granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for
each such trade, profession, business or privilege, except as specifically
provided elsewhere in this Business Regulation Code. 



(1975 Code § 7.2)



802.04  STATE LICENSED BUSINESSES.



   The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the
State of Michigan to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any
trade, profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from
the necessity of securing a license or permit from the City if such license
or permit is required by this Business Regulation Code.



(1975 Code § 7.3)



802.05  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Unless otherwise provided in this Business Regulation Code, every
person required to obtain a license from the City to engage in the operation,
conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall
make application for said license to the City Clerk upon forms provided by
the City Clerk, and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may
be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license.  No person
shall make a false statement or representation in connection with any
application for a license under this Code. 



(1975 Code § 7.4)



802.06  LICENSE YEAR; FEE.



   Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain licenses, the license
year shall begin May 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on April
30 of the following year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance
of the license year at the full license fee, except that after November 1,
the fee for any license shall be one-half (1/2) the full amount, if the full
fee is ten dollars ($10.00) or more.  License applications for license
renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of fifteen days
prior to the annual expiration date.  In all cases where the provisions of
this Business Regulation Code permit the issuance of licenses for periods of
less than one year, the effective date of such licenses shall commence with
the date of issuance thereof. 



(1975 Code § 7.5)



802.07  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   No license or permit required by this Business Regulation Code shall be
issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the
State of Michigan, until such person shall submit evidence of such State
license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been
paid.  No license shall be granted to any applicant therefor until such
applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this Business Regulation
Code applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which
application for a license is made, nor unless the applicant agrees in writing
to permit inspection of the licensed premises at reasonable hours by
authorized officers of the City. 



(1975 Code § 7.6)



802.08  REQUIRED CERTIFICATION.



   No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of
the City is required prior to the issuance thereof until such certification
is made. 



(1975 Code § 7.7)



802.09  COMPLIANCE WITH FIRE REGULATIONS.



   In all cases where the certification of the Public Safety Director is
required prior to the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such
certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the
premises in which the person making application for such license proposes to
conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply
with all the fire regulations of the State of Michigan and of the City. 



(1975 Code § 7.9)



802.10  FINDING OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER.



   In all cases where the certification of the Public Safety Director is
required prior to the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such
certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making
application for such license is of good moral character.



(1975 Code § 7.10)



802.11  COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING CODE.



   In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business
or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor
shall not be issued until the Building Inspector shall certify that the
proposed use is not prohibited by the Zoning Code. 



(1975 Code § 7.11)



802.12  BONDS.



   Where this Business Regulation Code requires that the applicant for any
license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount
deemed adequate by the proper City officer, or, where the amount thereof is
specified elsewhere in this Business Regulation Code, in the amount so
required.  The form of such bond shall be acceptable to the City Attorney. 
In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or
more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same
protection as called for in any such bond.  Any such policies of insurance
shall be approved as to substance by the City official issuing said license
or permit and as to form by the City Attorney.



(1975 Code § 7.12)



802.13  LATE RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time
said fees shall be due shall be paid as "late fees" with an additional
twenty-five percent of the license fee required for such licenses for the
first fifteen days that such license fee remains unpaid, and thereafter the
license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses, plus fifty per cent
of such fee. 



(1975 Code § 7.13)



802.14  LICENSE ISSUANCE.



   If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers
of the City, as provided in this Business Regulation Code, said license shall
be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for
such license.



(1975 Code § 7.14)



802.15  EXEMPT PERSONS.



   No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee
by State or Federal law.  Such persons shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter.  The City Clerk shall, in all such cases, issue
to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to said exemption and
the reason therefor. 



(1975 Code § 7.16)



802.16  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   Any license issued by the City may be suspended by the City Manager for
cause, and any permit issued by the City may be suspended or revoked by the
issuing authority for cause.  The licensee shall have the right to a hearing
before the Council on any such action of the City Manager, provided a written
request therefor is filed with the City Clerk within five days after receipt
of said notice of such suspension.  The Council may confirm such suspension
or revoke or reinstate such license.  The action taken by the Council shall
be final.  Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee
therefor shall not be refunded. 



(1975 Code § 7.17)



802.17  "CAUSE" DEFINED.



   The term "cause", as used in this chapter, shall include the doing or
omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with
any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is
granted under the provisions of this Business Regulation Code, or upon any
premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or
condition is:



   (a)   Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the
public;



   (b)   Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature;



   (c)   Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit
granted; or



   (d)   Forbidden by the provisions of this Business Regulation Code
or any duly established rule or regulation of the City applicable to the
trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has
been granted.



(1975 Code § 7.18)



802.18  LICENSE RENEWAL.



   Unless otherwise provided in this Business Regulation Code, an
application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner
as an original application.



(1975 Code § 7.19)



802.19  LICENSE EXHIBITION.



   No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter upon his or her person at all times when
engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession,
business or privilege for which the license was granted; except that where
such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or
carried on at a fixed place or establishment, said license shall be exhibited
at all times in some conspicuous place in his or her place of business. 
Every licensee shall produce his or her license for examination when applying
for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any City police officer
or by any person representing the issuing authority.



(1975 Code § 7.20)



802.20  EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE ON VEHICLES AND MACHINES.



   No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or
mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Business
Regulation Code such tags or stickers as are furnished by the City Clerk. 



(1975 Code § 7.21)



802.21  DISPLAYING INVALID LICENSE.



   No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a
duplicate has been issued. 



(1975 Code § 7.22)



802.22  TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES; MISUSE; REVOCATION.



   (a)   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this
Business Regulation Code shall be transferable unless specifically authorized
by the provisions of this Business Regulation Code.  No licensee or
permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this
Business Regulation Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his or her license
or permit to another, nor shall he or she make any improper use of the same.



(1975 Code § 7.23)



   (b)   In addition to the general penalty provision for violation
thereof, any attempt by a licensee or permittee to transfer his or her
license or permit to another, unless specifically authorized by the
provisions of this Business Regulation Code, or to use the same improperly,
shall be void and result in the automatic revocation of such license or
permit. 



(1975 Code § 7.24)



802.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
the general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



CHAPTER 804
Sidewalk Cafés



804.01   Definitions.



804.02   Licensing required.



804.03   Licensing procedure.



804.04   General standards.



804.05   Operating standards.



804.06   Revocation.



804.99   Penalty.



804.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:



   (a)   "City manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City or his
or her designee.



   (b)   "Sidewalk" shall mean the paved surface provided for the
exclusive use of pedestrians in the public right-of-way and situated between
and extending from any building to the curb of any street (excluding
therefrom any unpaved area).



   (c)   "Sidewalk café" shall mean an outdoor dining area located on
a public sidewalk that is public through easement, dedication, or
right-of-way; that provides wait staff service or counter service; that
contains readily removable tables and chairs.  It is unenclosed by fixed
walls and is open to the air, except that it may have umbrellas.



   (d)   "Sidewalk café district" shall mean the area in which a
business owner may operate a sidewalk café.  The district shall consist of
Depot Street (Adams Street to Washington Street); Kidd Street (Adams Street
to Washington Street); Main Street (Dexter Street to Kidd Street); and,
Steele Street (Adams Street to Washington Street).



(Ord. 453.  Passed 11-6-07.)



804.02  LICENSING REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a sidewalk café within the City without first
obtaining a sidewalk café license and satisfying all of the requirements of
this chapter.



(Ord. 453.  Passed 11-6-07.)



804.03  LICENSING PROCEDURE.



   (a)   The City Manager is authorized to issue a revocable seasonal
license to operate a sidewalk café within the sidewalk café district,
provided the applicant has complied with the standards set forth in this
chapter.



   (b)   The applicant must hold a valid business license at the time
of applying for a sidewalk café license and be licensed as a food service
establishment in accordance with Public Act 92 of 2000, as amended from time
to time, and other applicable State food service licensing requirements.



   (c)   Before issuing a license, the City Manager shall confirm with
the City Treasurer and County Treasurer that the applicant is up-to-date with
all income tax, personal property tax and real property tax payments.



   (d)   The seasonal license shall permit operation of a sidewalk
café from April 1 up to and including October 31 of any calendar year.  A
license may also be issued for less than a full season or for a stipulated
number of operating days.



   (e)   The fees for a license, if any, shall be those fees set by the
City Council by resolution or ordinance from time-to-time.  If a fee is
established, no license shall be issued until all fees have been paid.



   (f)   The applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the City
against loss, including costs and expenses, resulting from injury to
person(s) or property occurring on the premises occupied by the café.  The
applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance as evidence of the
required policy to the City, and name the City as an additional named
insured, in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000).



   (g)   Application and site plan.



      (1)   No sidewalk café shall be established on public
property except in conformance with a site plan approved by the City Manager.



      (2)   The application for a sidewalk café license which shall
include the following:



         A.   Name of the individual and business;



         B.   Address of the sidewalk occupancy;



         C.   Property owner if other than applicant (if not the
owner, written authorization for submitting the application from the property
owner is required);



         D.   Dates and hours of occupancy;



         E.   Dimensions and area of occupancy (in square feet);



         F.   Indication if the application is a new application
or a renewal.



      (3)   A sidewalk café site plan which shall contain such
information as.



   (h)   Prior to acting on an application, the City Manager shall
solicit the input of the Community Development Director, DDA Director, Public
Safety Director, Public Works Director and any other City staff determined
necessary.  Upon soliciting input, the City Manager may approve, approve
with conditions, refer the application back to the applicant for modification
or deny the request.  If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal
the denial in writing to the City Council.



   (i)   Sidewalk café licenses may be renewed for additional seasons
subject to review by the City Manager.



(Ord. 453.  Passed 11-6-07.)



804.04  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (a)   The sidewalk café shall not reduce the pedestrian travel area
of any sidewalk to less than that required by the Americans with Disabilities
Act.  The pedestrian travel area shall not include trees, benches, bushes,
walls, fire hydrants, tree grates or any other fixture permanently located
within the right-of-way.



   (b)   The sidewalk café shall not impede on a fire hydrant, utility
box, or other public service facility.



   (c)   Sidewalk cafés shall only be located adjacent to the
establishment with which they are associated.



   (d)   Furnishings of a sidewalk café shall be limited solely to
umbrellas, chairs, tables and trash containers within the permitted area. 
All objects shall be of quality construction and design to ensure the safety
and convenience of users and to enhance the visual and aesthetic quality of
downtown.  No furnishings shall be attached to the sidewalk, street trees,
light pole or any structure.



   (e)   Furniture or other items used in connection with the sidewalk
café shall be placed on the sidewalk no more than thirty minutes prior to
the opening of the business and shall be removed within thirty minutes after
the closing of the business.



   (f)   Signs, banners, flags, pennants, balloons, blow-ups or other
similar decorations or advertising devices are prohibited.  Umbrellas may
contain the name of the business or other advertising so long as the product
being advertised is utilized by the business.



   (g)   All food preparation shall be performed inside the business. 
No outside storage of food is permitted including hot or cold buffet tables.



   (h)   Sidewalk café areas shall remain clear of litter, food
scraps, soiled dishes at all times.  The business shall clean the entire
area of encroachment and all other adjacent sidewalk areas be removing debris
and trash, and sweeping and washing the sidewalk each day.



   (i)   Operation of a sidewalk café shall not adversely impact
adjacent or nearby residential, religious, educational or commercial
properties, and shall be operated in accordance with all applicable codes and
regulations.



   (j)   Electric powered lights shall not be used for the sidewalk
café.  The use of tabletop candles is permitted.



   (k)   Music, either acoustical or via external building speakers, is
permitted but shall be kept at such a level so as to not interfere with the
activities of neighboring businesses or residences.  Music shall also be
kept at such a level as to comply in all respects with the provisions of
other applicable ordinances.



(Ord. 453.  Passed 11-6-07.)



804.05  OPERATING STANDARDS.



   (a)   All sidewalk cafés shall not begin sales or service before
6:00 a.m. each morning and shall cease sales or service by 9:00 p.m. each
night.



   (b)   Alcohol shall not be sold or consumed at a sidewalk café.



   (c)   The sidewalk café permit for each business shall be
prominently displayed and displayed in a location which shall be viewed
easily by the general public.



   (d)   The business shall not serve food or beverage to a patron at a
sidewalk café unless that patron is seated at a table.  "To go" service
shall not be covered by this prohibition.



(Ord. 453.  Passed 11-6-07.)



804.06  REVOCATION.



   (a)   The City Manager shall be authorized to revoke a sidewalk
café license granted per this chapter with or without just cause or
explanation upon the recommendation of any of the City departments that
participated in the license review process or for non-payment of fees or
charges owed the City or County.



   (b)   Upon revocation of a license, the licensee shall immediately
cease operation or any use of the encroachment upon written or oral notice by
the City Manager or his or her representative.  All furnishings and fixtures
shall be immediately removed from the sidewalk café.



   (c)   The licensee may appeal the revocation to the City Council,
however, until action is taken by the City Council regarding the appeal the
license shall remain revoked.



(Ord. 453.  Passed 11-6-07.)



804.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who operates a sidewalk café outside of the sidewalk café
district, or any person who operates a sidewalk café within the sidewalk
café district without a license or who violates any of the standards or
operating provisions contained in this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal
civil infraction, punishable per the provisions of Section 202.99 of these
Codified Ordinances.  A second violation event within the license period
shall result in the immediate termination of the license agreement for the
remainder of the license period.



(Ord. 453.  Passed 11-6-07.)



CHAPTER 806
Video Service Provider Right-of-Way Management



806.01   Definitions.



806.02   Purpose.



806.03   Consistent interpretation.



806.04   Applicability to permittees.



806.05   Contacts, maps and plans.



806.06   Use of public right-of-way.



806.07   Indemnification.



806.08   Insurance.



806.09   Performance bond or letter of credit.



806.10   Removal.



806.11   Different terms.



806.12   Severability.



806.13   Authorized City officials.



806.99   Penalty.



806.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings given to them herein:



   (a)   "Act" shall mean the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise
Act, being Act 480 of the Public Acts of 2006, M.C.L.A. 484.3301 and
following, as amended from time to time.



   (b)   "Claims" shall have the meaning set forth in Section 806.07(a).



   (c)   "Facilities" shall mean the lines, equipment and other
facilities of a permittee which use or occupy the public right-of-way in the
delivery of video services in Municipality.



   (d)   "Franchise agreement" shall mean the franchise agreement
entered into or possessed by a video service provider with Municipality as
required by Section 3(1) of the Act, if it is the standardized, uniform form
of franchise agreement established by the MPSC.



   (e)   "Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City of Ionia or
his or her designee.



   (f)   "Metro Act" shall mean the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, being Act No. 48 of the
Public Acts of 2002, M.C.L.A. 484.3101 and following.



   (g)   "Metro Act Permit" shall mean a permit to use the public
right-of-way issued by Municipality under its ordinance implementing the
Metro Act after a provider's application for same to Municipality as set
forth in such ordinance.



   (h)   "Metro authority" shall have the same meaning as "Authority"
in the Metro Act.



   (i)   "MPSC" shall mean the Michigan Public Service Commission, and
shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act and the Metro
Act.



   (j)   "Municipality" shall mean the City of Ionia.



   (k)   "Permittee" shall mean a video service provider with a
currently valid franchise agreement but without a currently valid Metro Act
Permit.



      (1)   Upon applying to Municipality for and then obtaining a
Metro Act Permit from Municipality, a video service provider is not a
permittee and is no longer required to comply with this chapter.  A video
service provider is also not a permittee and is not required to comply with
this chapter if it and Municipality enter into a voluntary franchise
agreement as described in Section 806.11.



   (l)   "Person" shall mean an individual, corporation, association,
partnership, governmental entity, or any other legal entity.



   (m)   "Public right-of-way" shall have the same meaning as in the
Act.



   (n)   "Street construction" and "street resurfacing" shall have the
meanings set forth in Section 806.06(h).



   (o)   "Video service" shall have the same meaning as in the Act.



   (p)   "Video service provider" shall have the same meaning as in the
Act.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.02  PURPOSE.



   (a)   Under the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, video
service providers may obtain a franchise to provide video services in
Municipality using a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement
established by the MPSC.  This form includes the right to use the public
right-of-way to provide such service but does not contain right-of-way
management and related provisions.



   (b)   Telecommunications providers who obtain such a standardized,
uniform form of franchise agreement generally will have previously obtained
from Municipality a permit under the Metro Act to construct and maintain
their telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way.  Such Metro
Act Permits set forth the terms and conditions for such right-of-way usage,
standard forms of such permits were agreed to in a collaborative process
between municipalities and providers that was initiated by the MPSC, and such
standard forms have since been approved by the legislature and the MPSC.



   (c)   Because telecommunications providers typically provide video
services over combined video and telecommunications facilities, such Metro
Act Permits generally provide adequate public right-of-way related
protections for Municipality and the public when such providers are providing
video services.



   (d)   Other video service providers, in particular new providers or
existing cable companies, may not have a Metro Act Permit issued by
Municipality.



   (e)   The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the
standardized, uniform franchise agreement require video service providers to
comply with all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and
occupation of the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services,
including the police powers of the franchising entity, and makes such
right-of-way usage subject to the laws of the State of Michigan and the
police powers of the franchising entity.



   (f)   The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the
standardized, uniform franchise agreement state that franchising entities
shall provide video service providers with open, comparable,
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral access to the public
right-of-way, and may not discriminate against a video service provider for
the authorization or placement of a video service or communications network
in the public right-of-way.



   (g)   The Michigan Constitution reserves reasonable control of their
highways, streets, alleys and public places to local units of government.



   (h)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the
public health, safety and welfare and exercise reasonable control over the
public right-of-way by regulating the use and occupation of such
rights-of-way by video service providers who have a standardized, uniform
franchise but who lack a Metro Act Permit from Municipality.  This chapter
does so by setting forth terms and conditions for such usage and occupation
from the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC and approved by the
legislature in Section 6(1) of the Metro Act, thus providing open,
comparable, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral access to the public
right-of-way and not discriminating against a video service provider for the
authorization or placement of a video service or communications network in
public right-of-way.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.03  CONSISTENT INTERPRETATION.



   This chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent
with the Metro Act and corresponding provisions of the forms of Metro Act
Permit approved by the MPSC, including applicable MPSC, Metro Authority and
court decisions and determinations relating to same.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.04  APPLICABILITY TO PERMITTEES.



   All permittees shall comply with this chapter, except that a permittee
need not comply with the insurance provisions of Sections 806.08(a) through
806.08(f) if it is maintaining the insurance required by Section II.J of its
Franchise Agreement (pertaining to incumbent video providers continuing
certain insurance provided under their preceding franchise).



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.05  CONTACTS, MAPS AND PLANS.



   (a)   Permittee Contacts.  Permittee shall provide manager with the
names, addresses and the like for engineering and construction related
information for permittee and its facilities as follows:



      (1)   The address, e-mail address, phone number and contact
person (title or name) at permittee's local office (in or near Municipality).



      (2)   If permittee's engineering drawings, as-built plans and
related records for the facilities will not be located at the preceding local
office, the location address, phone number and contact person (title or
department) for them.



      (3)   The name, title, address, e-mail address and telephone
numbers of permittee's engineering contact person(s) with responsibility for
the design, plans and construction of the facilities.



      (4)   The address, phone number and contact person (title or
department) at permittee's home office/regional office with responsibility
for engineering and construction related aspects of the facilities.



      (5)   Permittee shall at all times provide manager with the
phone number at which a live representative of permittee (not voice mail) can
be reached twenty-four-hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of a
public emergency.



      (6)   Permittee shall notify Municipality in writing pursuant
to the notice provisions of the franchise agreement of any changes in the
preceding information.



   (b)   Route Maps.  Within ninety days after the substantial
completion of construction of new facilities in Municipality, permittee shall
submit route maps showing the location of the facilities to Municipality, in
the same manner and subject to the same provisions as apply to
telecommunications providers under Section 6(7) and 6(8) of the Metro Act,
M.C.L.A. 484.3106(7) and (8). 



   (c)   As-Built Records.  Permittee, without expense to
Municipality, shall, upon forty-eight hours notice, give Municipality access
to all "as-built" maps, records, plans and specifications showing the
facilities or portions thereof in the public right-of-way.  Upon request by
Municipality, permittee shall inform Municipality as soon as reasonably
possible of any changes from previously supplied maps, records, or plans and
shall mark up maps provided by Municipality so as to show the location of 
the facilities.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.06  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (a)   Overlashing.  Permittee shall not allow the wires or any
other facilities of a third party to be overlashed to permittee's facilities
without Municipality's prior written consent. Municipality's right to
withhold written consent is subject to the authority of the MPSC under
Section 361 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, M.C.L.A. 484.2361.



   (b)   No Burden on Public Right-of-Way.  Permittee, its
contractors, subcontractors, and the facilities shall not unduly burden or
interfere with the present or future use of any of the public right-of-way. 
Permittee's aerial cables and wires shall be suspended so as to not endanger
or injure persons or property in or about the public right-of-way.  If
Municipality reasonably determines that any portion of the facilities
constitutes an undue burden or interference, due to changed circumstances,
permittee, at its sole expense, shall modify the facilities or take such
other actions as Municipality may determine is in the public interest to
remove or alleviate the burden, and permittee shall do so within a reasonable
time period. Municipality shall attempt to require all occupants of a pole or
conduit whose facilities are a burden to remove or alleviate the burden
concurrently.



   (c)   No Priority.  This chapter does not establish any priority of
use of the public right-of-way by permittee over any present or future
permittees or parties having agreements with Municipality or franchises for
such use.  In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the
public right-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the
second priority to Municipality, the third priority to the State of Michigan
and its political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions,
and thereafter as between other permit, agreement or franchise holders, as
determined (except as otherwise provided by law) by Municipality in the
exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved
to and conferred on it by the State of Michigan.



   (d)   Restoration of Property.  Permittee, its contractors and
subcontractors shall immediately (subject to seasonal work restrictions)
restore, at permittee's sole expense, in a manner approved by Municipality,
any portion of the public right-of-way that is in any way disturbed, damaged,
or injured by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the facilities to a reasonably equivalent (or, at permittee's
option, better) condition as that which existed prior to the disturbance. In
the event that permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to make such
repair within a reasonable time, Municipality may make the repair and
permittee shall pay the costs Municipality incurred for such repair.



   (e)   Marking.  Permittee shall mark its facilities installed after
the effective date of this chapter as follows: Aerial portions of the
facilities shall be marked with a marker on permittee's lines on alternate
poles which shall state permittee's name and provide a toll-free number to
call for assistance.  Direct buried underground portions of the facilities
shall have a conducting wire placed in the ground at least several inches
above permittee's cable (if such cable is nonconductive); at least several
inches above that, a continuous colored tape with a statement to the effect
that there is buried cable beneath; and stakes or other appropriate above
ground markers with permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that
there is buried cable below. Bored underground portions of the facilities
shall have a conducting wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be
required to provide the continuous colored tape.  Portions of the facilities
located in conduit, including conduit of others used by permittee, shall be
marked at its entrance into and exit from each manhole and handhole with
permittee's name and a toll-free telephone number.



   (f)   Tree Trimming.  Permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging
the public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming into contact with the facilities, consistent with any standards
adopted by Municipality. Permittee shall dispose of all trimmed materials.
Permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to that essential to maintain
the integrity of the facilities.  Except in emergencies, all trimming of
trees in the public right-of-way shall have the advance approval of Manager.



   (g)   Installation and Maintenance.  The construction and
installation of the facilities shall be performed pursuant to plans approved
by Municipality. The open cut of any public right-of-way shall be coordinated
with  Manager.  Permittee shall install and maintain the facilities in a
reasonably safe condition.  If the existing poles in the public right-of-way
are overburdened or unavailable for permittee's use, or the facilities of all
users of the poles are required to go underground then permittee shall, at
its expense, place such portion of its facilities underground, unless
Municipality approves an alternate location. Permittee may perform
maintenance on the facilities without prior approval of Municipality,
provided that permittee shall obtain any and all permits required by
Municipality in the event that any maintenance will disturb or block
vehicular traffic or are otherwise required by Municipality.



   (h)   Pavement Cut Coordination.  Permittee shall coordinate its
construction and all other work in the public right-of-way with
Municipality's program for street construction and rebuilding (collectively
"street construction") and its program for street repaving and resurfacing
(except seal coating and patching) (collectively, "street resurfacing").



      (1)   The goals of such coordination shall be to encourage
permittee to conduct all work in the public right-of-way in conjunction with
or immediately prior to any street construction or street resurfacing planned
by Municipality.



   (i)   Compliance with Laws.  Permittee shall comply with all valid
and enforceable federal and state statutes and regulations; and all valid and
enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the public
right-of-way, including the police powers of Municipality; regarding the
construction, installation, and maintenance of its facilities, now in force
or which hereafter may be promulgated. Before any installation is commenced,
permittee shall secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from
Municipality or other governmental entity as may be required by law,
including, without limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits.
Municipality shall not unreasonably delay or deny issuance of any such
permits, licenses or approvals.  Permittee shall comply in all respects with
applicable codes and industry standards, including but not limited to the
National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition adopted by Michigan Public
Service Commission) and the National Electric Code (latest edition).
Permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use ordinances and historic
preservation ordinances as may exist or may hereafter be amended.  This
section does not constitute a waiver of permittee's right to challenge laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations now in force or established in the
future.



   (j)   Street Vacation.  If Municipality vacates or consents to the
vacation of public right-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation
necessitates the removal and relocation of permittee's facilities in the
vacated public right-of-way, permittee shall consent to the vacation and
remove its facilities at its sole cost and expense when ordered to do so by
Municipality or a court of competent jurisdiction. Permittee shall relocate
its facilities to such alternate route as Municipality and permittee mutually
agree, applying reasonable engineering standards.



   (k)   Relocation. If Municipality requests permittee to relocate,
protect, support, disconnect, or remove its facilities because of street or
utility work, or other public projects, permittee shall relocate, protect,
support, disconnect, or remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense,
including where necessary to such alternate route as Municipality and
permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards.  The
work shall be completed within a reasonable time period.



   (l)   Public Emergency.  Municipality shall have the right to
sever, disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy facilities of permittee if such
action is necessary because of a public emergency. If reasonable to do so
under the circumstances, Municipality shall attempt to provide notice to
permittee. Public emergency shall be any condition which poses an immediate
threat to life, health, or property caused by any natural or man-made
disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents,
explosions, water main breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. Permittee
shall be responsible for repair at its sole cost and expense of any of its
facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by Municipality.



   (m)   Miss Dig.  If eligible to join, permittee shall subscribe to
and be a member of "MISS DIG," the association of utilities formed pursuant
to Act 53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, M.C.L.A. 460.701 et seq.,
and shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory provisions
and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (n)   Underground Relocation.  If permittee has its facilities on
poles of consumers energy another electric or telecommunications provider and
consumers energy or such other electric or telecommunications provider
relocates its system underground, then permittee shall relocate its
facilities underground in the same location at permittee's sole cost and
expense.



   (o)   Identification.  All personnel of permittee and its
contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact
with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible
identification card bearing permittee's name, their name and photograph. 
Permittee shall account for all identification cards at all times.  Every
service vehicle of permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be
clearly identified as such to the public, such as by a magnetic sign with
permittee's name and telephone number.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.07  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (a)   Indemnity.  Permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and
hold harmless Municipality, its officers, agents, employees, elected and
appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions from any and all
claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees,
proceedings, and expenses of any nature (collectively "claims") (including,
without limitation, attorneys' fees) arising out of or resulting from the
acts or omissions of permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors,
successors, or assigns, but only to the extent such acts or omissions are
related to permittee's use of or installation of facilities in the public
right-of-say and only to the extent of the fault or responsibility of
permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors and
assigns.



   (b)   Notice, Cooperation.  Municipality shall notify permittee
promptly in writing of any such claims and the method and means proposed by
Municipality for defending or satisfying any such claims.  Municipality
shall cooperate with permittee in every reasonable way to facilitate the
defense of any such claims.  Municipality shall consult with permittee
respecting the defense and satisfaction of such claims, including the
selection and direction of legal counsel.



   (c)   Settlement.  Municipality shall not settle any claim subject
to indemnification under the preceding two sections without the advance
written consent of permittee, which consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld.  Permittee shall have the right to defend or settle, at its own
expense, any claim against Municipality for which permittee is responsible
hereunder.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.08  INSURANCE.



   (a)   Coverage Required.  Prior to beginning any construction in or
installation of permittee's facilities in the public right-of-way, permittee
shall obtain insurance as set forth below and file certificates evidencing
same with Municipality. Such insurance shall be maintained in full force and
effect until the end of the term of the franchise agreement.  In the
alternative, permittee may satisfy this requirement through a program of
self-insurance, acceptable to Municipality, by providing reasonable evidence
of its financial resources to Municipality. Municipality's acceptance of such
self-insurance shall not be unreasonably withheld.



      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
Completed Operations Liability, Independent Contractors Liability,
Contractual Liability coverage, railroad protective coverage and coverage for
property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground
utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage, in an amount not less than five
million dollars ($5,000,000).



      (2)   Liability insurance for sudden and accidental
environmental contamination with minimum limits of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000) and providing coverage for claims discovered within three
years after the term of the policy.  Pursuant to the 2006 MPSC decision in
Case U-14720, permittee need not comply with the preceding sentence until
such time after the effective date of this chapter that it decides to place
any new or existing facilities underground within the public right-of-way in
Municipality.



      (3)   Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000).



      (4)   Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance
with statutory limits, and any applicable Federal insurance of a similar
nature.



      (5)   The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a
combination of underlying (primary) and umbrella policies so long as in
combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. If more than one
insurance policy is purchased to provide the coverage amounts set forth
above, then all policies providing coverage limits excess to the primary
policy shall provide drop down coverage to the first dollar of coverage and
other contractual obligations of the primary policy, should the primary
policy carrier not be able to perform any of its contractual obligations or
not be collectible for any of its coverages for any reason during the term of
the franchise agreement, or (when longer) for as long as coverage could have
been available pursuant to the terms and conditions of the primary policy.



   (b)   Additional Insured.  Municipality shall be named as an
additional insured on all policies (other than worker's compensation and
employer's liability). All insurance policies shall provide that they shall
not be canceled, modified or not renewed unless the insurance carrier
provides thirty days prior written notice to Municipality. Permittee shall
annually provide Municipality with a certificate of insurance evidencing such
coverage. All insurance policies (other than environmental contamination,
workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance) shall be written on
an occurrence basis and not on a claims made basis.



   (c)   Qualified Insurers. All insurance shall be issued by insurance
carriers licensed to do business by the State of Michigan or by surplus line
carriers on the Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of companies
qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus line carriers
shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company.



   (d)   Deductibles. If the insurance policies required by this
chapter are written with retainages or deductibles in excess of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000), they shall be approved by Manager in advance in
writing.  Permittee shall indemnify and save harmless Municipality from and
against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on
any insurance policy required to be furnished hereunder.



   (e)   Contractors. Permittee's contractors and subcontractors
working in the public right-of-way shall carry in full force and effect
commercial general liability, environmental contamination liability,
automobile liability and workers' compensation and employer liability
insurance which complies with all terms of this Part Eight.  In the
alternative, permittee, at its expense, may provide such coverages for any or
all its contractors or subcontractors (such as by adding them to permittee's
policies).



   (f)   Insurance Primary.  Permittee's insurance coverage shall be
primary insurance with respect to Municipality, its officers, agents,
employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and
commissions (collectively "them"). Any insurance or self-insurance maintained
by any of them shall be in excess of permittee's insurance and shall not
contribute to it (where "insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of
them" includes any contract or agreement providing any type of
indemnification or defense obligation provided to, or for the benefit of
them, from any source, and includes any self-insurance program or policy, or
self-insured retention or deductible by, for or on behalf of them).



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.09  PERFORMANCE BOND OR LETTER OF CREDIT.



   Municipality may require permittee to post a bond (or letter of
credit), in the amount provided in Section 15(3) of the Metro Act, as
amended, M.C.L.A. 484.3115(3).



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.10  REMOVAL.



   (a)   Removal; Underground.  As soon as practicable after the term
of the franchise agreement expires, permittee or its successors and assigns
shall remove any underground cable or other portions of permittee's
facilities from the public right-of-way which has been installed in such a
manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the
public right-of-way.  Permittee shall not remove any underground cable or
other portions of the facilities which requires trenching or other opening of
the public right-of-way except with the prior written approval of Manager.
All removals shall be at permittee's sole cost and expense. 



      (1)   For purposes of Section 10.1, "cable" means any wire,
coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire.



   (b)   Removal; Above Ground.  As soon as practicable after the
expiration of the term of a franchise agreement, permittee, or its successor
or assigns at its sole cost and expense, shall, unless waived in writing by
Manager, remove from the public right-of-way all above ground elements of its
facilities, including but not limited to poles, pedestal-mounted terminal
boxes, and lines attached to or suspended from poles.



   (c)   Schedule.  The schedule and timing of removal shall be
subject to approval by Manager. Unless extended by Manager, removal shall be
completed not later than twelve months following the expiration of the term
of the franchise agreement.  Portions of permittee's facilities in the
public right-of-way that are not removed within such time period shall be
deemed abandoned and, at the option of Municipality exercised by written
notice to permittee at the address provided for in the franchise agreement,
title to the portions described in such notice shall vest in Municipality.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.11  DIFFERENT TERMS.



   The Act allows local units of government and video service providers to
enter into voluntary franchise agreements that include terms and conditions
which are different from those required under the Act or which are different
from those in the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement
established by the MPSC.  The Metro Act allows municipalities and providers
to mutually agree to Metro Act Permit terms differing from those in the
standard forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC.  Current or
prospective permittees who desire terms different from those in this chapter,
as applied to them, should request such a voluntary franchise agreement or a
mutually agreed to Metro Act Permit from Municipality.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.12  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to protect
and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the public, and should
any provision or section of this chapter be held unconstitutional, invalid,
overbroad or otherwise unenforceable, such determination/holding shall not be
construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining conditions of
this chapter.  If any provision in this chapter is found to be partially
overbroad, unenforceable, or invalid, permittee and Municipality may
nevertheless enforce such provision to the extent permitted under applicable
law.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.13  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The Manager, which includes his or her designee, is hereby designated
as the authorized official of Municipality to issue municipal civil
infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or
municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to
appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations of this
chapter, as provided by Municipality's Codified Ordinances.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



806.99  PENALTY.



   A permittee who violates any provision of this chapter or terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a Municipal civil infraction, and
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)(plus
costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding ninety-three days, or
both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation in
the Codified Ordinances or any other ordinance (Codified Ordinances Section
202.99). Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to Municipality in the event of a violation by a permittee of this
chapter.



(Ord. 455.  Passed 2-5-08.)



Chapter 808
Cable Television System Franchises (Repealed)



EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Chapter 808, Cable Television System Franchises,
was repealed by Ordinance No. 455, passed  February 5, 2008.



Chapter 810
Cable Television Rate Regulation (Repealed)



EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Chapter 810, Cable Television Rate Regulation, was
repealed by Ordinance No. 455, passed  February 5, 2008.



CHAPTER 812
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way



812.01   Purpose.



812.02   Conflict.



812.03   Definitions.



812.04   Permit required.



812.05   Issuance of permit.



812.06   Construction/engineering permit.



812.07   Conduit or utility poles.



812.08   Route maps.



812.09   Repair of damage.



812.10   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee.



812.11   Modification of existing fees.



812.12   Savings clause.



812.13   Use of funds.



812.14   Annual report.



812.15   Cable television operators.



812.16   Existing rights.



812.17   Compliance.



812.18   Reservation of police powers.



812.19   Severability.



812.20   Authorized City officials.



812.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Cable television system franchises - see B.R. & T. Ch. 808



   Cable television rate regulation - see B.R. & T. Ch. 810



   Streets generally - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1020



812.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other
applicable law, and to ensure that the City qualifies for distributions under
the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.02  CONFLICT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to
conflict with the Act or other applicable law.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   The terms used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:



      (1)   "Act" means the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts
of 2002), as amended from time to time.



      (2)   "City" means the City of Ionia.



      (3)   "City Council" means the City Council of the City of
Ionia or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any
decision or function that is required by law to be made by the City Council.



      (4)   "City Manager" means the City Manager or his or her
designee.



      (5)   "Permit" means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to
the Act and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public
rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities.



   (b)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation
the following:



      (1)   "Authority" means the Metropolitan Extension
Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to
Section 3 of the Act.



      (2)   "MPSC" means the Michigan Public Service Commission in
the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same
meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act.



      (3)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership,
association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity.



      (4)   "Public right-of-way" means the area on, below, or above
a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public
right-of-way does not include a Federal, State, or private right-of-way.



      (5)   "Telecommunication facilities" or "facilities" means the
equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines,
wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication
services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not
include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or
houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to
provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section
332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652,
48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio
service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.



      (6)   "Telecommunications provider," "provider" and
"telecommunications services" mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of
the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, M.C.L.A. 484.2102.
Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that
person when providing a Federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as
defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934,
Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial
mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless,
two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter
only, a provider also includes all of the following:



         A.   A cable television operator that provides a
telecommunications service.



         B.   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person
who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.



         C.   A person providing broadband internet transport
access service.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (a)   Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in
the City for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a
permit pursuant to this chapter.



   (b)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a
permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager, and one copy
with the City Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall make ten copies of
the application and distribute a copy to Council, Director of Public Safety,
Director of Public Utilities, and Director of Public Works. Applications
shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including
without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's
existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act.



   (c)   Confidential Information. If a telecommunications provider
claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its
application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information,
which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, M.C.L.A.
15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications
provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.



   (d)   Application Fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00).



   (e)   Additional Information. The City Manager may request an
applicant to submit such additional information which the City Manager deems
reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such
requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional
information as established by the City Manager. If the City and the applicant
cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the
City, the City or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section
6(2) of the Act.



   (f)   Previously Issued Permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the
Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the City under Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, M.C.L.A. 484.2251
and authorizations or permits issued by the City to telecommunications
providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements
of this chapter.



   (g)   Existing Providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act,
within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way
in the City as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization
or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA
179, M.C.L.A. 484.2251, shall submit to the City an application for a permit
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3)
of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under
this division is not required to pay the five hundred dollar ($500.00)
application fee required under division (d) of this section. A provider under
this division shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the
permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4)
of the Act.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.05  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (a)   Approval or Denial. The authority to approve or deny an
application for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to
Section 15(3) of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an
application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications
provider files an application for a permit under Section 812.04(b) of this
chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the City. Pursuant to
Section 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City
Manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the
date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was
granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit.



   (b)   Form of Permit. If an application for permit is approved, the
City Managers hall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections
6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.



   (c)   Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City
Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions
shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the
public right-of-way.



   (d)   Bond Requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and
without limitation on division (c) of this section, the City Manager may
require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a
condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the
reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access
and use.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.06  CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.



   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the City without first
obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under Chapter 1020
of the Codified Ordinances for the City of Ionia, as amended, for
construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for
such a construction or engineering permit.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.07  CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.



   Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.08  ROUTE MAPS.



   Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the City, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
City. The route maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and until
the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.09  REPAIR OF DAMAGE.



   Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the City, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair
all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over,
below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the
public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.10  ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.



   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the City set
forth in Section 812.04(d) of this chapter, a telecommunications provider
with telecommunications facilities in the City's public rights-of-way shall
pay an annual maintenance fee to  the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the
Act.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.11  MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.



   In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the
City hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act,
which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of
Section 13(4) of the Act, the City also hereby approves modification of the
fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way
within the City's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees
required under Section 8 of the Act. The City shall provide each
telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter,
in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent
any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts
permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act,
such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the City's policy and
intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the City, shall be
promptly refunded as having been charged in error.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.12  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found
to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section
812.11 of this chapter shall be void from the date the modification was made.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.13  USE OF FUNDS.



   Pursuant Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the City
from the Authority shall be used by the City solely for rights-of-way related
purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the
City from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or
the Local Street Fund maintained by the City under Act No. 51 of the Public
Acts of 1951.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.14  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an
annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the Authority.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.15  CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.



   Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the City shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy
an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of
this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues
from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.16  EXISTING RIGHTS.



   Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided
herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing
rights that a telecommunications provider or the City may have under a permit
issued by the City or under a contract between the City and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.17  COMPLIANCE.



   The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that
purpose. The City shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the
Act, including but not limited to the following:



   (a)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information
Act, 1976 PA 442, M.C.L.A. 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in Section 812.04(c)
of this chapter;



   (b)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the
permit requirements hereof, in accordance with Section 812.04(f) of this
chapter;



   (c)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit
an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the five
hundred dollar ($500.000) application fee, in accordance with Section
812.04(g) of this chapter;



   (d)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45
days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a
permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the City, in
accordance with Section 812.05(a) of this chapter;



   (e)   Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a
permit, in accordance with Section 812.05(a) of this chapter;



   (f)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in
accordance with Section 812.05(a) of this chapter;



   (g)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, as provided in Section
812.05(b) of this chapter;



   (h)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to
the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public
right-of-way, in accordance with Section 812.05(c) of this chapter;



   (i)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which
exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is
returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication
provider's access and use, in accordance with Section 812.05(d) of this
chapter;



   (j)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional
fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with Section
812.06 of this chapter;



   (k)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the
City's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with
Section 812.11 of this chapter;



   (l)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance
with Section 812.14 of this chapter; and



   (m)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a
failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Section 812.15 of
this chapter.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.18  RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.



   Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the
City's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to
and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the City's authority to
ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.19  SEVERABILITY.



   The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.20  AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized City official to issue Municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or Municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the
Municipal Chapter Violations Bureau) for violations under this chapter as
provided by the City Code.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



812.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a Municipal civil infraction, and
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) (plus
costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 93 days, or both, unless
a specific penalty is otherwise provide for the violation in the Codified
Ordinances or any other ordinance (Codified Ordinances Section 202.99).
Nothing in this Section 812.21 shall be construed to limit the remedies
available to the City in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter
or a permit.



(Ord. 10-2002-01. Passed 10-14-02.)



CHAPTER 814
Coin-Operated Amusement Devices



814.01   Definitions.



814.02   License required.



814.03   Procedure for license; requirements and fees.



814.04   Revocation of license.



814.05   License display; minors; obscenity; gambling; proximity to
schools.



814.06   Gambling prohibited.



814.07   False representation.



814.08   Enforcement.



814.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Opening or attempting to open coin-operated devices - see M.C.L.A. §§
750.113, 752.811, 752.812



   Slugs - see M.C.L.A. §§ 752.801 et seq.



   Pornographic amusements - see GEN. OFF. 654.02 et seq.



814.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Arcade" means any structure or place where amusement devices
are located.



   (b)   "Coin-operated amusement device" means any electric,
electronic, or mechanical device or machine constructed principally for
entertainment or amusement purposes which may be operated or set in motion by
the insertion of a coin for which a financial charge is made by the owner or
operator of the premises where located even though such device is not coin
operated.  Examples of such devices by way of illustration, and not by way
of limitation, are video games, pinball machines, motion picture machines,
pool tables, shuffle boards, any other electrically or mechanically operated
device or machine, and any and all other and similar devices and machines.



   (c)   "Owner" means any person, society, club, corporation, or other
business entity which is the owner, lessee or occupant in control of the
premises in which coin-operated amusement devices are located.



   (d)   "Premises" means any structure or place except an arcade, as
defined hereafter, wherein any service or merchandise is offered for sale to
the public, or where any amusement or service is furnished for anticipated
gain or profit by the owner or operator.



814.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, society, club, corporation or other business entity shall
operate, maintain or cause to be maintained any coin-operated amusement
device, as herein defined, without having first obtained a license therefor
for the premises wherein the said device is to be located.



814.03  PROCEDURE FOR LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS AND FEES.



   (a)   Application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk upon
forms to be provided by that office, which application shall include at least
the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of owner and operator.



      (2)   The location of the premises where such amusement
devices will be located.



      (3)   The number, type and serial number of each such device,
provided that if the serial number is not available at the time of
application, it shall be submitted prior to placing the device into operation
after issuance of a license.  Thereafter, the owner shall, within
forty-eight hours after arrival upon the premises, give written notice to the
City Clerk of the information required in this paragraph for each succeeding,
additional or replacement device located thereon.



   (b)   The applicants shall, at the time of submitting the
application, pay the following license fee, and fifty percent of such fee
shall be forthwith refunded to the applicant if no license is issued and the
remainder shall be retained by the City.  The fees shall be as follows:



      (1)   For arcades:  two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);



      (2)   All other licenses:  seventy-five dollars ($75.00).



   (c)   After filing of the application with the required fee, it
shall be promptly forwarded by the City Clerk to each of the following
departments for its investigation, for the purposes hereafter stated, and for
recommendation based on such investigation prior to issuance of the license:



      (1)   Public Safety Department - determine whether owner is of
good moral character and whether owner has been convicted of any criminal
offense involving moral turpitude.



      (2)   Building Inspection Department - investigation to
determine if premises comply with all City ordinances relating to electrical
and mechanical facilities on premises as would be required for the operation
of amusement devices.



      (3)   Community Development Department - determine if proposed
use of premises (operation of amusement devices) is permitted under then
existing zoning and other ordinances relating to land use in the City.  Also
determine if premises are equipped and maintained in accordance with all
applicable City ordinances and State laws relating to fire protection as such
ordinances and laws relate to the intended use of the premises (maintenance
and operation of amusement devices).



   If any of the foregoing departments recommends disapproval, the
specific reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing.



   (d)   Upon receipt of written recommendation of approval from each
of the departments hereinbefore listed, the City Clerk shall issue the
license requested.



   (e)   If any department recommends denial of the license, the City
Clerk shall give written notice to the owner that the application for the
license is denied.  Within fifteen days thereafter, the owner may appeal
such denial to the Council by written request for public hearing before such
Council.  In the event of such request, the Council shall schedule and hold
a public hearing within twenty-one days after receipt of such request.  At
such hearing, the applicant, or his or her attorney, may present such
evidence as he or she desires to establish that he or she meets all
requirements of this chapter and each and every other ordinance and State law
applicable to the intended use of the premises.  Any other person or
representative of any City department may present such evidence as he or she
desires concerning said application.  The Council may approve issuance of
the license if it finds from all such evidence that all requirements of this
chapter, other applicable ordinances of the City and State laws are complied
with by the owner.  If the Council shall disapprove the issuance of a
license, it shall state the reasons therefor.



   (f)   Each license shall be issued for a period of one year and all
licenses shall expire on the first day of June of each year.  The license
shall contain at least the following information:



      (1)   Date of issuance and date of expiration.



      (2)   Name of owner and address of premises.



   (g)   Each license issued hereunder shall not be transferable, and
any purchaser, assignee or person or entity taking control of the licensed
premises shall apply for a new license and shall not operate the devices
regulated by this chapter without obtaining such license.  License fees, or
portions thereof, are not refundable except as otherwise provided in Section
814.03(b).



814.04  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (a)   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Council
upon violation of any provision of this chapter or term or condition of the
license issued hereunder.



   (b)   Notice of proposed revocation of license shall be given in
writing by the Council or the Director of Public Safety as its agent to the
licensee who may, within a period of ten days after receipt of such notice,
demand a public hearing on such revocation before the Council.  At any such
hearing the licensee may appear in person or by an attorney and offer any
evidence he or she may have as to why such license should not be revoked. 
Upon the conclusion of all such evidence, the Council shall render its
decision on the revocation in writing within fourteen days thereafter, and in
the event the license is revoked such decision shall set forth the specific
reasons therefor.



814.05  LICENSE DISPLAY; MINORS; OBSCENITY; GAMBLING; PROXIMITY TO SCHOOLS.



   (a)   Each license issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a
prominent place on the premises.  In addition thereto, a sign containing
information about the provisions of this chapter relating to minors, which
will be furnished by the office of City Clerk upon issuance of the license,
shall be prominently displayed on the premises.  Such sign may contain such
other information as the Township deems necessary and pertinent from time to
time, provided, however, that all such signs shall be prepared and furnished
by the City to the licensee.



   (b)   The use of amusement devices, as defined in this chapter, by
minors, shall be subject to the following provisions, and the licensee and
any and all persons on his or her behalf shall not permit or allow any minor
of the age hereafter stated to use or operate any amusement device at any
time or manner in violation hereof:



      (1)   No person under the age of sixteen years shall use or
operate any amusement device during the hours of any day in which that
person's public or parochial school class is in session, unless accompanied
by a parent or guardian at the time thereof.



      (2)   No person under the age of sixteen years shall use or
operate any amusement device at any time or manner which is prohibited by any
other provision of these Codified Ordinances or any law of the State of
Michigan applicable thereto.



   (c)   No amusement device shall be permitted or maintained on any
premises, which device displays, exposes, produces or emits any picture,
printed matter, or sound that is obscene, indecent, pornographic, or contrary
to good morals.



   (d)   No amusement device shall be permitted or maintained on any
premises, which device is adaptable, or may be readily converted into a
gambling device.



   (e)   No license shall be issued for any premises located within 500
feet of any public or parochial school except any such premises which may be
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the State of Michigan.



814.06  GAMBLING PROHIBITED.



   (a)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as
permitting licensing, use or maintenance of any gambling device, including
slot machines.



   (b)   No person, society, club, corporation or other business entity
shall knowingly permit any amusement device to be used or maintained for
purpose of gambling in any manner or form prohibited by the ordinances of the
City or the statutes of the State of Michigan.



814.07  FALSE REPRESENTATION.



   No person, society, club, corporation or other business entity shall
knowingly make any false representation in order to obtain a license or
renewal thereof under the terms of this chapter.  Upon any such conviction,
in addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any license which may
have been issued theretofore may be revoked by the Council.



814.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter shall be enforced by the Public Safety Department which,
upon the institution of any criminal prosecution for violation of this
chapter, shall immediately notify the Council of such action.  In addition
to, or in lieu of, any criminal prosecution for enforcement of this chapter,
the Council may, in its sole discretion, institute legal action before any
court of competent jurisdiction to abate a violation hereof or to otherwise
enforce the provisions of this chapter as it may deem necessary and proper in
the interest of the public health, safety, welfare and morals.



814.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
the general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 832
Junk Dealers  (Repealed)



EDITOR'S NOTE: Former Chapter 832, Junk Dealers, was repealed by Ordinance
No. 472, passed April 13, 2010.



Chapter 848
Outdoor Assemblies



848.01   Findings.



848.02   Definitions.



848.03   License required.



848.04   Application for license.



848.05   Plans; maps.



848.06   Investigation.



848.07   Action by Council.



848.08   Grounds for denial.



848.09   Contents of license; posting.



848.10   Minimum requirements.



848.11   Revocation of license.



848.12   Violations; declaration of nuisance.



848.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Outdoor theaters - see M.C.L.A. § 29.93



   Municipal police regulations re theaters and shows - see M.C.L.A. §§
431.201, 431.202



   Masks and disguises - see M.C.L.A. § 750.396



   Licensing in general - see B.R. & T. Ch. 802



   Parades - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.17



   Outdoor theaters - see P. & Z. 1286.02(a)



848.01  FINDINGS.



   The City Council of the City of Ionia finds and declares that the
interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City of Ionia require the regulation, licensing and control of assemblages of
large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health,
sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services
regularly provided in the City. 



(1975 Code § 7.171)



848.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Attendant" means any person who obtains admission to an
outdoor assembly by the payment of money or by the rendering of services in
lieu of the payment of money for admission.



   (b)   "Licensee" means any person to whom a license is issued
pursuant to this chapter.



   (c)   "Outdoor assembly", hereinafter referred to as "assembly,"
means any event, attended by more than 1,000 attendants, all or any part of
which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment,
amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to, musical
festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar gatherings, but does
not mean:



      (1)   An event which is conducted or sponsored by a
governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property;



      (1)   An event which is conducted or sponsored by an entity
qualifying for tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954, being 26 U.S.C.  501(c)(3), as incorporated by
reference in Section 201 of the Michigan Income Tax Act of 1967, Act 281 of
the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, being Section 201.201 of the Compiled
Laws of 1948; or



      (2)   An event held entirely within the confines of a
permanently enclosed and covered structure.



   (d)   "Person" means any natural person, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company,  association or organization.



   (e)   "Sponsor" means any person who organizes, promotes, conducts
or causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly.



(1975 Code § 7.172)



848.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an
outdoor assembly in the City of Ionia unless he or she shall have first made
application for, and obtained, as hereinafter prescribed, a license for each
assembly. 



(1975 Code § 7.173)



848.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made
in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the Clerk of the
City of Ionia and shall be made at least sixty days prior to the date of the
proposed assembly.  Each application shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable fee to be determined from time to time by Council and shall
include at least the following:



   (a)   The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person
making the application.  Where the person making the application is a
partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be
provided for all partners, officers and directors, or members.  Where the
person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be
filed and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders
having a financial interest greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00)



   (b)   A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed
assembly.



   (c)   The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the
site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted.  Where ownership is
not vested in the prospective licensee, he or she shall submit an affidavit
from the owner indicating his or her consent to the use of the site for the
proposed assembly.



   (d)   The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly
is to be conducted.



   (e)   An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at
the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the
evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or
other method which will be used for accounting purposes. 



(1975 Code § 7.174)



   (f)   A Certificate of Good Standing from the Secretary of State.



848.05  PLANS; MAPS.



   (a)   Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed
explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the
prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following:



      (1)   Police and fire protection.



      (2)   Food and water supply and facilities.



      (3)   Health and sanitation facilities.



      (4)   Medical facilities and services, including emergency
vehicles and equipment.



      (5)   Vehicle access and parking facilities.



      (6)   Camping and trailer facilities.



      (7)   Illumination facilities.



      (8)   Communications facilities.



      (9)   Noise control and abatement.



      (10)   Facilities for clean-up and waste disposal.



      (11)   Insurance and bonding arrangements.



   (b)   In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map or
maps of the overall site of the proposed assembly. 



(1975 Code § 7.175)



848.06  INVESTIGATION.



   On receipt of the application by the City Clerk, copies of such
application shall be forwarded to the chief law enforcement and health
officers for the City of Ionia, the State Fire Marshal and such other
appropriate public officials as the Clerk deems necessary.  Such officers
and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the
application and, within twenty days of receipt thereof, shall report their
findings and recommendations to the City Council. 



(1975 Code § 7.176)



848.07  ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   Within thirty days of the filing of the application, the City Council
shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny, a
license.  The City Council may require that adequate security or insurance
be provided before a license is issued.  Where conditions are imposed as
prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied,
within five days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed to the
applicant by certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor
shall be stated in the notice. 



(1975 Code § 7.177)



848.08  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.



   A license may be denied if:



   (a)   The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of
this chapter, with any or all conditions imposed pursuant hereto or with any
other applicable provision of State or local law; or



   (b)   The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or
fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 



(1975 Code § 7.178)



848.09  CONTENTS OF LICENSE; POSTING.



   A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind
and location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible,
the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this
chapter.  The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises of the assembly and shall not be transferred to any other person or
location. 



(1975 Code § 7.179)



848.10  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   In processing an application, the City Council shall, at a minimum,
require the following:



   (a)   Security Personnel.  The licensee shall employ at his or her
own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to
provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of
attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection
of property in and around the site of the assembly.  No license shall be
issued unless the chief law enforcement officer for the City of Ionia, in
cooperation with the Director of State Police, is satisfied that such
necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee
for the duration of the assembly.



   (b)   Water Facilities.  The licensee shall provide potable water,
sufficient in quantity and pressure to assure proper operation of all water
using facilities under conditions of peak demand.  Such water shall be
supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then
from a source, constructed, located, and approved in accordance with Act 294
of the Public Acts of 1965, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable State or local
law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the
Ionia County Health Director.



   (c)   Restroom Facilities.  The licensee shall provide separate
enclosed flush-type water closets as defined in Act 266 of the Public Acts of
1929, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and
in accordance with any other applicable State or local law.  If such
flush-type facilities arc not available, the Ionia County Health Director may
permit the use of other facilities which arc in compliance with Act 273 of
the Public Acts of 1939, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable State or local
law.



The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities
constructed, installed, and maintained in accordance with Act 266 of the
Public Acts of 1929, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable State or local
law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water and soap and
paper towels.



The number and type of facilities required shall be determined, on the basis
of the number of attendants, in the following manner:



   Facilities      Male      Female



   Toilets         1:300      1:200



   Urinals         1:100



   Lavatories      1:200      1:200



   Drinking fountains      1:500



   Taps or faucets      1:500



Where the assembly is to continue for more than twelve hours, the licensee
shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number of attendants, in
the following manner:



   Facilities   Male      Female



   Shower heads   1:100      1:100



All facilities shall be installed, connected and maintained free from
obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable
condition as determined by the Ionia County Health Director.



   (d)   Food Service.  If food service is made available on the
premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and
operated in accordance with the provisions of Act 269 of the Public Acts of
1968, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and
in accordance with any other applicable State or local law.



   (e)   If the assembly is distant from food service establishments
open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services available on
the premises as will adequately feed the attendants.



   (f)   Medical Facilities.  If the assembly is not readily and
quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee
shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the
assembly.  The kind, location, staff strength and medical and other supplies
and equipment of such facilities shall be as prescribed by the Ionia County
Health Director.



   (g)   Liquid Waste Disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid
waste disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining
thereto established by the Ionia County Health Director.  If such rules and
regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste
disposal shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service
Publication No. 526, entitled, Manual of Septic Tank Practice.  If liquid
waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they
shall be licensed in accordance with Act 243 of the Public Acts of 1951, as
amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in
accordance with any other applicable State or local law, and, prior to
issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the Ionia County Health
Director with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a
licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will assure proper, effective and
frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create
nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.



   (h)   Solid Waste Disposal.  The licensee shall provide for solid
waste storage on, and removal from, the premises.  Storage shall be in
approved, covered, fly tight and rodent proof containers, provided in
sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants.  Prior to
issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the Ionia County Health
Director with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a
licensed refuse collector, which agreement will assure proper, effective and
frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor
cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.



   (i)   The licensee shall implement effective control measures to
minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the
premises.  Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall
not be used in any way so as to contaminate food or equipment or otherwise
constitute a hazard to the public health.  Solid waste containing food waste
shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin.  The premises shall be
kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin.



   (j)   Public Bathing Beaches.  The licensee shall provide or make
available or accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with Act
218 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable
provision of State or local law.



   (k)   Public Swimming Pools.  The licensee shall provide or make
available public swimming pools only in accordance with Act 230 of the Public
Acts of 1966, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of State or
local law.



   (l)   Access and Traffic Control.  The licensee shall provide for
ingress to and egress from the premises so as to insure the orderly flow of
traffic onto and off of the premises.  Access to the premises shall be from
a highway or road which is a part of the County system of highways or which
is a highway maintained by the State of Michigan.  Traffic lanes and other
space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance,
fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles.  Prior to the
issuance of a license, the Director of the Department of State Police and the
Director of the Department of State Highways must approve the licensee's plan
for access and traffic control.



   (m)   Parking.  The licensee shall provide a parking area
sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall he or she
provide less than one automobile space for every four attendants.



   (n)   Camping and Trailer Parking.  A licensee who permits
attendants to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in
accordance with Act 171 of the Public Acts of 1970, as amended, and the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with any other
applicable provision of State or local law.



   (o)   Illumination.  The licensee shall provide electrical
illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to insure the safety and
comfort of all attendants.  The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved
by the Building Inspector.



   (p)   Insurance.  Before the issuance of a license the licensee
shall obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars/five million dollars ($1,000,000/$5,000,000) and property
damage insurance with a limit of not less than two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000) from a company or companies approved by the Commissioner
of Insurance of the State of Michigan, which insurance shall insure liability
for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from
the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto, and which insurance
shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the
duration of the license.  The evidence of insurance shall include an
endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the Clerk
of the City of Ionia in writing at least ten days before the expiration or
cancellation of said insurance.



   (q)   Bonding.  Before the issuance of a license the licensee shall
obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in
Michigan, a corporate surety bond in the amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000) in a form to be approved by the City Attorney, conditioned
upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions
of this chapter and all applicable provisions of State or local law, and
which shall indemnify the City of Ionia, its agents, officers and employees
and the City Council against any and all loss, injury or damage arising out
of or in any way connected with the assembly, and which shall indemnify the
owners of property adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to
cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash or other waste resultant from the
assembly.



   (r)   Fire Protection.  The licensee shall, at his or her own
expense, take adequate steps as determined by the State Fire Marshal to
insure fire protection.



   (s)   Sound-producing equipment.  Sound-producing equipment,
including, but not limited to, public address systems, radios, phonographs,
musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the
premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as
to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens
of the City of Ionia.



   (t)   Fencing.  The licensee shall erect a fence completely
enclosing the site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude
persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access
and which will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready
and safe ingress and egress.



   (u)   Communications.  The licensee shall provide public telephone
equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each 1,000
attendants.



   (v)   Miscellaneous.  Prior to the issuance of a license, the City
Council may impose any other condition reasonably calculated to protect the
health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the City
of Ionia.



848.11  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Council may revoke a license whenever the licensee or  his or
her employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and
all provisions and requirements set forth herein or with any and all
provisions and regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated
herein by reference. 



(1975 Code § 7.181)



848.12  VIOLATIONS; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee, or his or her employee or
agent, to knowingly:



      (1)   Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct or
operate an assembly without first obtaining a license as herein provided.



      (2)   Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to
create a public or private nuisance.



      (3)   Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene
display, exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement.



      (4)   Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a
disturbance in, around or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct.



      (5)   Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess
intoxicating liquor while on the premises.



      (6)   Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any
narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined in Act 343 of
the Public Acts of 1952, as amended.



   (b)   Any of the above-enumerated violations is hereby declared to
be a nuisance per se, immediately enjoinable in the Circuit Court, and,
further, is a sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the
immediate enjoining of the assembly by the Circuit Court.



(1975 Code §7.182).



848.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 850
Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers



850.01   Definitions.



850.02   License required.



850.03   Application for license.



850.04   License fees.



850.05   Exemptions from fee requirements.



850.06   Issuance of license.



850.07   Regulations for licensees.



850.08   Suspension and revocation of license.



850.99   Penalty



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Power to license - see M.C.L.A. § 91.1



   Hawkers and peddlers generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.371 et seq.



   Transient merchants generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.371 et seq.



   Secondhand dealers - see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.401 et seq.



   License fees - see ADM. 214.04(a)



   Transient merchants - see ADM. 214.04(a); B.R. & T. Ch. 868



   Noise from peddlers, solicitors and canvassers - see GEN. OFF.
664.03(b)(7)



850.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   As used in this chapter:



   (b)   "Peddler" means a person, whether or not a resident of the
City, traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to
street, who carries, conveys or transports goods, wares, merchandise, baked
goods, fruits or vegetables and offers or exposes the same for sale or makes
and delivers articles to purchasers. 



   (c)   "Solicitor" and "canvasser" mean a person traveling by foot,
wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place,
from house to house or from street to street, who takes or attempts to take
orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or any other personal
property, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed
in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for such
sale a sample of the subject of such sale and whether or not he or she is
collecting advance payments on such sales, or who procures names for
petitions or solicits funds for profit or nonprofit causes.



850.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall be a solicitor, canvasser or peddler in the City
without first having obtained a license therefor in the manner set forth in
this chapter.



850.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (a)   A person wishing to obtain a license to be a solicitor,
canvasser or peddler shall make written application therefor to the City
Clerk on a form furnished by the Clerk.  Such application shall contain the
following items, together with such additional information as the Clerk may
require:



      (1)   The full name, age and permanent residence, and the
local address if other than the permanent residence, of the applicant;



      (2)   The name of the firm or corporation that the applicant
represents, if any, together with the address of the central or district
office of such firm or corporation;



      (3)   The address or location of the place in the City where
the applicant proposes to engage in such business;



      (4)   A list or general description of the goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale;



      (5)   The length of time for which the license is desired;



      (6)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has held
a solicitor's, canvasser's or peddler's license from the City or has applied
for such a license previous to the present application, together with the
years in which such previous licenses were held or applications were made;



      (7)   The places, other than the permanent place of business
of the applicant, where the applicant has conducted business during the
previous six months;



      (8)   A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty days
immediately prior to the date of filing the application, such photograph to
be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear and identifiable manner; and



      (9)   An affidavit from the applicant as to the truth of the
statements contained in the application.



   (b)   If the business of the applicant requires the use of a
weighing or measuring device, the application shall be accompanied by a
certificate from the State Sealer of Weights and Measures stating that such
device has been examined and approved.



850.04  LICENSE FEES.



   (a)   For each license issued under this chapter, the applicant
shall pay the fee prescribed by resolution of the City Council.



850.05  EXEMPTIONS FROM FEE REQUIREMENTS.



   The following solicitors, canvassers and peddlers are exempt from the
payment of fees required by Section 850.04:



   (a)   Those engaged in interstate commerce;



   (b)   Those selling only products produced, grown or manufactured by
their own labor, but such exemption shall not apply to makers of baked goods;



   (c)   Those representing retail or wholesale establishments which
have engaged in business in the City three months or longer;



   (d)   Those representing charitable or nonprofit organizations;



   (e)   Those soliciting signatures on petitions for causes, both
public and private; and



   (f)   Those distributing handbills, advertising or other
informational material not otherwise prohibited by ordinance or State or
Federal law.



850.06  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Upon receipt of the application for the license required by Section
850.02, together with the appropriate fee required by Section 850.04, the
City Clerk shall make such investigation as he or she deems necessary for the
protection of the public good.  If, as a result of such investigation, the
applicant's character and business reputation are found to be unsatisfactory,
the application shall be denied.  If, as a result of the investigation, the
character and business reputation of the applicant appear to be satisfactory,
the Clerk shall issue the license.  If the applicant's character and
business reputation appear to be unsatisfactory, the Clerk shall refund the
license fee, less five dollars ($5.00), which shall cover the cost of the
application and investigation.



   No license shall be issued to a person under eighteen years of age,
except that this limitation shall not apply to street trades as the term is
defined in Act 157 of the Public Acts of 1947, as amended (M.S.A. 17.728,
Sec. 28, as amended).



   No applicant to whom such license has been refused or who has had such
a license revoked shall make another application for such a license for at
least six months after the last previous rejection or revocation, unless he
or she can show, to the satisfaction of the Clerk, that the reason for such
rejection or revocation no longer exists.



850.07  REGULATIONS FOR LICENSEES.



   Each licensee, upon receipt of the license required by Section 850.02,
shall, in the presence of the City Clerk, affix his or her signature thereon,
accepting the license and all the conditions of its use as stated in this
chapter or other ordinances of the City, respecting the use of such license,
and agreeing to the suspension and revocation of such license if any such
condition is violated.



   The following conditions and regulations shall apply to the exercise of
privileges granted by licenses issued under this chapter, in addition to
those set forth in other parts of this chapter or in these Codified
Ordinances:



   (a)   No licensee shall use any weighing or measuring device in the
conduct of his or her business, or have in his or her possession any weighing
or measuring device, unless such device has been examined and approved by the
State Sealer of Weights and Measures.



   (b)   No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any article or
commodity purported to be in quantities of standard weight or measure,
whether or not in the original package, unless the same is actually of the
weight or measure purported.



   (c)   No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any unsound, unripe
or unwholesome food, or a defective, faulty, incomplete or deteriorated
article of merchandise, unless the goods are so represented to the
prospective customers.



   (d)   Every owner licensed to sell or vend from a vehicle shall be
entitled to one helper for such vehicle.



   (e)   The Clerk may require that the goods, wares and merchandise of
an applicant for the license required by Section 850.02 be inspected by the
City Manager or his or her designee before issuing a license under this
chapter.  The Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to any applicant, and
may revoke any license issued under this chapter, if such goods, wares or
merchandise are found to be a fire hazard by the inspecting official.



   (f)   Persons peddling or vending goods from a vehicle under this
chapter shall comply with the provisions of the City Traffic Code relative to
vehicles, and shall not allow any such vehicle to remain standing for
peddling or vending purposes at one place on any street, alley or public
place for more than ten minutes on any one block.



   (g)   The license required by Section 850.02 shall be worn in full
view on the person to whom it was issued.



   (h)   No person shall solicit, canvass or peddle in any manner on
Monday through Saturday before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., or on Sundays
before 1:00 p.m. or after 8:00 p.m.



850.08  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Manager may suspend any license issued under this chapter
whenever, in his or her judgment, it is in the best interest of the City to
do so, having in mind the welfare, safety and health of the City.



   The City Manager may revoke any such license for the same reasons for
which he or she may suspend a license as aforesaid, after giving the licensee
reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard.



   A violation of the express conditions and regulations under which the
license was granted shall be sufficient cause for the suspension or
revocation of such license. If a license is revoked for a violation of the
express conditions and regulations under which it was granted, the amount of
the fee paid therefor shall be forfeited to the City and no licensee shall
have a right to a refund of any part of such fee.



850.99  PENALTY



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 858
Renting of Residential Property



858.01   Definitions.



858.02   Registration.



858.03   Certificate of compliance.



858.04   Scheduling of inspections.



858.05   Right of access for inspection.



858.06   Inspection consequences.



858.07   Fees.



858.08   Penalties.



858.09   Appeals.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Hotels; boarding and lodging houses - see M.C.L.A. §§ 427.1 et seq.



   Leases of City Housing Commission - see ADM. 278.07



   Licensing in general - see B.R. & T. Ch. 802



   Site condominiums - see P. & Z. Ch. 1272



   Distance spacing for multiple dwellings - see P. & Z. Appx. XI



858.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Agent" means a person authorized by the owner who has charge,
care or control of a rental dwelling or rental unit which is let or offered
for occupancy.  The owner must notify the City of any agent authorized to
act on the owner's behalf.  The tenant in a rental unit may not act as the
owner's authorized agent.



   (b)   "Applicable codes" means all local, State, and Federal laws
and regulations in force in the City that pertain to the maintenance and
safety of residential property, including but not limited to the Michigan
Construction Code, the Property Maintenance Code, and the Michigan Housing
Law.



   (c)   "Code official" means a public safety officer assigned by the
City Manager to enforce this chapter.



   (d)   "Certificate of compliance" means a certification issued under
this chapter stating that a residential dwelling was — as of the time of
its last inspection — safe, healthful and in fit condition for occupancy. 
A valid rental license issued by the City prior to the effective date of
Ordinance No. 516, qualifies as a certificate of compliance.



   (e)   "Family member" means a child, grandchild, stepchild, brother,
sister, step-brother, step-sister, half-brother, half-sister, parent,
grandparent, stepfather and/or stepmother (but not the parents of such
individuals), niece, nephew, uncle, aunt, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law.



   (f)   "Let for occupancy" or "let" means to permit, provide, or
offer occupancy of a building or portion of a building by a person who is not
the legal owner for monetary or other consideration.



   (g)   "Michigan Housing Law" means Act 167 of the Public Acts of
1917, as amended, M.C.L.A. 125.401 et seq.



   (h)    "Occupant" means an individual living in, sleeping in, or
otherwise having possession of a space.



   (i)   "Owner" means the record legal title holder and any partners,
members, or officers of a person holding title.



   (j)   "Person" means an individual, married couple, joint tenancy,
trust, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, or
any other similar legal entity.



   (k)   "Property Maintenance Code" means the property maintenance
code adopted in Chapter 1460 of these Codified Ordinances.



   (l)   "Rental dwelling" means a building or structure that has at
least one rental unit.  The term "rental dwelling" does not include jails,
hospitals, foster care homes, or buildings that are inspected by housing
professionals under contract with the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD), the Michigan State Housing Development Authority
(MSHDA), or an agency that is a sub-recipient of funding from either HUD or
MSHDA.



   (m)   "Rental unit" means a space for sleeping or living with
complete, independent living facilities (including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation) that is let for occupancy
to any individual(s) other than a family member of the owner.



(Ord. 338.  Passed 5-1-90; Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.02  REGISTRATION.



   (a)   An owner of a rental dwelling located in the City, regardless
of whether such owner resides in the City, shall provide to the code official
in writing the information described in this section.  The City shall
maintain a registry of all rental dwellings, upon such form as may be
prescribed by the code official containing, at a minimum, the following
information:



      (1)   Address(es) of the rental dwelling.



      (2)   Number and type of rental units.



      (3)   Name, address, and birthdate of the owner.  In
situations when the owner is not an individual, the name, address, and
birthdate of the president, general manager, partner, or other chief
executive of the entity.



      (4)   Name, address, and birthdate of any agent designated by
the owner.



      (5)   Address and telephone number of the person responsible
to accept notices and calls from the City.  A local agent for every rental
unit is required if an owner does not reside in Ionia County or any county
adjoining Ionia County.



   (b)   It is a violation of this chapter to provide inaccurate
information for the rental registry or to fail to provide information
required by the City for the rental registry.



   (c)   After the effective date of Ordinance No. 516, owners or
agents responsible for rental dwellings shall comply with the following
rental registry requirements:



      (1)   All existing rental dwellings shall be registered within
90 days of the effective date.  Any existing rental dwelling that does not
have a valid rental license as of the adoption date shall be subject to an
initial compliance inspection and shall be required to obtain a certificate
of compliance.  Any person occupying a rental unit as of the adoption date
shall be permitted to remain until an initial compliance inspection can be
conducted.



      (2)   All rental dwellings constructed or established by
conversion of an existing structure after the adoption date shall be
registered and required to obtain a certificate of compliance prior to being
let for occupancy.



      (3)   Any change in the information required by this section
shall be communicated in writing to the City within 30 days of the change by
the owner or the owner's agent.



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.03  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no owner or
agent responsible for a rental dwelling shall let any rental unit in such
dwelling without a valid certificate of compliance issued by the City after
inspection (as conducted pursuant to Section 858.04).



   (b)   A certificate of compliance shall expire in accordance with
the following guidelines:



      (1)   A certificate of compliance for a rental dwelling with
five or more rental units let for occupancy shall expire two years after the
date of issuance.  The code official may choose to inspect only a portion of
the rental units in such dwelling in order to issue a certificate of
compliance, at the discretion of the code official.  An inspection fee will
be assessed only for the rental units that are actually inspected.



      (2)   A certificate of compliance for a rental dwelling with
less than five rental units let for occupancy shall generally expire four
years after the date of issuance.  However, the certificate of compliance
shall expire only two years after the date of issuance if the owner or agent
responsible for the rental dwelling has been found to be in violation of this
chapter within the last five years.  Further, a four-year certificate of
compliance may be amended to expire two years from the date of original
issuance if the owner or agent is later found to be responsible for a
violation of this chapter.  If the amendment results in an expired
certificate of compliance, a complete compliance inspection will occur and a
new two-year certificate of compliance issued if the rental dwelling passes
the inspection.



   (c)   A certificate of compliance authorizes occupancy only of the
rental units that were let for occupancy as of the date of issuance.  If new
rental units are added by construction or conversion, the owner or agent must
notify the City and obtain a new certificate of compliance before such rental
units can be occupied.



   (d)   The City may refuse to issue a certificate of compliance for
any rental dwelling owned by a person or entity with outstanding bills or
liabilities to the City.



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.04  SCHEDULING OF INSPECTIONS.



   (a)   The code official shall be responsible for contacting owners
and agents to conduct inspections.



   (b)   The code official shall endeavor to schedule initial
compliance inspections as follows:



      (1)   Newly constructed rental dwellings will be inspected in
accordance with this chapter at the same time the building is subject to
final inspection to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required under the
building code.



      (2)   Existing structures that are converted to rental
dwellings will be scheduled for an initial compliance inspection within 30
days of the submission of the rental registry information.



      (3)   Rental dwellings that were not registered with the City
prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 516 will be scheduled for an initial
compliance inspection within 60 days of the submission of the rental registry
information.



      (4)   Any new rental unit within a certified rental dwelling
will be scheduled for an initial compliance inspection within 30 days of a
request for inspection by the owner or agent.



      (5)   Upon receipt of knowledge that a rental dwelling is not
registered with the City as required by this chapter, the code official shall
schedule an initial compliance inspection and may assess fees and/or issue
violation citations as authorized under this chapter.



   (c)   Periodic compliance inspections will be scheduled by the code
official for registered rental dwellings prior to the expiration of the
existing certificate of compliance.



   (d)   Non-periodic compliance inspections may be required and
scheduled as soon as practical by the code official:



      (1)   Upon receipt of a complaint from an owner, agent,
occupant or citizen who would have occasion to be aware that the rental
dwelling or rental unit is in violation of this chapter.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a report or a referral from any City
department, public or private school or other public agency that a rental
dwelling or rental unit is in violation of this chapter.



   (e)   When scheduling an inspection, the code official shall seek
right of entry and access pursuant to Section 858.05 of this chapter, and
shall not conduct an inspection until such rights are obtained.



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.05  RIGHT OF ACCESS FOR INSPECTION.



   (a)   To conduct a complete compliance inspection for purposes of
this chapter, the code official needs access to all rental units to be
inspected, and to all additional parts of the premises that serve such units,
including mechanical equipment and hallways.  The code official shall not
request access to structures that are unattached from any rental units and
occupied solely by the owner or the owner's family members, except to the
extent needed to inspect mechanical equipment serving the rental units.



   (b)   By registering a rental dwelling, the owner or agent agrees to
make the rental dwelling available for inspections conducted under this
chapter within 14 days of receiving notice of the need for inspection from
the code official.  If an owner or agent hinders a code official's access to
portions of a rental dwelling premises so as to prevent a full inspection,
the code official is authorized to revoke a certificate of compliance, pursue
administrative warrants, or pursue other recourse as provided by law.



   (c)    If an occupant refuses to provide access to a rental unit,
the code official is authorized to pursue administrative warrants, or pursue
other recourse as provided by law.



   (d)   Upon request of the code official, the owner or agent
responsible for the rental dwelling shall accompany the code official during
the inspection.



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.06  INSPECTION CONSEQUENCES.



   (a)   If the code official conducts an inspection and determines
that the rental dwelling or unit is not in compliance with applicable codes,
the code official will provide the owner or agent a list of items required to
be completed or conditions to be met, and the applicable time frame, in order
to schedule a re-inspection.  A certificate of compliance will be issued or
renewed only when those requirements have been met.



   (b)   If the code official does not conduct an initial compliance
inspection within the time frames stated in Section 858.05, the owner or
agent shall, upon request, be entitled reimbursement of the initial
registration fee.  The building inspector's inability to conduct an
inspection shall not be construed as in any way authorizing an owner or agent
to let a rental dwelling or unit prior to the issuance of a certificate of
compliance.



   (c)   If the official does not conduct a periodic compliance
inspection prior to the expiration date of the certificate of compliance:



      (1)   And the failure is not due to any action or failure of
the owner or agent (including a failure to make the rental dwelling available
for inspection within 14 days of receiving notice of the need for
inspection), the owner or agent shall be permitted to let the subject rental
dwelling or unit until the code official conducts an inspection and decides
whether or not to issue or renew a certificate of compliance.



      (2)   And the failure is due to an action or failure of the
owner or agent (including a failure to make the rental dwelling available for
inspection within 14 days of receiving notice of the need for inspection),
the owner or agent shall not let the subject rental dwelling or unit and, if
occupants are utilizing the rental dwelling or unit, the code official may
require vacation of the subject rental dwelling or unit and may seek a court
of eviction pursuant to Section 858.07(c).



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.07  FEES.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the owner or
agent responsible for a rental dwelling shall pay a fee for the initial
registration of the dwelling, all required compliance inspections, all
required re-inspections, and any appeal request that does not result in a
reversal or modification of the code official's decision.  The fees shall be
in amounts established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.



   (b)   All required fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a
certificate of compliance.



   (c)   The code official shall waive registration and inspection fees
for any tax-exempt charitable organization that is operating the subject
rental dwelling for charitable purposes (such as providing relief to the poor
or to victims of domestic violence), or that is letting the subject rental
unit to its own employees (such as pastor of a church renting a church-owned
dwelling).



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.08  PENALTIES.



   (a)   Any violation of this chapter shall be a municipal civil
infraction and shall be subject to such fines, costs and other relief as
provided for in Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances.



   (b)   Where an owner has notified the City that an agent is
authorized to act on his behalf, the agent (and not the owner) shall
generally be the party responsible for violations of this chapter.  However,
this division shall not be interpreted as precluding the City from seeking
the remedies provided in division (d) in situations where the owner has
authorized an agent.



   (c)   Upon a finding of responsibility by the court for a violation
of this chapter, including a violation of applicable codes, the code official
may revoke an existing certificate of compliance and may seek the issuance of
a court order compelling the eviction of all persons and property upon the
premises until a new certificate of compliance is issued by the City.



   (d)   The City may seek a court order requiring an owner or agent to
abate conditions in a rental dwelling that constitute a violation of
applicable codes, and may seek permission for City personnel to abate such
conditions with the cost of abatement becoming a lien on the property
collected in the same manner as property taxes.



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



858.09  APPEALS.



   (a)   Appeal Procedure.



      (1)   Any owner aggrieved by a decision of the code official
made pursuant to this chapter (except for decisions to commence enforcement
proceedings or obtain a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction) may
request a hearing on the matter before the Housing Board of Appeals. 
Examples of decisions that can be appealed include decisions to revoke or
withhold a certificate of compliance and decisions to deny a fee waiver under
Section 858.06.  The aggrieved person shall file a written appeal request to
the code official requesting the hearing.  The appeal request shall include
the name, address and phone number of the appellant, and a brief statement of
the grounds for the appeal.



      (2)   Any appeal request submitted under this section shall
not be processed until payment of the applicable appeal fee.



      (3)   The appeal must be filed within 21 days after the date
of the decision being appealed (which shall be the date when the owner or
agent first received notice of the decision).  Failure to file the written
notice of appeal within the 21-day period shall be deemed a waiver of the
person's right to a hearing.  Upon timely receipt of an appeal, the code
official shall set a time for a hearing before the Housing Board of Appeals
and shall give the appellant notice of the date, time and location for the
hearing.



   (b)   Hearings.



      (1)   Hearings shall be commenced within a reasonable time
after an appeal has been filed.  At such hearings the appellant shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause as to why the code
official's decision was in error.  The code official shall be given the
opportunity to provide information about the decision being appealed.



      (2)   The Housing Board of Appeals shall conduct the hearing
in a public meeting accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the
Public Acts of 1976, as amended, M.C.L.A. 15.261 et seq.



      (3)   After a hearing, the Housing Board of Appeals may
affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the code official.  In rendering
these determinations, the powers of the Housing Board of Appeals shall be
limited to interpreting the provisions of this chapter and the applicable
codes and applying their specific provisions to the specific case being heard.



   (c)   Decision.  The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be
final.



(Ord. 516.  Passed 10-7-14.)



Chapter 860
Retail Wheel Electric Providers



860.01   Definitions.



860.02   Franchise required.



860.03   Application process.



860.04   Terms and conditions.



860.05   Liability; indemnity.



860.06   Basis for computation of fees.



860.07   False or misleading representations.



860.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Electricity generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, §§ 24, 25; M.C.L.A.
§§ 486.201 et seq.; S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1048



   Electrical Code in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.4b
et seq., 117.4f



   National Electrical Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1426



860.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used this chapter:



   (a)   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Ionia,
and shall include his or her designee.



   (b)   "Electrical system" shall include electric lines, towers,
masts, poles, cross-arms, guides, braces, feeders, transmission and
distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances used in the
transmission of electricity existing on, along, across or under the highways,
streets, alleys, bridges (hereinafter "rights-of-way") within the City of
Ionia.



   (c)   "Franchise" means a revocable franchise that allows a person
to be a retail wheel electrical provider.



   (d)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, company,
association, firm, partnership or limited liability company, including its
lessors, trustees and receivers.



   (e)   "Retail wheel electrical provider" or "provider" means a
person supplying or desiring to supply electricity, generated by another,
through an electrical system entirely or substantially owned by another.



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



860.02  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   No person shall become a retail wheel electrical provider within the
City without first obtaining a revocable franchise therefor.



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



860.03  APPLICATION PROCESS.



   (a)   A provider, or one who desires to become a provider, shall
apply for a revocable franchise by providing to the City the following
information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant.  If the
applicant is not a natural person, the name and address of each of its
officers and general partners and each limited partner holding an equity
interest of more than twenty percent.



      (2)   Evidence of all required regulatory approvals, permits
and licenses for the offering or providing of electricity by way of retail
wheeling.  To the extent such an approval, permit or license cannot be
obtained prior to the issuance of a franchise, the provider shall satisfy the
City that one has been obtained prior to the provider's actual use of an
electrical system.



      (3)   A statement that the applicant is not in any way
indebted to the City for taxes, fees, costs or any other sums.



      (4)   A list of all persons to whom the provider intends to
provide electricity.



   (b)   The City may request that an applicant submit additional
information it reasonably deems necessary to respond to the application.



   (c)   To reimburse the City for its fixed and variable costs
incurred by the City for granting and monitoring revocable franchises, each
applicant shall pay a non-refundable application fee in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) (unless changed hereafter by resolution of the
City Council). Said fee shall be paid as follows:



      (1)   One thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250) upon the
submission of the application; and



      (2)   One thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250) upon the
return to the City by the applicant of the signed revocable franchise.



   (d)   Within sixty days of receiving a provider's application and
all required information, the City Manager shall present the provider's
request for a revocable franchise to the City Council, which shall grant or
deny the request or, if reasonably necessary, request more information before
granting or denying said request.



   (e)   A revocable franchise shall not be granted unless the
applicant establishes that it is capable of complying with the legal,
technical and financial requirements of this chapter.



   (f)   If the City Council grants the provider's request for a
revocable franchise, the City Manager shall prepare and execute a revocable
franchise agreement consistent with this chapter and submit it to the
provider for its signature. Said signature shall indicate that the provider
acknowledges and agrees to abide by the terms and conditions set forth
therein and within this chapter.



   (g)   A revocable franchise shall become effective when the City
receives an original franchise bearing the signature of the applicant along
with the payment of the second required application fee.



   (h)   A revocable franchise granted by the City Council, executed by
the City Manager and sent to the applicant, but not signed and returned with
the required fee by the applicant within six months of its being mailed to
the applicant, shall be null and void.



   (i)   Prior to the expiration of a revocable franchise, a provider
may apply for a renewed revocable franchise, the process and application fee
for which shall be the same as the original revocable franchise.



   (j)   The terms, conditions and duration of a renewed revocable
franchise shall be the same as for the original revocable franchise.



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



860.04  TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   (a)   A revocable franchise shall remain in effect for a term of
five years commencing upon the date it is executed by the City.



   (b)   All such revocable franchises shall be nonexclusive and
nonassignable.  By issuing a revocable franchise, the City does not agree to
restrict the number of revocable franchises in all or part of the City.



   (c)   The revocable franchise shall not limit or modify any other
revocable franchise, license or revocable franchise previously granted by the
City to any other occupant of the rights of way.



   (d)   All revocable franchises shall be revocable by the City
Council for any reason, upon providing 180 days written notice to the
provider.



   (e)   The provider's use of any rights of way shall not exceed that
authorized by this chapter and the revocable franchise.



   (f)   The provider shall use the electrical systems of others and
shall not itself construct or cause to be constructed any electrical system
for its own purposes other than when such system is located upon a customer's
property or is necessary to connect a customer to another utility's
electrical system (and then, only if such construction would not amount to an
unreasonable duplication of existing facilities owned by local utilities). 
In the event such construction is necessary, the provider shall first give
the City ten days written notice of its intent to so construct.



   (g)   Any unlawful use of private property over the objection of the
property owner shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (h)   In the event a provider, during the term of its revocable
franchise, desires to provide electricity to persons not previously disclosed
to the City in the provider's application, the provider shall notify the City
in writing prior to so providing electricity.



   (i)   In the event of a conflict between this chapter and a
revocable franchise, this chapter shall prevail.



   (j)   Unless required to do so by State or Federal law, a person,
including a public utility, owning an electrical system, shall not lease or
sublease any portion of its electrical system, or allow another to use its
electrical system, unless said person has first obtained from the City a
revocable franchise allowing it to do so.



   (k)   If a franchisee forfeits or otherwise loses its rights under a
pole-conduit license agreement with the owner of an electrical system, the
franchisee shall notify the City Manager in writing within fourteen days.



   (l)   A franchisee shall provide the City with copies of all
documents it sends to the Michigan Public Service Commission and copies of
all orders, decisions or correspondence franchisee receives from the Michigan
Public Service Commission. 



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



860.05  LIABILITY; INDEMNITY.



   (a)   A provider shall have no recourse against the City for any
loss or damage arising out of the failure of the City to have the authority
to grant all or any part of a revocable franchise or the authority to grant
permission to use all or part of the rights-of-way. A provider acknowledges
that on accepting a revocable franchise:



      (1)   It did so relying on its own investigation and
understanding of the power and authority of the City; and



      (2)   It has not been induced to obtain a revocable franchise
by any understanding or promise by or on behalf of the City concerning any
term or condition of a revocable franchise not expressed in this chapter or
in the revocable franchise.



   (b)   Each provider accepts as its own risk that the City may make
use of the rights of way in which a system used by a provider is located in a
manner inconsistent with the provider's use and that in such event the
provider will not be entitled to compensation from the City.



   (c)   The City shall not be liable for injury or damage to others
arising out of a provider's use of a system due to the act or omission of any
person other than the City or those persons for which the City is legally
liable as a matter of law.



   (d)   A provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and
hold harmless the City and its respective employees, officers, boards, agents
and contractors (hereinafter referred to in this chapter as "indemnitees")
from and against any and all liability which may be imposed upon or against
the indemnitees by reason of any act or omission of a provider, its
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal
injury or property damage to any person arising out of its use of an
electrical system.



   (e)   In the event any action shall be brought against the
indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the indemnitees are indemnified
hereunder, a provider shall, at the provider's sole cost and expense, defend
the same with legal counsel selected by the provider and consented to by the
City Attorney, which consent shall not to be unreasonably withheld.



   (f)   A provider shall immediately advise the City Attorney of any
claim or litigation that may result in liability to the City.



   (g)   The issuance of a revocable franchise, or other action or
transaction of the City, shall not constitute any representation, guarantee
or warranty by the City of any kind to any person, customer or provider, and
shall not be a defense against a provider's obligation to indemnify and hold
the City harmless.



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



860.06  BASIS FOR COMPUTATION OF FEES.



   If the franchisee or any subsidiary company pays a fee, charge or other
payment of any kind on a periodic basis (e.g., monthly, quarterly, annually,
etc.) for a franchise to any municipality in Michigan, then the franchisee
shall pay to the City a fee computed in the same manner as the fee is
computed in the other municipality (e.g., if the fee in the other
municipality is computed on a percentage of revenue, the same percentage
shall be applicable and paid to the City.  If such fee in the other
municipality is computed on the lineal measure of service, the same unit
price shall be applicable and paid to the City).  A one-time charge prior to
and for the installation of such new service shall be considered a periodic
fee unless the charge is unreasonably higher than that paid to other
municipalities.  If fees are paid by the grantee to more than one
municipality, then the computation of the fee for the City shall be based
upon the method producing the largest fee.  The City shall have the right,
at its own expense, to audit the books and records or review audits of the
books and records of the grantee to determine whether and to what extent a
fee is due.  Any additional fee found due as a result of the audit or review
shall be paid by the grantee.  If the additional fee is greater than two
percent of the total annual fee, which should have been paid for any calendar
year, the grantee shall pay the City's cost for the audit.



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



860.07  FALSE OR MISLEADING REPRESENTATIONS.



   Any material, false or misleading statement or representation knowingly
made by an applicant or provider in an application, or in any document
submitted to the City pursuant to this chapter, shall be a violation of this
chapter, and, if made by a provider, shall be a material breach of its
revocable franchise, and shall subject the applicant or provider to all
penalties and remedies available to the City, including the denial of the
application or revocation of the revocable franchise.



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



860.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of the Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, the City
may:



   (a)   Bring an action for an injunction or other process against a
person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this chapter; or



   (b)   Revoke a person's revocable franchise.



(Ord. 388.  Passed 3-7-00.)



Chapter 866
Taxicabs (Repealed)



   EDITOR’S NOTE:  Former Chapter 866, Taxicabs, was repealed by
Ordinance No. 536, passed October 3, 2017.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Carrying passengers; locking of doors - see M.C.L.A. §§ 256.531,
256.532



   Application for registration of taxicabs - see M.C.L.A. § 257.217



   Discrimination - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.146, 750.147



   Michigan Vehicle Code - see TRAF. Ch. 410



   Commercial and heavy vehicles - see TRAF. Ch. 430



   Stopping of motor vehicles for temporary detention and search - see
GEN. OFF. 604.01



   Transportation or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages
in motor vehicles - see GEN. OFF. 606.01



Chapter 868
Transient Merchants



868.01   Transient merchant defined.



868.02   License required.



868.03   Effect of association with local merchant.



868.04   License application.



868.05   Information attached to application.



868.06   Preliminary investigation.



868.07   Bond requirement.



868.08   License fees; effective period.



868.09   Use of public areas.



868.10   Exhibition of license.



868.11   Prohibited conduct.



868.12   Records.



868.13   Loud noises and speaking devices.



868.14   Exempt persons.



868.99   Penalty.



Exhibit A:    Application for transient merchant license.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Power to license - see M.C.L.A. § 91.1



   Hawkers and peddlers - see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.371 et seq.



   Transient merchants generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.371 et seq.



   Secondhand dealers - see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.401 et seq.



   License fees - see ADM. 214.04(a)



   Noise by peddlers, solicitors and canvassers - see GEN. OFF.
664.03(b)(7)



   Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers - see B.R. & T. Ch. 850



868.01  TRANSIENT MERCHANT DEFINED.



   The term "transient merchant", as used in this chapter, shall mean any
person, firm, association or corporation engaging temporarily (six months or
less) in the retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise, in any place in the
City, and who, for the purpose of conducting such business, occupies any lot,
building, room or structure of any kind.  Such term shall not be construed
to apply to any person selling goods, wares or merchandise of any description
raised, produced or manufactured by the individual offering the same for
sale; to persons handling vegetables, fruits or perishable farm products at
any established City market; to persons operating refreshment stands or
booths on or adjacent to the property owned or occupied by them; nor to any
stands or booths on any Ionia Free Fair grounds.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of being a transient merchant
without first obtaining a license therefor.  No such license shall be
granted except upon certification from the Director of Public Safety.  No
such license shall be issued or become effective until forty-eight hours,
excluding Sundays and holidays, have elapsed from the time of application.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.03  EFFECT OF ASSOCIATION WITH LOCAL MERCHANT.



   No person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be relieved
or exempted from the provisions or requirements hereof by reason of
associating himself or herself temporarily with any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting his or her business in the name of
any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Applicants for the license required by this chapter must file with the
City Clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be
furnished by the City Clerk, a copy of which follows the text of this chapter
(Exhibit A), which form shall contain the following information:



   (a)   Full name of the applicant.



   (b)   Social Security number.



   (c)   Date and time of application.



   (d)   Date and place of birth.



   (e)   Driver's license number.



   (f)   Permanent address (legal).



   (g)   Local address (if any).



   (h)   Occupation.



   (i)   Home phone.



   (j)   Business address.



   (k)   Business phone.



   (l)   Title of person applying.



   (m)   Name of firm or corporation.



   (n)   Length of time for license, available only for two days, one
week or six months.



   (o)   Previous places of business within the last six months.



   (p)   A list describing the article or articles to be sold or
offered for sale.



   (q)   Value of goods for sale.  This would be the total dollar
amount of the merchandise for sale.



   (r)   Source of goods to be sold:  from stock in possession, by
sample, by direct sale or by taking orders for future delivery.



   (s)   Proposed method of vending:  by foot, handcart, vehicle,
etc.  If merchandise is sold from a vehicle a description that includes the
make, model, year and serial number.



   (t)   Present location of goods to be sold.



   (u)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or a
violation of any City ordinance, and, if so, the nature of the offense and
the punishment therefor.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.05  INFORMATION ATTACHED TO APPLICATION.



   The following information must be included with the application form
before any license shall be granted.  This information is to be used for a
proper criminal history check and for administrative purposes.



   (a)   A list of names and dates of birth of all employees working in
the City of Ionia.



   (b)   Two valid character references.



   (c)   A photocopy of legal picture identification, such as a
driver's license.



   (d)   Type of advertising (if any).



   (e)   Authorization of the applicant to act as a representative from
the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant is to act as such
representative, as required by Michigan Compiled Laws 445.371-378.



   (f)   The applicant's State transient merchant license.



   (g)   A copy of the Michigan sales tax license.



   (h)   A statement from the owner of private property if the
applicant wishes to sell on private property. 



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.06  PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receipt of the application, the original shall be referred to the
Director of Public Safety, who shall cause such investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character to be made as he or she deems
necessary for the protection of the public good.



   (a)   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the
Director of Public Safety shall endorse on such application his or her
disapproval and his or her reasons for the same, and return the said
application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his or her
application is disapproved and that no license shall be issued.



   (b)   If as a result of such investigation, the character and
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
Director of Public Safety shall endorse on the application his or her
approval, execute a license addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of
the business applied for and return said license, along with the application,
to the City Clerk, who shall, upon payment of all prescribed license fees, in
an amount to be determined from time to time by the City Council, deliver to
the applicant his or her license.  Upon application and good cause shown,
license fees may be waived by the City Council.  The City Clerk shall keep a
permanent record of all licenses issued.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.07  BOND REQUIREMENT.



   No license to be a transient merchant will be issued until a bond in
the amount of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for every ten thousand dollars
($10,000) in merchandise is filed with the City Clerk (e.g. ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) of merchandise or less equal six hundred dollars ($600.00)
bond, ten thousand one dollar ($10,001) to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000)
in merchandise equal one thousand, two hundred dollars ($1200) bond, etc.). 
Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's faithful performance of
all contracts and fulfillment of all warranties made by him or her in
connection with the business or acts for which such license is sought.  The
bond is refundable at the end of the licensed period.  The bond is not due
until after the preliminary investigation has been concluded and the
applicant has been found to be satisfactory.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.08  LICENSE FEES; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   (a)   Before any license shall be issued under this chapter the
applicant shall pay the fee prescribed by resolution of the City Council. 
The fee is not due until after the preliminary investigation has been
concluded and the applicant has been found to be satisfactory.



   (b)   No license shall be issued for more than six months. 



868.09  USE OF PUBLIC AREAS.



   The City of Ionia has the authority to regulate transient merchants
where they interfere with the flow of traffic or pedestrian movement.



   (a)   Streets and Sidewalks.  No person licensed under this
chapter, nor any person on his her behalf, shall have any exclusive right to
any location in the public streets or rights of way.  No license shall be
permitted a stationary location within a congested area if said location
operates to impede or inconvenience the public use and enjoyment of City
streets and sidewalks.



   (b)   Parking Lots and Driveways.  No sales activity or exhibit,
whether mobile or stationary, shall be conducted in, upon or so near the
entrance to parking lots or driveways as to obstruct or impede the free
ingress and egress of vehicle traffic therewith.



   (c)   Exercise of Public Safety Powers.  For the purpose of this
chapter, the judgment of the Public Safety Department, exercised in good
faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether an area is congested or
impeded or inconvenienced.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.10  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.



   Persons licensed under this chapter are required to exhibit their
licenses at the request of any citizen.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.11  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   Whoever engages in any of the following prohibited conduct shall
forfeit his or her license and all bond money paid, with no refund of license
fees.



   (a)   Entering a private residence under pretenses other than for
doing the business of a transient merchant.



   (b)   Remaining in a private residence or on the premises thereof
after the owner or occupant thereof has requested any such person to leave.



   (c)   Going in and upon the premises of a private residence to do
the business of a transient merchant when the owner or occupant thereof has
displayed a "No Peddling" sign on such premises.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.12  RECORDS.



   The Director of Public Safety shall report to the City Clerk all
convictions for violation of this chapter, and the City Clerk shall maintain
a record for each license issued and record the reports of violations therein.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.13  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.



   No transient merchant, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall
shout, make any cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device,
including any loudspeaker, radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the City, where sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being
plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public
places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.14  EXEMPT PERSONS.



   The following persons are exempted from this chapter:  those engaged
in selling goods or merchandise manufactured by the individual and offering
the same for sale; those engaged in selling vegetables, fruits or perishable
farm products at any established farmers market; those operating refreshment
stands or booths on or adjacent to the property owned or occupied by them;
those engaged in exhibiting and selling merchandise on the grounds of the
Ionia Free Fair, who are subject to the control and authority of the Ionia
Free Fair Board; and any person under eighteen years of age, when engaged in
the business of being a transient merchant, while traveling on foot in the
neighborhood of his or her residence under direct supervision of any school
or recognized non-profit, charitable or religious organization.  The City
Council reserves the right to waive fees for any special event with approval
by a majority vote of the City Council.



(Ord. 369.  Passed 7-5-95.)



868.99  PENALTY



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  see Section 202.99 of the Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)




EXHIBIT A
Application for Transient Merchant License




FULL NAME   



SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER   



DATE AND TIME OF APPLICATION    



DATE AND PLACE OF BIRTH    



DRIVERS LICENSE NUMBER   



PERMANENT ADDRESS    



LOCAL ADDRESS    



OCCUPATION    



HOME PHONE    



BUSINESS ADDRESS    



BUSINESS TELEPHONE    



TITLE OF PERSON APPLYING   



NAME OF FIRM OR CORPORATION    



LENGTH OF TIME FOR LICENSE: 2 DAYS   1 WEEK   6 MONTHS



PREVIOUS PLACES OF BUSINESS (NAMES AND ADDRESSES) WITHIN LAST 6 MONTHS    



LIST DESCRIPTION OF ARTICLE OR ARTICLES TO BE SOLD OR OFFERED FOR SALE    



VALUE OF GOODS FOR SALE $                                  
                                                   
           



GOODS ARE TO BE SOLD FROM -    a)STOCK IN POSSESSION



                        b)BY SAMPLE



                        c)BY DIRECT SALE



                        d)TAKING ORDER FOR FUTURE
DELIVERY



PROPOSED METHOD OF VENDING (e.g., on foot, handcart, or vehicle)        
                         



If vehicle list the MAKE                                
MODEL                                     YEAR        
         



SERIAL #                                              
                                                   
                                       



PRESENT LOCATION OF GOODS TO BE SOLD                          
                                             



HAS APPLICANT EVER BEEN CONVICTED OF A CRIME, MISDEMEANOR, or



VIOLATION OF A MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE                            
          if YES state nature of offense and punishment          
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
     



ATTACHED ITEMS NEEDED:



* A LIST OF NAMES AND DATE OF BIRTH OF ALL EMPLOYEES WORKING IN THE CITY OF
IONIA



* 2 REFERENCES



* PHOTOCOPY PICTURE IDENTIFICATION



* TYPE OF ADVERTISING (IF ANY)



* AUTHORIZATION OF APPLICANT TO ACT AS REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE



PERSON, FIRM, OR CORPORATION FOR WHICH THE APPLICANT IS TO ACT AS



SUCH REPRESENTATIVE



               Michigan Compiled Laws 445.371-378



* COPY OF MICHIGAN SALES TAX LICENSE



* STATEMENTS FROM OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY (if necessary)



* $600 REFUNDABLE BOND FOR EVERY $10,000 IN MERCHANDISE



   BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE   86



* ADMINISTRATION FEES: $25 FOR 2 DAYS $75 PER WEEK $200 FOR 6 MONTHS, UNLESS
OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY COUNCIL.



Signature of applicant   Date



A City license must be obtained to be a transient merchant. Complete this
form and give it to the City Clerk. No such license shall be issued or become
effective until 48 hours, excluding Sundays and holidays, has elapsed from
the time of application.



(Ord. 369. Passed 7-5-95.)



CHAPTER 871
Tattoo Parlors  (Repealed)



EDITOR'S NOTE:  Former Chapter 871, Tattoo Parlors, was repealed by
Ordinance No. 471, passed  April 13, 2010.



TITLE FOUR – Taxation



   Chap. 880.   Uniform City Income Tax.



   Chap. 882.   Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan.



   Chap. 884.   Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the
Downtown Development Authority.



   Chap. 886.   Obsolete Property Rehabilitation District.



   Chap. 888.   Personal Property Exemption District.



   Chap. 890.   Low Income Housing Payment in Lieu of Taxes.



   Chap. 892.     Property Tax.



CHAPTER 880
Uniform City Income Tax




880.01   Short title.





880.02   Rules of construction; definitions.





880.03   Imposition of tax; rates.





880.04   Dedication and transfer of funds for use of Federal Facility
Development Fund.





880.05   Dedication and transfer of funds for use of Federal Data Facility
Fund.





880.06   Resident income to which tax applies.





880.07   Nonresident income to which tax applies.





880.08   Application of tax to corporations.





880.09   Application of tax to unincorporated business or profession; sole
proprietorship and partnership.





880.10   Return for unincorporated business, profession or activity.





880.11   Election of payment by unincorporated business, profession or
activity.





880.12   Partial business activity in City; apportionment of net profit.





880.13   Partial business activity in City; separate accounting method.





880.14   Partial business activity in City; business allocation percentage
method.





880.15   Capital gains and losses; determination.





880.16   Estates or trusts.





880.17   Exemptions.





880.18   Payments and benefits not subject to tax.





880.19   Deductible expenses generally.





880.20   Specific deductible expenses.





880.21   Qualified taxpayer within renaissance zone; determination of
deductions claimed.





880.22   Annual return; joint return.





880.23   Returns; contents.





880.24   Payment of tax; refund; interest; allocation of payment; notice;
nonobligated spouse; form; filing; release of liability.





880.25   Federal Income Tax return; eliminations.





880.26   Withholding of tax by employer; employer as trustee; failure or
refusal to deduct and withhold tax; liability; discharge.





880.27   Declaration of estimated tax; filing; form; time; exceptions.





880.28   Declaration of estimated tax; payment; installments; amended
declarations.





880.29   Annual returns; extensions of time; authority of Administrator.





880.30   Sale of business or stock of goods or quitting business;
liability for tax; escrow by purchaser; release to purchaser of known tax
liability; failure to comply with escrow requirements; liability of
corporation officers.





880.31   Credit for tax paid to another Municipality.





880.32   Fractional part of a cent.





880.33   Rules and regulations; enforcement; forms; collection of tax.





880.34   Special ruling; appeal to Income Tax Board of Review.





880.35   Failure or refusal to make return or payment; insufficient
information on return; examination of books, records and witnesses.





880.36   Confidential information; divulgence; discharge from employment.





880.37   Unpaid taxes; interest; penalty for delay; waiver of penalty for
reasonable cause.





880.38   Additional tax assessment; when interest and penalty not imposed.





880.39   Due and unpaid assessment; protest procedure.





880.40   Final assessment; determination of receipt.





880.41   Failure to pay tax; demand; recovery; prosecution.





880.42   Jeopardy assessment; procedure.





880.43   Statute of limitations; waiver; payment of tax.





880.44   Statute of limitations for refund.





880.45   Income Tax Board of Review; appointments; officers; rules of
procedure; quorum; conflict of interests; record of transactions and
proceedings; conduct of business at public hearing; notice of hearing.





880.46   Notice of appeal; hearing; confidentiality; payment of deficiency
or refund.





880.47   Appeal to State Tax Commissioner or tax tribunal.





880.48   Appeal to Court of Appeals or Supreme Court; procedure.





880.49   Payment to taxpayer from general fund or City Income Tax Trust
Fund.





880.50   Violations.





880.99   Penalty.




   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation generally - see CHTR. Art. VIII



   Municipal income taxes - see M.C.L.A. §§ 141.501 et seq.



   Exemptions - see M.C.L.A. §§ 141.632, 141.642, 141.652, 141.654,
141.655



880.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform City
Income Tax Ordinance".



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.02  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS.



   (a)   Rules of Construction.  As used in this chapter, the words,
terms and phrases set forth in subsection (b) hereof, and their derivations,
have the meanings given therein.  When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural. "Shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.  "May" is
always directory.



   (b)   Definitions.  As used in this chapter:



      (1)   "Administrator" means the official designated by the
City to administer this chapter, or the duly authorized agent or
representative of that official, but does not mean the Department of Treasury.



      (2)   "Business" means an enterprise, activity, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted or ordinarily conducted for profit or
gain by any person, including the operation of an unrelated business by a
charitable, religious or educational organization.



      (3)   "Capital gains" and "capital losses" mean those terms as
defined for Federal income tax purposes.  In addition:



         A.   "Capital gains" shall also mean gains from the sale
or exchange of non-capital property where such gains are taxed as capital
gains under Sec. 1231 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



         B.   "Capital gains" and "capital losses" shall not
include any portion of such gains or losses occurring prior to the effective
date of the City income tax, January 1, 1994.  In determining gain or loss
on property acquired prior to January 1, 1994, the fair market value as of
January 1, 1994, shall be used.  The fair market value shall be determined
by appraisal or other reliable evidence.  In the case of traded securities,
the fair market value shall be the closing price of such securities on the
last business day prior to January 1, 1994.  The bid price shall be used if
quotations are shown in this way.  If no fair market value can be determined
by the above means, the following method shall be used:



            1.   Compute total gain or loss for Federal income
tax purposes.



            2.   Compute the percentage of time held since the
effective date of the City income tax, January 1, 1994, to the total time the
property was held.



            3.   Apply the percentage determined in paragraph
(b)(3) B.2 hereof to the amount in paragraph (b)(3) B.1. hereof to compute
the capital gain or loss taxable by the City.



      (4)   "Compensation" means salary, pay or emolument given as
compensation or wages for work done or services rendered, in cash or in kind,
and includes but is not limited to the following: salaries, wages, bonuses,
commissions, fees, tips, incentive payments, severance pay, vacation pay and
sick pay.



      (5)   "Corporation" means a corporation or a joint stock
association organized under the laws of the United States, this state, or any
other state, territory, or foreign country or dependency.



      (6)   "Department" means the Department of Treasury for tax
years after the 1996 tax year for which the City has entered into an
agreement with the Department of Treasury pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter
1.  "Department" includes a duly authorized agent or representative of the
Department.



      (7)   "Doing business" shall be defined as follows:



         A.   "Doing business" means the conduct of any activity
with the object of gain or benefit, except that it does not include:



            1.   The solicitation of orders by a person or his
or her representative in the City for sales of tangible personal property,
which orders are sent outside the City for approval or rejection and, if
approved, are filled by shipment or delivery from a point outside the City.



            2.   The solicitation of orders by a person or his
or her representative in the City in the name of or for the benefit of a
prospective customer of a person, if orders by the customer to such person to
enable the customer to fill orders resulting from the solicitation are orders
described in paragraph (b)(7)A.1. hereof.



            3.   The mere storage of personal property in the
City in a warehouse neither owned nor leased by the taxpayer.



         B.   A person shall not be considered to be doing
business in the City, in the absence of maintaining an establishment in the
City or engaging in other activity in the City, merely by engaging in one or
more of the following acts:



            1.   Maintenance, by a corporation, of a resident
agent in the City;



            2.   Installing, servicing or instructing in the
use of equipment or other goods sold when performed by an employee-salesman
of such person and where such activities are incidental to the
employee-salesman's primary selling activities;



            3.   Occasional credit investigations or
collections by an employee-salesman of such person where such activities are
incidental to the employee-salesman's primary selling activities:



            4.   Exhibiting goods for a short time, in leased
space, at a convention, exhibition or trade show;



         C.   Mere ownership of real or tangible personal
property in the City which is not used in or related to business activity in
the City and which does not produce gross income in the City.



      (8)   "Employee" means a person from whom an employer is
required to withhold for either Federal income or Federal Social Security
taxes.



      (9)   "Employer" means an individual, partnership,
association, corporation, non-profit organization, governmental body or unit
or agency, including the State, or any other entity, whether or not taxable
under this chapter, that employs one or more persons on a salary, bonus,
wage, commission or other basis, whether or not the employer is in a business.



      (10)   "Federal Internal Revenue Code" means the Internal
Revenue Code of the United States in effect on the last day of the taxpayer's
tax year.



      (11)   "Financial institution" means a bank, industrial bank,
trust company, building and loan or savings and loan association, credit
union, safety and collateral deposit company, regulated investment company as
defined in Section 851 and the following sections of the Federal Internal
Revenue Code, under whatever authority organized, and any other association,
joint stock company or corporation at least ninety percent of whose assets
consist of intangible personal property and at least ninety percent of whose
gross income consists of dividends or interest or other charges resulting
from the use of money or credit.



      (12)   "Fiscal year" means an accounting period of twelve
months ending on any day other than December 31.  Only fiscal years accepted
by the Internal Revenue Service for Federal Income tax purposes may be used
for City tax purposes



      (13)   "Net profits" means the net gain from the operation of
a business, profession or enterprise, after provision for all costs and
expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined on either a cash or
accrual method. on the same basis as provided for in the Federal Internal
Revenue Code for Federal income tax purposes, excluding items exempted under
this chapter, but without deduction of Federal and City taxes based on income
and without deduction of net operating loss carry-over or capital loss
carry-over sustained prior to the effective date of this tax.  However, that
net operating losses and capital losses sustained after the effective date of
this tax may be carried over to the same extent and on the same basis as
under the Federal Internal Revenue Code, but shall not be carried back to
prior years.



         A.   "City taxes based on income," as used in this
paragraph, shall mean the City of Ionia income tax imposed by this chapter.



         B.   Depreciation shall be computed in the same manner
as under the Federal Internal Revenue Code and taken to the same extent as
taken on the taxpayer's Federal return for the same taxable year. 
Depreciable assets acquired before the effective date of the City tax cannot
be valued as of such effective date and depreciated on that basis.  However,
a taxpayer may take depreciation on war emergency facilities to the extent
still being depreciated on its official books, on which it elected to take
special amortization in lieu of depreciation under the authority of Acts of
Congress for Federal income tax purposes.



      (14)   "Nonresident" means an individual domiciled outside the
City.



      (15)   "Person" means a natural person, partnership,
fiduciary, association, corporation or other entity.  When used in any
provision imposing a criminal penalty, "person" as applied to an association
means the parties or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, the
officers thereof.



      (16)   "Predominant place of employment" means that city
imposing a tax under a uniform city income tax ordinance other than the city
of residence, in which the employee estimates he will earn the greatest
percentage of his compensation from the employer, which percentage is
twenty-five percent or more.



      (17)   "Resident" means an individual domiciled in the City. 
"Domicile" means a place where a person has his or her true, fixed and
permanent home and principal establishment, to which, whenever absent
therefrom, he or she intends to return, and domicile continues until another
permanent establishment is established.  If an individual, during the
taxable year, being a resident becomes a non-resident or vice versa, taxable
income shall be determined separately for income in each status.



      (18)   "Taxable year" means the calendar year, or the fiscal
year, used as the basis on which net profits and other income subject to tax
under this chapter are to be computed, and in case of a return for a
fractional part of a year, the period for which the return is required to be
made.



      (19)   "Taxpayer" means a person required under this chapter
to file a return or to pay a tax.



         A.   Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for
domicile is the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the
individual, is permanent rather than transitory.  It is the place in which
an individual has voluntarily fixed his or her habitation, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home, until some unexpected event shall occur to cause him to adopt
some other permanent home.  Every individual has one and only one
domicile.  Once established it continues until a new one is established,
coupled with the abandonment of the old.  Prima facie, a married woman has
the same domicile as her husband.  Ordinarily, the domicile of a minor
follows that of the father.



         The Administrator may require of individuals claiming
domicile outside the City of Ionia, a statement of information with respect
to the particular case.  Mailing address, place of voting, statements in
licenses and other applications, establishment of business and social
contacts, marital status and other overt acts are evidence of domicile, but
no one such item is controlling



         B.   If an individual is a resident during part of a
taxable year and a non-resident during the remainder, he or she shall not
file two returns.  If he or she is required to file under this chapter, he
or she shall file a resident return only, Form I-1040, reporting thereon the
period of time for each status.  Income which is taxable to residents, but
not to non-residents (e.g. interest and dividends), shall be reported, and be
subject to tax, only for the portion of the year during which he or she was a
resident.



         C.   Each person shall use the same taxable year for
City income tax purposes as such person uses for Federal income tax purposes.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX; RATES.



   Subject to the exclusions, adjustments, exemptions and deductions
herein provided, an annual tax of one percent on corporations and resident
individuals and one-half percent on non-resident individuals for general
revenue purposes and the purposes provided for in Sections 880.04 and 880.05
is hereby imposed as an excise on income earned and received on and after the
effective date of this chapter.  However, if the governing body of the City
adopts a resolution to impose the tax at a lower rate, the tax is hereby
imposed at that lower rate.  If the tax is imposed at a lower rate, the rate
on nonresident individuals shall not exceed one-half of the rate on
corporations and resident individuals.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.04  DEDICATION AND TRANSFER OF FUNDS FOR USE OF FEDERAL FACILITY
DEVELOPMENT FUND.



   (a)   For the 1993 tax year and each tax year after 1993, a city
that is a qualified local unit of government, as defined by the Federal
Facility Development Act, may adopt an ordinance or resolution, or may enter
into an agreement with a qualified local unit of government other than the
city, to dedicate and transfer funds in an amount determined pursuant to
subsection (c) hereof, solely and to the extent necessary for the purposes
authorized for use of the Federal Facility Development Fund created by the
Federal Facility Development Act.



   (b)   When a city adopts an ordinance or resolution or enters into
an agreement pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, the use or transfer of any
funds dedicated or to be transferred shall commence and continue until any
bonds, obligations or other evidences of indebtedness for which the funds are
pledged are fully paid.



   (c)   The amount dedicated or to be transferred by a city each year
pursuant to subsection (a) hereof shall equal the amount of withheld tax
remitted by a qualified employer pursuant to Section 880.26(j), as reconciled
pursuant to Section 880.26(k), for all qualified employees.



   (d)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Qualified employee" means a person who meets both of
the following criteria:



         A.   Is employed by a qualified employer.



         B.   Whose principal workplace is a qualified facility.



      (2)   "Qualified employer" means the Federal government.



      (3)   "Qualified facility" and "qualified local unit of
government" mean those terms as defined in the Federal Facility Development
Act.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.05  DEDICATION AND TRANSFER OF FUNDS FOR USE OF FEDERAL DATA FACILITY
FUND.



   (a)   A city that is a qualified local unit of government, as
defined by the Federal Data Facility Act, may adopt an ordinance or
resolution, or may enter into an agreement with a qualified local unit of
government other than the city, to dedicate and transfer funds in the 1994
through 2003 tax years in an amount determined pursuant to subsection (c)
hereof solely and to the extent necessary for the purposes authorized for the
use of the Federal Data Facility Fund created by the Federal Data Facility Act



   (b)   If a city adopts an ordinance or resolution or enters into an
agreement pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, the use or transfer of any funds
dedicated or to be transferred shall commence and continue until any bonds,
obligations, or other evidence of indebtedness for which the funds are
pledged are fully paid or the authorized purpose is otherwise completed, but
not after the 2003 tax year.



   (c)   The amount dedicated or to be transferred by a city each year
pursuant to subsection (a) hereof shall equal the amount of withheld tax
remitted by a qualified employer pursuant to Section 880.26(j) as reconciled
pursuant to Section 880.26(k), for all qualified employees.



   (d)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Qualified employee" means a person who meets both of
the following criteria:



         A.   Is employed by a qualified employer.



         B.   Whose principal workplace is a qualified facility.



      (2)   "Qualified employer" means the Federal government.



      (3)   "Qualified facility" and "qualified local unit of
government" mean those terms as defined in the Federal Data Facility Act.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.06  RESIDENT INCOME TO WHICH TAX APPLIES.



   The tax shall apply on the following types of income of a resident
individual to the same extent and on the same basis that the income is
subject to taxation under the Federal Internal Revenue Code:



   (a)   On a salary, bonus, wage, commission and other compensation.



   (b)   On a distributive share of the net profits of a resident
opener of an unincorporated business, profession, enterprise, undertaking or
other activity, as a result of work done, services rendered and other
business activities wherever conducted.



   (c)   On dividends, interest, capital gains less capital losses,
income from estates and trusts and net profits from rentals of real and
tangible personal property.



   (d)   On other income of a resident individual.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.07  NONRESIDENT INCOME TO WHICH TAX APPLIES.



   (a)   The tax shall apply on the following types of income of a
nonresident individual to the same extent and on the same basis that the
income is subject to taxation under the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



      (1)   On a salary, bonus, wage, commission and other
compensation for services rendered as an employee for work done or services
performed in the City. Income that a nonresident taxpayer receives as the
result of disability and after exhausting all vacation pay, holiday pay and
sick pay is not compensation for services rendered as an employee for work
done or services performed in the City.  Vacation pay, holiday pay, sick pay
and a bonus paid by the employer are deemed to have the same tax situs as the
work assignment or work location and are taxable on the same ratio as the
normal earnings of the employee for work actually done or services actually
performed.



      (2)   On a distributive share of the net profits of a
non-resident owner of an unincorporated business, profession, enterprise,
undertaking or other activity, as a result of work done, services rendered
and other business activities conducted in the City.



      (3)   On capital gains less capital losses from sales of, and
on the net profits from rentals of, real and tangible personal property, if
capital gains arise from property located in the city.



   (b)   The amount of taxable compensation of nonresidents working in
and out of the City is to be computed by dividing the total number of days
worked in the City by the total number of days worked during the year, or the
total number hours worked in the City by the total member of hours worked
during the year, and applying the resulting percentage to gross annual
compensation, including vacation, holiday, sickness and bonus pay; except
that the amount of taxable compensation of a nonresident compensated on the
volume of business secured or other results achieved by him or her such as a
salesperson on a commission basis, shall be the amount received by him or her
for business secured or other results achieved by him or her attributable to
his efforts in the City.



   (c)   The mere fact that a nonresident employee is subject to call
at any time does not permit the allocation of compensation on a seven-day per
week basis.  The mere fact that a non-resident employee is compensated on a
seven-day per week salary basis, when he or she does not in fact perform work
or render services seven-days per week, does not permit the allocation of
compensation on a seven-day per week basis.  The mere fact that a
nonresident employee takes work home with him or her and performs such work
at his or her home does not permit the allocation of compensation.



   (d)   A nonresident employee who is paid commissions and renewal
commissions for selling insurance, not a general insurance agent who conducts
his or her own independent insurance business, shall allocate such
compensation on the following basis: for life, health and accident insurance;
the locus shall be the location of the purchaser of the insurance; for group
insurance the locus shall be the location of the group; for fire and casualty
insurance the locus shall be the location of the risk insured, except that on
vehicles it shall be the location of the purchaser.



   (e)   Compensation paid to officers or employees of the State of
Michigan is subject to the tax.  Such compensation shall be taxable even
though the services are performed on property owned or controlled by the
State within the corporate limits of the City of Ionia.



   (f)   Compensation paid to officers or employees of the United
States government not for service in the armed forces is subject to the
tax.  Such compensation shall be taxable even though the services are
performed on property owned or controlled by the United States government
within the corporate limits of the City of Ionia.



   (g)   The mere fact that part or all of the work of a nonresident
employee working within the City limits may be attributable to branches,
governmental units, projects, undertakings or other activities outside of the
corporate limits of the City of Ionia does not give rise to an exclusion of
the related compensation from taxable income.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.08  APPLICATION OF TAX TO CORPORATIONS.



   (a)   The tax shall apply on the taxable net profits of a
corporation doing business in the City, being levied on such part of the
taxable net profits as is earned by the corporation as a result of work done,
services rendered and other business activities conducted in the City, as
determined in accordance with this chapter.  "Taxable net profits of a
corporation" means Federal taxable income as defined in Section 63 of the
Federal Internal Revenue Code but taking into consideration all exclusions
and adjustments provided in this chapter.  No deductions shall be allowed
for:



      (1)   Net operating losses and net capital losses sustained
prior to the effective date of the tax.



      (2)   The City income tax imposed by this chapter.



   A corporation may deduct income, war profits and excess profits taxes,
imposed by a foreign country or possession of the United States, allocable to
income included in taxable net income, any part of which would be allowable
as a deduction in determining Federal taxable income under the applicable
provisions of the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



   (b)   Corporations are not permitted to file as so-called tax option
corporations.  Every corporation subject to the City tax must file a return
and pay the tax, regardless of any option available to it under Sections
1371-1377 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code.  The taxable income or net
operating loss of a corporation shall not be prorated to the shareholders and
reported on their individual returns.



   (c)   In determining taxable net profits of a corporation no
deduction shall be allowed for:



      (1)   Net operating losses and net capital losses sustained
prior to the effective date of the City income tax, January 1, 1994.



      (2)   The City income tax imposed by this chapter.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.09  APPLICATION OF TAX TO UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS OR PROFESSION; SOLE
PROPRIETORSHIP AND PARTNERSHIP.



   (a)   An unincorporated business, profession or other activity
conducted by one or more persons subject to the tax as either a sole
proprietorship or partnership shall not be taxable as such.  The persons
carrying on the unincorporated business, profession or other activity are
liable for income tax only in their separate and individual capacities and on
the following basis:



      (1)   A resident proprietor or partner is taxable upon his or
her entire distributive share of the net profits of the activity regardless
of where the activity is conducted.



      (2)   A nonresident proprietor or partner is taxable only upon
his or her distributive share of the portion of the net profits of the
activity which is attributable to the City under the allocation methods
provided in this chapter.



      (3)   In the hands of proprietor or partner of an
unincorporated activity, the character of any item of income taxable under
this chapter is determined as if such item were realized by the individual
proprietor or partner directly from the source from which it is realized by
the unincorporated activity.  In computing his or her taxable income for a
taxable year, a person who is required to file a return shall include therein
his or her taxable distributive share of the net profits for any partnership
year ending within or with his or her taxable year.



   (b)   A nonresident owner of an unincorporated business or
profession must include in income subject to tax his or her distributive
share of interest, dividends and other income from intangibles if such income
is directly related to the nature of the business (as, for example, where one
of the functions of the business is to lend money at interest).



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.10  RETURN FOR UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS, PROFESSION OR ACTIVITY.



   An unincorporated business, profession or other activity owned by two
or more persons shall file an annual information return setting forth:



   (a)   The entire net profit for the period covered by the return and
the taxable portion of the net profit attributable to the City.



   (b)   The names and addresses of the owners of the unincorporated
activity and each owner's taxable distributive share of the total net profit
and each nonresident owner's share of the taxable net profit attributable to
the City.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.11  ELECTION OF PAYMENT BY UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS, PROFESSION OR
ACTIVITY.



   (a)   At the election of an unincorporated business, profession or
other activity, the entity, on behalf of the owners, may compute and pay the
tax due with respect to each owner's share of the net profit of the activity
after giving effect to exemptions to which each owner is entitled.  This
election is available to all unincorporated business entities having two or
more owners regardless of the residence of the owners.  The tax thus paid by
the entity shall constitute all tax due with respect to each owner's
distributive share of the net profits of the unincorporated business,
profession or other activity.



   If the unincorporated business, profession or other activity elects
under this section to file a return and pay the tax on behalf of its owners,
the election and filing are deemed to meet the requirements of this chapter
for the filing of a return for each owner who has no other income subject to
the tax.  However, a return is required from any such owner having taxable
income other than his or her distributive share of the net profits of the
entity.  In such case the entire income subject to the tax shall be included
in the return and credit taken thereon for the tax paid in his or her behalf
by the unincorporated activity.



   If the unincorporated business, profession or other activity elects to
pay the tax on behalf of the owners then the unincorporated business,
profession or other activity assumes the status of a taxpayer and is liable
to interest and penalty if payment is not made by the due date, in accordance
with the calendar or fiscal year used by the unincorporated business,
profession or other activity.



   (b)   If the unincorporated business, profession or other activity
elects to pay the tax on behalf of its owners then such unincorporated
business, profession or other activity assumes the status of a taxpayer under
Sections 880.27 to 880.29 and is required to file a declaration of estimated
tax and pay the estimated tax shown thereon.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.12  PARTIAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY IN CITY; APPORTIONMENT OF NET PROFIT.



   (a)   When the entire net profit of a business subject to the tax is
not derived from business activities exclusively within the City, the portion
of the entire net profit, earned as a result of work done, services rendered
or other business activity conducted in the City, shall be determined at the
election of the taxpayer under either Section 880.13(a), 880.14(a) to (e) or
880.14(f).



   (b)   The fact that a person fills orders by shipment to an
out-of-City destination, when such person has no regularly maintained and
established out-of-City location and engages in no out-of-City business
activity, does not entitle such person to apportion part of his net profit as
being earned as a result of work done, services rendered or other business
activity conducted out of the City.



   (c)   The mere solicitation of orders by telephone or by catalogs or
other mailed matter, from a location within the City for shipment to an
out-of-City destination, does not of itself constitute out-of-City
activity:  The solicitation of orders for or on behalf of a person by an
independent contractor does not constitute business activity by the person.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.13  PARTIAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY IN CITY; SEPARATE ACCOUNTING METHOD.



   (a)   The taxpayer may petition for and the Administrator may grant
approval of, or the Administrator may require, the separate accounting
method.  If such method is petitioned for, the Administrator may require a
statement explaining the manner in which apportionment will be made, in
sufficient detail to determine whether the net profits attributable to the
City will be apportioned with reasonable accuracy.



   (b)   Approval to use the separate accounting method must be
requested of the Administrator, in writing, within the first ninety days
following the beginning of the taxable year or period for which its use is
requested.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.14  PARTIAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY IN CITY; BUSINESS ALLOCATION PERCENTAGE
METHOD.



   (a)   Application of Method.  The business allocation percentage
method shall be used if the taxpayer is not granted approval to use the
separate accounting method of allocation. The entire net profits of such
taxpayer earned as a result of work done, services rendered or other business
activity conducted in the City shall be ascertained by determining the total
"in-City" percentages of property, payroll and sales.  "In-City" percentages
of property, payrolls and sales, separately computed, shall be determined in
accordance with subsections (b) to (e) hereof.



   (b)   Percentage of Average Net Book Value; Gross Rental Value of
Real Property.  First the taxpayer shall ascertain the percentage which the
average net book value, of the tangible personal property owned and the real
property, including leasehold improvements, owned or used by it in the
business and situated within the City during the taxable period, is of the
average net book value of all of such property, including leasehold
improvements, owned or used by the taxpayer in the business during the same
period wherever situated.  Real property shall include real property rented
or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be deemed to
be eight times the annual gross rental thereon.  "Gross rental of real
property" means the actual sum of money or other consideration payable,
directly or indirectly, by the taxpayer for the use or possession of real
property and includes but is not limited to:



      (1)   An amount payable for the use or possession of real
property or any part thereof, whether designated as a fixed sum of money or
as a percentage of sales, profits or otherwise.



      (2)   An amount payable as additional rent or in lieu of rent
such as interest, taxes, insurance, repairs or other amount required to be
paid by the terms of a lease or other arrangement.



   (c)   Percentage of Compensation Paid Employees.  Second, the
taxpayer shall ascertain the percentage which the total compensation paid to
employees for work done or for services performed within the City is of the
total compensation paid to all the taxpayer's employees within and without
the City during the period covered by the return.  For allocation purposes,
compensation shall be computed on the cash or accrual basis in accordance
with the method used in computing the entire net income of the taxpayer.



   If an employee performs services within and without the City, the
following examples are not all inclusive but may serve as a guide for
determining the amount to be treated as compensation for services performed
within the City:



      (1)   In the case of an employee compensated on a time basis,
the proportion of the total amount received by him or her which his or her
working time within the City is of his or her total working time.



      (2)   In the case of an employee compensated directly on the
volume of business secured by him or her, such as a salesperson on a
commission basis, the amount received by him or her for business attributable
to his or her efforts in the City.



      (3)   In the case of an employee compensated on other results
achieved, the proportion of the total compensation received which the value
of his or her services within the City bears to the value of all his or her
services.



   (d)   Percentage of Gross Revenue.  Third, the taxpayer shall
ascertain the percentage which the gross revenue of the taxpayer derived from
sales made and services rendered in the City is of the total gross revenue
from sales and services wherever made or rendered during the period covered
by the return.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, "sales made in the
City" means all sales where the goods, merchandise or property is received in
the City by the purchaser, or a person or firm designated by him or her.  In
the case of delivery of goods in the City to a common or private carrier or
by other means of transportation, the place at which the delivery has been
completed is considered as the place at which the goods are received by the
purchaser.



   In determining "sales made in the City" the fact that title may pass to
the purchaser on delivery to a common or private carrier or other means of
transportation is immaterial.  The place at which the goods are ultimately
received after all transportation has been completed shall be considered as
the place at which the goods are received by the purchaser.



   The following examples are not all inclusive but may serve as a guide
for determining sales made in the City:



         A.   Sales to a customer in the City with shipments to a
destination within the City from a location in the City or an out-of-City
location are considered sales made in the City.



         B.   Sales to a customer in the City with shipments to a
destination within the City directly from the taxpayer's in-City supplier or
out-of-City supplier are considered sales made in the City.



         C.   Sales to a customer in the City with shipments
directly to the customer at his or her regularly maintained and established
out-of-City location are considered out-of-City sales.



         D.   Sales to an out-of-City customer with shipments or
deliveries to the customer's location within the City are considered sales
made in the City.



         E.   Sales to an out-of-City customer with shipments to
an out-of-City destination are considered out-of-City sales.



      (2)   In the case of public utilities, or businesses
furnishing transportation services, "gross revenue", for the purposes of this
subsection, may be measured by such means as operating revenues, vehicle
miles, revenue miles, passenger miles, ton miles, tonnage or such other
method as shall reasonably measure the proportion of gross revenue obtained
in the City by such business.



      (3)   In case the business of the taxpayer involves
substantial business activities other than sales of goods and services, such
other method or methods of allocation shall be employed as shall reasonably
measure the proportion of gross revenue obtained in the City by such business.



   (e)   Business Allocation Percentage.  Fourth, the taxpayer shall
add the percentages determined in accordance with subsections (b) to (d)
hereof and divide the total by three and the result so obtained is the
business allocation percentage.  In determining this percentage, a factor
shall be excluded from the computation only when the factor does not exist
anywhere insofar as the taxpayer's business operation is concerned and, in
such case, the total of the percentages shall be divided by the number of
factors actually used.  The business allocation percentage shall be applied
to the entire net profits, wherever derived, of the taxpayer subject to the
tax to determine the net profits allocable to the City.



   (f)   Substitute Methods.  An alternative method of accounting
shall be used if the taxpayer or the Administrator demonstrates that the net
profits of the taxpayer allocable to the City, cannot be justly and equitably
determined under the separate accounting method or the business allocation
percentage method, or if undue expense to the taxpayer would result from
complying therewith because of the taxpayer's manner of operations and
methods of accounting.  In such cases the Administrator, upon application of
the taxpayer or upon his or her own initiative, may approve or specify
factors or methods of determination as will effect a just, non-discriminatory
and reasonable result.  Application to the Administrator to substitute other
factors in the formula or to use a different method to allocate net profits
shall be made in writing and state the specific grounds on which the
substitution of factors or use of a different method is requested and the
relief sought.  No specific form need be followed in making the
application.  Once a taxpayer has filed under a substitute method, he or she
shall continue so to file until given permission by the Administrator to
change.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.15  CAPITAL GAINS AND LOSSES; DETERMINATION.



   (a)   Capital gains and capital losses, other than gains and losses
on securities issued by the government of the United States, shall be
included in income only to the extent of that portion of the gains or losses
which occur after the effective date of this chapter.  In determining the
amount of gain or loss, the taxpayer may use net proceeds from the sale or
exchange less fair market value as of the effective date of this chapter. 
The fair market value of property shall be determined by an appraisal or
similar reliable evidence.  The fair market value of a security shall be the
last quoted price on the last business day prior to such effective date. 
For a security traded over the counter the last quoted price shall be the
last bid price on the last business day prior to such effective date.  The
taxpayer may determine the gain or loss on a transaction in the same manner
as for Federal Income Tax purposes taking into account only that portion
thereof which occurs after such effective date.  The portion of that gain or
loss includible in computing taxable income will be the same proportion of
the total gain or loss as the period of time the property was held after the
effective date of this chapter bears to the total time the property was
held.  In any city adopting this ordinance which had a valid local income
tax ordinance in effect on January 1, 1964, capital gains and losses shall be
included to the extent of that portion of such gains or losses which occur
after the effective date of the original city income tax ordinance.



   (b)   If capital losses exceed capital gains in a taxable year, the
unused portion may be utilized to the same extent and on the same basis as
under the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.16  ESTATES OR TRUSTS.



   (a)   An estate or trust is not subject to tax under this chapter,
except that it shall be treated as a nonresident individual for purposes of
Section 880.03 to the extent income of the estate or trust described in
Section 880.03 is not includable in the return of a resident individual as
"income from estates and trusts."  A resident individual shall include
"income from estates and trusts" in his or her income subject to tax under
this chapter without regard to the situs of the estate or trust.  For this
purpose, an "estate" means the estate of a deceased person during the period
of administration or settlement and a "trust" means an inter vivos or
testamentary trust created by an individual for the benefit of one or more
persons.



   (b)   "Income from estates" means "income", as defined in Section
643(b) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, properly paid, credited or
distributed but not in excess of the resident individual's share of the
distributable net income of the estate decreased by the amount of
depreciation or depletion allowed the resident individual as a deduction
under Section 642 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code.  The exceptions
hereinafter set forth with respect to trusts are also applicable to income
from estates. "Income from trusts" means the amount of "income" as defined in
Section 643(b) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, distributed or required
to be distributed under Section 652(a) or 662(a)(1) of the Federal Internal
Revenue Code, decreased by the amount of depreciation or depletion allowed
the resident individual as a deduction by Section 642 of the Federal Internal
Revenue Code, with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Dividends on stock of state and national banks and trust
companies.



      (2)   Interest from obligations of the United States, the
states or subordinate units of government of the states.



      (3)   Income received by a resident individual from a
fiduciary shall retain the character it held in the hands of the fiduciary. 
With respect to trusts where the income is taxed to the grantor or other
person under subpart E of subchapter J of the Federal Internal Revenue Code,
the grantor or other person shall include in his or her return all items of
income and deductions allowed by this chapter.



      (4)   An individual shall include income from estates and
trusts in his or her return in the same year as provided in the Federal
Internal Revenue Code with respect to distributions of income from estates
and trusts.  The amount of income included in the return for the first tax
year of a resident individual, with respect to estates and trusts, shall be
computed as though the tax year of the estate or trust for Federal Income Tax
purposes began on the effective date of this chapter and ended with the end
of the tax year of the estate or trust for Federal Income Tax purposes which
ends next following such effective date.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.17  EXEMPTIONS.



   (a)   An individual taxpayer in computing his or her taxable income
is allowed a deduction of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for each personal
and dependency exemption under the rules for determining exemptions and
dependents as provided in the Federal Internal Revenue Code.  The taxpayer
may claim his or her spouse and dependents as exemptions, but if the taxpayer
and the spouse are both subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, the
number of exemptions claimed by each of them when added together shall not
exceed the total number of exemptions allowed under this chapter.



   (b)   In addition to the exemptions for an individual taxpayer set
forth in this section, an additional exemption in the amount of seven hundred
dollars ($700.00) is allowed for an individual taxpayer whose deduction under
Section 151 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code is allowable to another
taxpayer during the tax year.



   (c)   In addition to the exemptions set forth in this section, an
exemption of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) is allowed for an individual
taxpayer whose deduction under Section 151 of the Federal Internal Revenue
Code is allowable to another taxpayer during the tax year.



   (d)   In addition to the exemptions set forth in this section, an
additional exemption of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) each is allowed for
an individual taxpayer who is a paraplegic, quadriplegic, hemiplegic or
totally and permanently disabled person, as defined in Section 216 of Title
II of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 416, or an individual taxpayer who
is a deaf person, as defined in Section 2 of the Deaf Persons Interpreters
Act, Act 204 of the Public Acts of 1982, being M.C.L.A.393.502.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.18  PAYMENTS AND BENEFITS NOT SUBJECT TO TAX.



   (a)   The following payments and benefits received by any person are
not subject to the tax:



      (1)   Gifts and bequests



      (2)   Proceeds of insurance, annuities, pensions and
retirement benefits. Amounts received for personal injuries, sickness or
disability are excluded from taxable income only to the extent provided by
the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



      (3)   Welfare relief unemployment benefits, including
supplemental unemployment benefits, and workmen's compensation or similar
payments from whatever source derived.



      (4)   Amounts received by charitable, religious, educational
and other similar nonprofit organizations which are exempt from taxation
under the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



      (5)   Amounts received by supplemental unemployment benefit
trusts or pension, profit sharing and stock bonus trusts qualified and exempt
under the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



      (6)   Interest from obligations of the United States, the
states or subordinate units of government of the states and gains or losses
on the sales of obligations of the United States.



      (7)   Net profits of financial institutions and insurance
companies.



      (8)   Amounts paid to an employee as reimbursement for
expenses necessarily and actually incurred by him or her in the actual
performance of his or her services and deductible as such by the employer.



      (9)   Compensation received for service in the armed forces of
the United States.



   (b)   Service in the armed forces of the United States shall include
service in the Army, Navy, Marine Corp, Air Force and Coast Guard. It shall
not include employment as a civilian by the armed forces.



   (c)   Payments made by an employer to an employee with respect to
periods during which the employee is serving in the Armed Forces are not to
be considered compensation received for services in the armed forces.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.19  DEDUCTIBLE EXPENSES GENERALLY.



   Ordinary, necessary, reasonable and unreimbursed expenses paid or
incurred by an individual in connection with the performance by him or her of
services as an employee may be deducted from gross income in determining
income subject to the tax to the extent the expenses are applicable to income
taxable under this chapter.  The expenses are limited to the following:



   (a)   Expenses of travel, meals and lodging while away from home.



   (b)   Expenses as an outside salesperson, away from his or her
employer's place of business.



   (c)   Expenses of transportation.



   (d)   Expenses under a reimbursement or other expense allowance
arrangement with his or her other employer, where the reimbursement or
allowance has been included in total compensation reported.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.20  SPECIFIC DEDUCTIBLE EXPENSES.



   The following expenses paid or incurred by an individual may be
deducted from gross income in determining income subject to tax to the extent
the expenses are applicable to income taxable under this chapter:



   (a)   An individual may deduct alimony, separate maintenance
payments and principal sums payable in installments, to the extent includable
in the spouse's adjusted gross income under the Federal Internal Revenue
Code, but only to the extent deductible by the individual under the Federal
Internal Revenue Code.  A nonresident individual may deduct only that
proportion of his or her alimony, separate maintenance or principal sums
payable in installments that his or her income taxable under this chapter
bears to his or her total Federal adjusted gross income.



   (b)   An employee or self-employed individual may deduct moving
expenses to the extent provided in Section 217 of the Federal Internal
Revenue Code.



   (c)   A self-employed individual may deduct payments to a qualified
retirement plan to the extent provided in Section 404 of the Federal Internal
Revenue Code.



   (d)   An individual may deduct payments to an individual retirement
account established pursuant to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974, 29 U.S.C. 1001 to 1381, to the extent provided in Section 219 of the
Internal Revenue Code.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.21  QUALIFIED TAXPAYER WITHIN RENAISSANCE ZONE; DETERMINATION OF
DEDUCTIONS CLAIMED.



   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and to
the extent and for the duration provided in the Michigan Renaissance Zone
Act, Act 376 of the Public Acts of l996, as amended, being sections 125.2681
to 125.2696 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, for the 1997 tax year and each tax
year after 1997, a qualified taxpayer may deduct from gross income, in
determining income subject to tax under this chapter, to the extent a
deduction is applicable to income subject to the tax under this chapter, an
amount equal to one of the following for the specified types of taxpayers:



      (1)   For a qualified taxpayer as defined in paragraph
(l)(3)A. hereof:



         A.   Except as provided in paragraphs (a)(1)B. and C.
hereof, income subject to the tax that is earned or received in the tax year
during the period of time that the taxpayer was a qualified taxpayer.



         B.   Capital gains subject to the tax that are received
during the tax year during the period of time that the taxpayer was a
qualified taxpayer. The deduction allowed under this subdivision shall be
prorated based on the percentage of time that the asset was held by the
taxpayer while the taxpayer was a qualified taxpayer.



         C.   Income received by the qualified taxpayer from
winning an on-line lottery game sponsored by the State, but only if the date
on which the drawing for that game was held is after the taxpayer became a
qualified taxpayer of a renaissance zone, and income received by the taxpayer
from winning an instant lottery game sponsored by the State, but only if the
taxpayer was a qualified taxpayer of a renaissance zone on the validation
date of the lottery ticket for that game.



      (2)   For a qualified taxpayer as defined in paragraph
(l)(3)B. hereof, the amount determined pursuant to Sections 880.08, 880.13
and 880.14, multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
percentage that the average net book value of the tangible personal property
owned and the real property, including leasehold improvements, owned or used
by the qualified taxpayer in the business and situated within the renaissance
zone during the taxable period, is of the average net book value of all such
property, including leasehold improvements, owned or used by the taxpayer in
the business during the same period situated in the City, plus the percentage
that the total compensation paid to employees for work done or for services
performed within the renaissance zone is of the total compensation paid to
all the taxpayer's employees within the City during the period covered by the
return, and the denominator of which is two.  For allocation purposes,
compensation shall be computed on the cash or accrual basis in accordance
with the method used in computing the entire net income of the taxpayer. Real
property includes real property rented or leased by the qualified taxpayer,
and the value of that property is considered to be eight times the annual
gross rental on the property. "Gross rental on the property" means gross
rental of real property as that term is defined in Section 880.14(b).



      (3)   For a qualified taxpayer as defined in paragraph
(l)(3)C. hereof, the amount determined pursuant to Section 880.09, multiplied
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the percentage that the average net
book value of the tangible personal property owned and the real property,
including leasehold improvements, owned or used by the qualified taxpayer in
the business and situated within the renaissance zone during the taxable
period, is of the average net book value of all such property, including
leasehold improvements, owned or used by the taxpayer in the business during
the same period situated in the City plus the percentage that the total
compensation paid to employees for work done or for services performed within
the renaissance zone is of the total compensation paid to all the taxpayer's
employees within the City during the period covered by the return, and the
denominator of which is two.  For allocation purposes, compensation shall be
computed on the cash or accrual basis in accordance with the method used in
computing the entire net income of the taxpayer. Real property includes real
property rented or leased by the qualified taxpayer, and the value of that
property is considered to be eight times the annual gross rental on the
property.  "Gross rental on the property" means gross rental of real
property as that term is defined in Section 880.14(b).



   (b)   For a qualified taxpayer as defined in paragraphs (l)(3) B.
and C. hereof, any portion of income subject to tax under this chapter
derived from illegal activity conducted in a renaissance zone shall not be
used to calculate a deduction allowed under this section. For a qualified
taxpayer who is an individual, any portion of income subject to tax under
this chapter derived from illegal activity conducted anywhere shall not be
used to calculate the deduction allowed under this section.  For a qualified
taxpayer as defined in paragraphs (l)(3) B. and C. hereof, any portion of the
taxpayer's tax liability that is attributable to business activity related to
the operation of a casino, and business activity that is associated or
affiliated with the operation of a casino, including, but not limited to, the
operation of a parking lot, hotel, motel, or retail store, shall not be used
to calculate a credit under this subsection.  As used in this subsection,
"casino" means a casino regulated by the State pursuant to the Michigan
Gaming Control and Revenue Act, Initiated Law of 1996, being Sections 432.201
to 432.216 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.



   (c)   Income used to calculate a deduction under any other section
of this chapter shall not be used to calculate a deduction under this section.



   (d)   If a qualified taxpayer completes the residency requirements
under paragraph (l)(3) hereof before the end of the tax year in which the
qualified taxpayer first resided in the renaissance zone, the qualified
taxpayer may claim the deduction allowed under this section for that tax
year.  If the qualified taxpayer completes the residency requirements under
paragraph (l)(3) hereof in a tax year subsequent to the tax year in which the
qualified taxpayer first resided in the renaissance zone, the following
apply: 



      (1)   If the qualified taxpayer completes the residency
requirement in a tax year subsequent to the tax year in which the taxpayer
first resided in the renaissance zone and before the date for filing the
annual return under this chapter for the tax year in which the taxpayer first
resided in the renaissance zone, the taxpayer may claim the deduction allowed
under this section for the tax year in which the taxpayer first resided in
the renaissance zone.



      (2)   If the qualified taxpayer completes the residency
requirement in a tax year subsequent to the tax year in which the taxpayer
first resided in the renaissance zone and after the date for filing the
annual return under this chapter for the tax year in which the taxpayer first
resided in the renaissance zone, the qualified taxpayer may claim the
deduction allowed under this section for the tax year in which the residency
requirement is completed on the annual return for the tax year in which the
residency requirement is completed and may claim the deduction for the tax
year in which the qualified taxpayer first resided in the renaissance zone by
filing an amended return for that tax year in which the qualified taxpayer
first resided in the renaissance zone.



   (e)   To be eligible for the deduction under this section, a
taxpayer shall file an annual return under this chapter.



   (f)   A qualified taxpayer shall file a withholding form prescribed
by the City with his or her employer after the date the qualified taxpayer
completes the requirements under paragraph (l)(3)A. hereof or, at the option
of the City, for taxpayers who claim to be qualified taxpayers under
paragraph (l)(3)A. hereof, the taxpayer shall file a form prescribed by the
City with the City after the date the taxpayer completes the requirements
under paragraph (l)(3)A. hereof.  If the City verifies the information on
the form, the City shall issue a certificate of qualification to the taxpayer
which the taxpayer shall file with his or her employer.  When a taxpayer who
filed a form under this subsection is no longer a qualified taxpayer under
paragraph (l)(3)A. hereof, the taxpayer shall send a written notice of that
change in status to the City not more than ten days after the change in
status occurs.



   (g)   If the Administrator finds that a taxpayer has claimed a
deduction under this section to which he or she is not entitled, the taxpayer
is subject to the interest and penalty provisions under this chapter.



   (h)   The deduction allowed under this section continues through the
tax year in which the renaissance zone designation expires.



   (i)   A net operating loss deduction allowed under this chapter
shall be calculated without regard to any deduction allowed under this section



   (j)   If a taxpayer who was a qualified taxpayer during the tax year
changes status and is not a qualified taxpayer or vice versa, income subject
to tax under this chapter shall be determined separately for income in each
status.



   (k)   A qualified taxpayer as defined in paragraph (l)(3)A. hereof,
is a resident of a renaissance zone for purposes of Act 376 of the Public
Acts of 1996, as amended.  A qualified taxpayer as defined in paragraph
(l)(3)B. or C. is located and conducts business in a renaissance zone, for
purposes of Act  376 of the Public Acts of 1996, as amended.



   (l)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Conducts business activity" means doing business as
defined in this chapter.



      (2)   "Domicile" means a place where a person has his or her
true, fixed, and permanent home and principal establishment to which,
whenever absent, he or she intends to return, and domicile continues until
another permanent establishment is established.



      (3)   "Qualified taxpayer" means one of the following:



         A.   A taxpayer who is an individual, a resident of the
City as determined under this chapter, and is domiciled in an area of the
City that is designated a renaissance zone for a period of 183 consecutive
days.  A taxpayer may begin calculating the 183-day period during the 183
days immediately preceding the designation of the area as a renaissance
zone.  "Qualified taxpayer" under this paragraph includes the estate of an
individual who was a qualified taxpayer at the time of death.  After a
taxpayer has completed the 183-day requirement under this paragraph, the
taxpayer is considered to have been a qualified taxpayer of the renaissance
zone beginning from the first day used to determine if the 183-day
requirement has been met.



         B.   A taxpayer that is a corporation and that is
located and conducts business activity in a renaissance zone in the City



         C.   A person who is located in and conducts business
activity as an unincorporated business, profession, or other activity in a
renaissance zone and is not a qualified taxpayer under paragraph (l)(3) A. or
B. hereof.



      (4)   "Renaissance zone" means that term as defined in Act 376
of the Public Acts of 1996, as amended.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.22  ANNUAL RETURN; JOINT RETURN.



   (a)   Every corporation doing business in the City and every other
person having income taxable under this chapter in any year before the 1997
tax year or in any tax year after the 1996 tax year for which the City has
not entered into an agreement with the Department of Treasury pursuant to
Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, shall make and file with
the City an annual return for that year, on a form furnished or approved by
the City on or before the last day of the fourth month for the same calendar
year, fiscal year or other accounting period that has been accepted by the
Internal Revenue Service for Federal Income Tax purposes for the taxpayer. 
For tax years after the 1996 tax year and for which the City has entered into
an agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code,
the annual return required by this subsection shall be filed with the City or
the Department as provided by the agreement on or before the fifteenth day of
the fourth month for the same calendar year, fiscal year or other accounting
period that has been accepted by the Internal Revenue Service for Federal
Income Tax purposes for the taxpayer.



   (b)   A husband and wife may file a joint return and, in such case,
the tax liability is joint and several.



   (c)   The fact that a taxpayer has paid his or her entire tax
liability on a declaration of estimated tax does not relieve him from the
requirement of filing an annual return (see Section 880.29 (a)).



   The fact that an individual not subject to withholding has an entire
tax liability of one dollar ($1.00) or less does not relieve him or her from
the requirement of filing an annual return.



   (d)   A husband and wife who both have income subject to the tax and
who elect to file separate returns may each take only those exemptions to
which they would be entitled under the Federal Internal Revenue Code.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.23  RETURNS; CONTENTS.



   (a)   The annual return shall set forth:



      (1)   The number of exemptions, place of residence, place of
employment and other pertinent information as shall reasonably be required.



      (2)   The aggregate amount of compensation, dividends,
interest, net profit from rentals, capital gains less capital losses, net
profits from business and other income, subject to the tax.



      (3)   The total amount of the tax imposed by this chapter.



      (4)   The amount of the tax previously withheld or paid.



      (5)   Credits provided in this chapter.



      (6)   The balance of the tax due or to be refunded.



   (b)   In filing his or her annual return an individual shall support
his or her claim for the amount of tax previously withheld by attaching
thereto a copy of the information return, Form W-2 or IW-2. required to be
furnished him or her by his or her employer in Section 880.26(k)(2).



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.24  PAYMENT OF TAX; REFUND; INTEREST; ALLOCATION OF PAYMENT; NOTICE;
NONOBLIGATED SPOUSE; FORM; FILING; RELEASE OF LIABILITY.



   (a)   A balance of the tax which is due the City at the time of
filing the annual return shall be paid with the return unless the balance is
less than  one dollar ($1.00), in which case payment is not required.



   (b)   If the annual return reflects an overpayment of the tax, the
declaration of the overpayment on the return constitutes a claim for refund.
Subject to subsection (f) hereof, if the City or the Department of Treasury
agrees that a claim is valid, the City or the Department shall apply the
overpayment first to a delinquent tax liability under this chapter of the
taxpayer to the City.  The City shall apply any remaining overpayment
against a subsequent liability under this chapter or, at the election of the
taxpayer and if indicated on the return, shall refund the overpayment. 
However, the City shall not pay a refund of less than one dollar ($1.00).



   (c)   If a valid claim for a refund of taxes, except a refund under
Section 880.26(k), due for the taxable year 1992 or a taxable year after 1992
is filed, interest at the rate established in Section 30(3) of Act 122 of the
Public Acts of 1941, as amended, being Section 205.30 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws, shall be added to the refund beginning forty-five (45) days
after the claim is filed or forty-five (45) days after the date established
under this chapter for the filing of the return, whichever is later.  For
tax years after the 1996 tax year and for which a city has entered into an
agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, a
claim for refund shall be paid from money in the City Income Tax Trust Fund.



   (d)   For tax years after the 1995 tax year and for which a city has
entered into an agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal
Revenue Code, if a taxpayer pays, when filing his or her annual return, an
amount less than the sum of the declared tax liability under this chapter,
and the declared tax liability under the Income Tax Act of 1967, being Act
218 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, being Sections 206.1 to 206.532
of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and there is no indication of the allocation
of payment between the tax liabilities against which the payment should be
applied, the amount paid shall first be applied against the taxpayer's tax
liability under this chapter, and any remaining amount of payment shall be
applied to the taxpayer s tax liability, under Act 281 of the Public Acts of
1967, as amended.  The taxpayer's designation of a payee on a payment is not
a dispositive determination of the allocation of that payment under this
subsection.



   (e)   If the claim for refund is reflected on a joint tax return,
the Administrator shall allocate to each joint taxpayer his or her share of
the refund.  The amount allocated to each taxpayer shall be applied to his
or her respective liabilities under this chapter.



   (f)   If the Administrator or the Department determines that all or
a portion of a refund claimed on a joint tax return is subject to application
to a liability of an obligated spouse, the Administrator or the Department
shall notify the joint taxpayers by first class mail sent to the address
shown on the joint return.  The notice shall be accompanied by a
nonobligated spouse allocation form.  The notice shall state all of the
following:



      (1)   That all or a portion of the refund claimed by the joint
taxpayers is subject to interception to satisfy a liability or liabilities of
one or both spouses.



      (2)   The nature of the liability and the name of the
obligated spouse or spouses.



      (3)   That a nonobligated spouse may claim his or her share of
the refund by filing a nonobligated spouse allocation form with the City or
the Department not more than thirty days after the date the notice was mailed.



      (4)   A statement of the penalties under subsection (i) hereof.



   (g)   A nonobligated spouse who wishes to claim his or her share of
a tax refund shall file with the City or the Department a nonobligated spouse
allocation form.  The nonobligated spouse allocation form shall be in a form
specified by the Administrator or the Department and shall require the
spouses to state the amount of income or other tax base and all adjustments
to the income or other tax base. including all subtractions, additions,
deductions, credits and exemptions, stated on the joint tax return that is
the basis for the claimed refund, and an allocation of those amounts between
the obligated and nonobligated spouse.  In allocating these amounts, all of
the following apply:



      (1)   Individual income shall be allocated to the spouse who
earned the income. Joint income shall be allocated equally between the
spouses.



      (2)   Each spouse shall be allocated the personal exemptions
he or she would be entitled to claim if separate Federal returns had been
filed, except that dependency exemptions shall be prorated according to the
relative income of the spouses.



      (3)   Adjustments resulting from a business shall be allocated
to the spouse who claimed income from the business.



      (4)   Ownership of other assets relevant to the allocation
shall be disclosed upon request of the Administrator or the Department.



   (h)   A nonobligated spouse allocation form shall be signed be both
joint taxpayers. However, the form may be submitted without the signature of
the obligated spouse if his or her signature cannot be obtained.  The
nonobligated spouse shall certify that he or she has made a good faith effort
to obtain the signature of the obligated spouse and shall state the reason
that the signature was not obtained.



   (i)   A person who knowingly makes a false statement on a
nonobligated spouse allocation form is subject to a penalty of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) or twenty-five percent of the excessive claim for his or her
share of the refund, whichever is greater, and other penalties as provided in
this chapter.



   (j)   A nonobligated spouse to whom the Administrator or the
Department has sent a notice under subsection (f) hereof, who fails to file a
nonobligated spouse allocation form within thirty (30) days after the date
the notice was mailed, shall be barred from commencing any action against the
City or the Department to recover an amount withheld to satisfy a liability
of the obligated spouse to which a joint tax refund is applied under this
section.  The payment by the City or the Department of any amount applied to
a liability of a taxpayer under this section shall release the Department or
the City and the Administrator from all liability to the obligated spouse,
the nonobligated spouse and any other person having or claiming any interest
in the amount paid.  A payment by the Department under this subsection shall
be made from the City Income Tax Trust Fund created in Section 5 of Chapter 1
of the Internal Revenue Code.



   (k)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Nonobligated spouse" means a person who has filed a
joint City income tax return and who is not liable for an obligation of his
or her spouse described in this chapter.



      (2)   "Obligated spouse" means a person who has filed a joint
City income tax return and who is liable for an obligation described in this
chapter for which his or her spouse is not liable.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.25  FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN; ELIMINATIONS.



   (a)   Where total income, total deductions, net profits or other
figures are derived from the taxpayers Federal Income Tax return, any item of
income not subject to the City income tax and unallowable deductions shall be
eliminated in determining net income subject to the City tax.  The fact that
a taxpayer is not required to file a Federal Income Tax return does not
relieve him or her from filing a City tax return.



   (b)   For the purpose of determining net profit allocable to the
City under this chapter, a corporate taxpayer may elect to file a
consolidated return, including subsidiaries whose voting stock is more than
fifty percent owned by the taxpayer if such return will more properly reflect
the net profits and activities of the taxpayer in the City.  The City may
require a consolidated return if necessary to properly determine net profits
of the taxpayer allocable to the City.



   (c)   An amended return shall be filed with the City or the
Department, on a form obtainable from the City or the Department, if
necessary to report additional income and pay an additional tax due, or to
claim a refund of tax overpaid.  Within ninety days after final
determination of a Federal tax liability which also affects the computation
of a taxpayer's City income tax liability, the taxpayer shall prepare and
file an amended City income tax return showing income subject to the City tax
based upon the final determination of Federal income tax liability, and pay
any additional tax shown due on the return or make claim for refund of an
overpayment  A taxpayer shall not change the method of accounting or
apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original
return, or any extensions for filing of the original return.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.26  WITHHOLDING OF TAX BY EMPLOYER; EMPLOYER AS TRUSTEE; FAILURE OR
REFUSAL TO DEDUCT AND WITHHOLD TAX; LIABILITY; DISCHARGE.



   (a)   Withholding Required.



      (1)   An employer doing business or maintaining an
establishment within the City shall withhold from each payment to the
employer's employees on and after the effective date of this chapter the tax
on their compensation subject to the tax, after giving effect to exemptions,
as follows:



         A.   Residents.



            1.   At a rate equal to one percent of all
compensation paid to the employee who is a resident of the City, if he or she
is not subject to withholding in any other city levying the tax.



            2.   At a rate equal to one-half of one percent of
all compensation paid to the employee.  Who is a resident of the city from
whom the employer is required to withhold on such compensation earned in
another city.



         B.   Nonresidents.  At a rate equal to one-half of one
percent of the compensation paid to the employee for work done or services
performed in the city designated by the employee as his or her predominant
place of employment.  The withholding rate shall be applied to the
percentage of the employee's total compensation equal to the employee's
estimated percentage of work done or services to be performed in the City for
such employer, but no withholding shall be required if the estimated
percentage of work is less than twenty-five percent.



      (2)   An employer withholding the tax is deemed to hold such
tax as a trustee for the City.



      (3)   An employer who is required to withhold and who fails or
refuses to deduct and withhold is liable for the payment of the amount
required to be withheld.  The liability shall be discharged upon payment of
the tax by the employee but the employer is not relieved of penalties and
interest provided in this chapter for such failure or refusal.



      (4)   In determining whether the tax shall be withheld from
musicians, entertainers, athletes and other such individuals, the definition
of "employee" in Section 880.02(b)(8) shall be controlling.



      (5)   An employer, whether or not an individual, and whether
or not a resident of the City, who maintains a business establishment or
business establishments in the City and a business establishment or business
establishments outside the City must withhold the tax from all Ionia
residents working at such employer's out-of-City establishment or
establishments.



      (6)   Compensation subject to withholding shall include wage
and salary advances, and advances on commissions.



   (b)   Payments or Persons Excepted From Withholding.



      (1)   Employers shall not withhold any tax from the following
payments or persons:



         A.   Compensation paid to domestic help.



         B.   Compensation paid to a person who is not an
employee, including an independent contractor.



         C.   An amount allowed and paid to an employee as
reimbursement for expenses necessarily and actually incurred by the employee
in the actual performance of his or her services, and that is deductible by
the employer.



         D.   A qualified taxpayer as defined in Section
880.21(l)(3) A.



      (2)   An employer who directly makes wage continuation
payments for personal injuries, sickness or disability may elect to withhold
or not withhold the tax on the exempt portion of such payments.  In either
case the amount of exempt income shall be included in the total amount of
compensation reported on the annual information return required of all
employers under paragraph (k)(2) hereof, either as part of total wages paid
or as a separate figure.



   (c)   Employee Responsibility and Liability re Withholding.  If the
tax is not withheld, an employee is not excused from filing a return and
paying the tax on his or her compensation.  If the tax is withheld but an
employer fails to pay the tax to the City, the employee is not liable for the
tax so withheld.



   (d)   Filing of Employee Form Required.  An employee with
compensation subject to tax shall file with his employer a form on which the
employee states the number of exemptions claimed, the city of residence, the
predominant place of employment, whether or not the employee claims status as
a qualified taxpayer of a renaissance zone, and the percentage of work done
or services performed in the predominant place of employment.  The
percentage shall be expressed as "less than twenty-five percent, forty
percent, sixty percent, eighty percent or  one hundred percent."  The
employer shall retain the form, rely on the information on the form for
withholding purposes unless directed by the City to withhold on another
basis, and, if the employee claims status as a qualified taxpayer based on
residency in a renaissance zone, forward a copy of the form to the City.  If
information submitted by the employee is not believed to be true, correct and
complete, the City shall be so advised  As used in this section,
"renaissance zone" means that term as defined in Section 880.21.



   (e)   Filing of Revised Form.



      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) hereof, an
employee shall file with his or her employer a revised form within ten days
after the number of exemptions decreases or when a change in residence from
or to a taxing city occurs.  The employee may file a revised form when his
or her number of exemptions increases.  An employee shall file a revised
form by December 1 of each year if his or her predominant place of
employment, estimate of the percentage of work done or services to be
rendered in the City or status as a qualified taxpayer of a renaissance zone
will change for the ensuing year.  Revised withholding certificates shall
not be given retroactive effect.



      (2)   An employee shall file a revised form with his or her
employer within ten days after the employee completes the residency
requirements under Section 880.21(l), and when a change of status occurs from
resident of a renaissance zone to nonresident of a renaissance zone, the
employer shall forward a copy of a revised form filed under this subsection
to the City.



   (f)   Refusal of Employee to Furnish Withholding Certificate.  If
an employee refuses to furnish a withholding certificate upon the request of
his or her employer, the employer shall withhold one percent of the
employee's total compensation and report and pay the withholding on the basis
of the best information in the possession of the employer.



   (g)   Withholding Tables; First Compensation.



      (1)   The City shall provide withholding tables establishing
the amounts to be withheld for various tax rates, wage brackets, numbers of
exemptions and pay periods.  An employer who uses the tables fully
discharges his or her duty to withhold.  An employer may elect not to use
the tables, in which case, to discharge fully his or her duty to withhold he
or she shall withhold, the applicable percent of taxable compensation after
provision for exemptions.



      (2)   The first compensation paid an employee on or after the
effective date of the tax levy is subject to withholding on either of the
following bases at the option of the employer:



         A.   On the full amount of compensation paid.



         B.   On the proportion of compensation paid for work
done or services performed on or after the effective date of the levy.



   (h)   Overwithheld Tax; Refund.  If an employer withholds more than
the apparent tax liability of an employee due to an increase in the number of
exemptions claimed during the year, due to the actual percentage of work
performed in the City by a non-resident being less than the estimated
percentage, due to a change of residence during the year to or from a taxing
city or due to any reason other than the employer's error, the employer shall
neither refund the excess to the employee nor offset the excess by
under-withholding in a subsequent period.  The employee shall claim his or
her refund from the City on his or her annual return.



   (i)   Correction of Withholding Error.  Correction of an over or an
under-withholding as a result of employer's error shall be made as follows:



      (1)   If the error is discovered in the same quarter in which
it is made, the employer shall make the necessary adjustment on a subsequent
pay and include only the corrected amount on the quarterly return.



      (2)   If the error is discovered in a subsequent quarter of
the same calendar year, the employer shall make the necessary adjustment on a
subsequent pay and report it as an adjustment on the quarterly return.



      (3)   If the error is discovered in the following calendar
year, or if the employer-employee relationship has terminated, the procedure
shall be as follows:



         A.   The employee or former employee shall apply to the
City for a refund in case of an over-withholding.  Upon proper verification,
the City shall refund to such employee or former employee the amount of the
over-withholding.



         B.   If a deficiency is discovered, the employer shall
notify the cites and the employee or former employee, who shall pay the City
the additional tax due in his or her annual return.



   (j)   Filing of Return; Payment by Employer; Electronic Funds
Transfer.



      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (j)(2) hereof, an
employer shall file a return, furnished by or obtainable on request from the
City, and pay to the City the full amount of the tax withheld on or before
the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter.



      (2)   For tax years after the 1996 tax year and for which a
City has entered into an agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the
Internal Revenue Code, an employer shall file a return and pay the tax
withheld for each calendar month on or before the fifteenth day of the month
following the close of each calendar month to the Department of Treasury by
means of an electronic funds transfer method approved by the State
Commissioner of Revenue.



   (k)   Employers' Reconciliation of Quarterly Returns; Deficiency and
Refund; Information Return; Cessation of Business.



      (1)   An employer shall file with the City or the Department
of Treasury a reconciliation of quarterly returns on or before the last day
of February following each calendar year in which the employer has withheld
from an employee's compensation.  A deficiency is due when the
reconciliation is filed.  If the employer made quarterly payments in excess
of the amount withheld from an employee's compensation, the City or the
Department, upon proper verification, shall refund the excess to the employer.



      (2)   In addition to the reconciliation, the employer shall
file with the City or the Department an information return for each employee
from whom the City income tax has been withheld and each employee subject to
withholding under this chapter, setting forth his or her name, address and
Social Security number, the total amount of compensation paid him or her
during the year, and the amount of City income tax withheld.  The
information return shall be on a copy of the Federal W-2 form or on a form
furnished or approved by the City or the Department  A copy of the
information return shall be furnished to the employee.



      (3)   Except as provided in paragraph (k)(3) hereof, if an
employer goes out of business or otherwise ceases to be an employer,
reconciliation forms and the information return forms shall be filed with the
City by the date the final withholding return and payment are due.



      (4)   For tax years after the 1996 tax year and for which the
City has entered into an agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the
Internal Revenue Code, if an employer goes out of business or otherwise
ceases to be an employer, reconciliation forms and the information return
forms shall be filed with the Department within thirty days after the
employer goes out of business or ceases to be an employer. 



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.27  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX; FILING; FORM; TIME; EXCEPTIONS.



   (a)   A person who anticipates taxable income from which the City
income tax will not be withheld with the City or the Department shall file a
declaration of estimated tax on a form furnished by or obtainable on request
from the City or the Department of Treasury if the City has entered into an
agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
A calendar year taxpayer shall file a declaration on or before each April 30
or, for tax years after the 1996 tax year and for which the City has entered
into an agreement with the Department pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of
the Internal Revenue Code, on or before each April 15.  A taxpayer on a
fiscal year basis or other accounting period shall file with the Department a
declaration within four months after the beginning of each fiscal year or
other accounting period.



   (b)   If a taxpayer has not previously been required to file, the
declaration shall be filed on or before the first date for making a quarterly
payment which occurs after he or she becomes subject to the requirement to
file a declaration.  A taxpayer shall file a declaration for the same
calendar year, fiscal year or other accounting period that has been accepted
by the Federal Internal Revenue Service for Federal Income Tax purposes.  A
declaration by an individual or unincorporated entity is not required if the
total estimated tax, less any credits applicable thereto, does not exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00).  A declaration by a corporation is not required
if the total estimated tax, less any credits applicable thereto, does not
exceed  two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).  A declaration by or on behalf
of an estate or trust is not required.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.28  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX; PAYMENT; INSTALLMENTS; AMENDED
DECLARATIONS.



   (a)   A taxpayer's annual return for the preceding year may be used
as the basis for computing a declaration of estimated tax for the current
year, or the taxpayer may use the same figures used for estimating his or her
Federal Income Tax adjusted to exclude any income or deductions not taxable
or permissible under this chapter.



   (b)   Except as otherwise provided, the estimated tax may be paid in
full with the declaration or in four equal installments on or before the last
day of the fourth, sixth, ninth and thirteenth months after the beginning of
the taxpayer's taxable year.  For tax years after the 1996 tax year and for
which a City has entered into an agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1
of the Internal Revenue Code, the estimated tax shall be paid in four equal
installments on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth, sixth, ninth and
thirteenth months after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year.



   (c)   An amended declaration may be filed when making a quarterly
payment, and the unpaid balance shown due shall be paid in equal installments
over the remaining payment dates.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.29  ANNUAL RETURNS; EXTENSIONS OF TIME;  AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   (a)   The filing of a declaration of estimated tax does not excuse
the taxpayer from filing an annual return even though there is no change in
the declared tax liability.  An annual return shall be filed by the end of
the fourth month, or for tax years after the 1996 tax year and for which the
City has entered into an agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the
Internal Revenue Code, filed with the Department of Treasury on or before the
fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year following that for which the
declaration was filed.  Upon written request of a taxpayer, the
Administrator or the Department may extend the time for filing the annual
return for not to exceed six months.  The Administrator or the Department
may require a tentative return and payment of the estimated tax.



   (b)   A penalty or interest shall not be assessed if the return is
filed and the final tax paid within the extended time and all other filing
and payment requirements of this chapter are satisfied, and the estimated tax
paid equals seventy percent or more of the tax shown due on the final return
or seventy percent or more of the tax shown due on the taxpayer's return for
the immediately preceding taxable year.



   (c)   A written request for extension of time for filing an annual
return must be made by the date such annual return was first due under this
chapter.  However, where the Federal Internal Revenue Code grants an
automatic extension to persons outside the United States, the Administrator
shall grant a like automatic extension to the same date.



   (d)   Nothing in this chapter or rules and regulations provided for
in Section 880.33 shall be construed to give the Administrator authority to
extend the time for making quarterly returns and payments of tax withheld or
for filing and making payments on declarations of estimated tax.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.30  SALE OF BUSINESS OR STOCK OF GOODS OR QUITTING BUSINESS; LIABILITY
FOR TAX; ESCROW BY PURCHASER; RELEASE TO PURCHASER OF KNOWN TAX LIABILITY;
FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ESCROW REQUIREMENTS; LIABILITY OF CORPORATION OFFICERS.



   (a)   If a person liable for the tax imposed under this chapter
sells a business or the stock of goods of a business or quits a business, the
person shall make a final return to the City or the Department of Treasury
within fifteen days after the date the business or stock of goods is sold or
the person quits the business.  The purchaser or succeeding purchasers, if
any, who purchase a going or closed business or stock of goods of a going or
closed business shall escrow sufficient to cover the amount of taxes,
interest and penalties that may be due and unpaid until the former owner
produces a receipt from the Administrator that shows that the taxes due have
been paid, or a certificate that states that taxes are not due.  If the
owner provides a written waiver of confidentiality, the Administrator may
release to a purchaser a business's known tax liability for the purposes of
establishing an escrow account for the payment of taxes.  If the purchaser
or succeeding purchasers of a business or stock of goods of a business fail
to comply with the escrow requirements of this subsection, the purchaser is
personally liable for the payment of the taxes, interest and penalties
accrued and unpaid by the business of the former owner.  The purchaser's or
succeeding purchaser's personal liability is limited to the fair market value
of the business less the amount of any proceeds applied to balances due on
secured interests that are superior to any lien provided for in this chapter.



   (b)   If a corporation that is liable for the tax imposed under this
chapter fails for any reason to file the required returns or to pay the tax
due, any officers of the corporation that have control or supervision of, or
who are charged with the responsibility for, making the returns or payments
are personally liable for the failure to file or pay.  The signature of any
corporate officer on a return or negotiable instrument submitted in payment
of a tax is prima facie evidence of the officer's responsibility for making
the returns and payments.  The dissolution of a corporation does not
discharge an officer's liability for a prior failure of the corporation to
make a return or remit a tax due.  The sum due for a liability may be
assessed and collected under this chapter.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.31  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.



   An individual who is a resident of the City and received net profits
from a business, profession or rental of real or tangible personal property,
gains from the sale or exchange of real or tangible personal property, or
salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation for work done or services
performed or rendered, in each case outside the City, and is subject to and
has paid an income tax on this income to another municipality, shall be
allowed a credit against the City income tax for the amount paid to the other
municipality.  The credit shall not exceed the amount of taxes which would
be assessed under this chapter on the same amount of income of a non-resident.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.32  FRACTIONAL PART OF A CENT.



   In withholding the tax due under this chapter, a fractional part of a
cent shall be disregarded unless it amounts to one half-cent ($.05) or more,
in which case it shall be increased to one cent (1¢).  For tax years after
the 1996 tax year in paying the tax due under this chapter, if any amount
other than a whole dollar amount is used, the Administrator or the Department
of Treasury shall disregard the fractional part of the dollar unless the
fractional part amounts to one-half dollar ($0.50) or more, in which case the
amount shall be increased by one dollar ($1.00).



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.33  RULES AND REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT; FORMS; COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (a)   The Administrator may adopt, amend and repeal rules and
regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of this chapter
subject to the approval of Council.  The rules and regulations, amendments
and repeals, after approval by the Council, shall become effective upon being
published in the official newspaper of the City.



   (b)   The Administrator shall enforce this chapter and the rules and
regulations approved as provided in subsection (a) hereof.  The
Administrator or the Department of Treasury shall prepare, adopt and make
available to taxpayers, employers and other persons all forms necessary for
compliance with this chapter.



   (c)   For tax years before the 1997 tax year and for tax years after
the 1996 tax year and for which a City has not entered into an agreement
pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code.  The City
Treasurer shall collect all taxes and payments due under this chapter and
deposit them in a designated City depository.  For tax years after the 1996
tax year and for which a city has entered into an agreement pursuant to
Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, the Department shall
collect taxes and payments due under this chapter and deposit them in the
City Income Tax Trust Fund established in Section 5 of Chapter 1 of the
Internal Revenue Code.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.34  SPECIAL RULING; APPEAL TO INCOME TAX BOARD OF REVIEW.



   A taxpayer or employer desiring a special ruling on a matter pertaining
to this chapter or rules and regulations established hereto shall submit in
writing to the Administrator all the facts involved and the ruling sought. 
A taxpayer or employer aggrieved by a special ruling may appeal the special
ruling in writing to the Income Tax Board of Review within thirty days.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.35  FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO MAKE RETURN OR PAYMENT; INSUFFICIENT
INFORMATION ON RETURN; EXAMINATION OF BOOKS, RECORDS AND WITNESSES.



   (a)   If a taxpayer or employer fails or refuses to make a return or
payment as required, in whole or in part, or if the Administrator or the
Department of Treasury has reason to believe that a return made does not
supply sufficient information for an accurate determination of the amount of
tax due, the Administrator or the Department may examine the books, papers
and records of any person, employer, taxpayer or agent or representative of
any person, employer or taxpayer, or audit the accounts of any person,
employer or taxpayer or any other records pertaining to the tax, to verify
the accuracy and completeness of a return filed, or if no return was filed,
to ascertain the tax, withholding, penalties, or interest due under this
chapter.



   (b)   The Administrator or the Department may examine any person,
under oath, concerning income which was or should have been reported for
taxation under this chapter, and for this purpose may compel the production
of books, papers and records and the attendance of all parties before him or
her whether as parties or witnesses, if he or she believes those persons have
knowledge of the income.  In addition, for tax years after the 1996 tax year
and for which a City has entered into an agreement with the Department of
Treasury pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, all
of the following apply to implement this section:



      (1)   The Department shall send to the taxpayer or employer a
letter of inquiry stating, in a courteous and unintimidating manner, the
Department's opinion that the taxpayer or employer needs to furnish further
information or owes taxes to the City, and the reason for that opinion.  A
letter of inquiry shall also explain the procedure by which the taxpayer or
employer may initiate communication with the Department to resolve any
dispute.  A letter of inquiry may be served on the taxpayer in any manner
determined appropriate by the Department.  This paragraph does not apply in
any of the following circumstances:



         A.   The taxpayer or employer files a return that shows
a tax due and fails to pay that tax.



         B.   The deficiency resulted from an audit of the
taxpayer's or employer's books and records by the City or the Department



         C.   The taxpayer or employer otherwise affirmatively
admits that a tax is due and owing.



      (2)   If the dispute is not resolved within thirty days after
the Department sends the taxpayer or employer a letter of inquiry, or if a
letter of inquiry is not required under paragraph (b)(1) hereof, the
Department, after determining the amount of tax due from a taxpayer or
employer, shall give notice to the taxpayer or employer of the Department's
notice of intent to assess the tax. The notice shall include all of the
following:



         A.   The amount of the tax the Department claims the
taxpayer or employer owes.



         B.   The reason for the deficiency.



         C.   A statement advising the taxpayer or employer of
his or her right to file a protest and to a hearing with the Department.



   (c)   A taxpayer or employer has thirty days after receipt of a
notice of intent to assess within which to file a written protest with the
Department.  If a written protest is received, the Department shall give the
taxpayer or employer or duly authorized representative of the taxpayer or
employer an opportunity to be heard and present evidence and arguments in his
or her behalf.



   (d)   If a protest to the notice of intent of assess the tax under
subsection (b) hereof is determined by the Department to be a frivolous
protest or a desire by the taxpayer or employer to delay or impede the
administration of the tax under this chapter, a penalty of twenty-five
($25.00) or twenty-five percent of the amount of tax under protest, whichever
is greater, shall be added to the tax.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.36  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION; DIVULGENCE;  DISCHARGE FROM EMPLOYMENT.



   (a)   Information gained by the Administrator, City Treasurer or any
other City official, agent or employee as a result of a return,
investigation, hearing or verification required or authorized by this chapter
is confidential, except for official purposes in connection with the
administration of this chapter and except in accordance with a proper
judicial order.



   (b)   No person shall divulge confidential information, except for
official purposes.  In addition to the penalty provided for in Section
880.99, an employee of the City who divulges confidential information is
subject to discharge for misconduct. 



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.37  UNPAID TAXES; INTEREST; PENALTY FOR DELAY; WAIVER OF PENALTY FOR
REASONABLE CAUSE.



   (a)   All taxes imposed in a taxable year before the 1992 taxable
year on a taxpayer and money withheld by an employer under this chapter and
remaining unpaid after the taxes or money withheld are due bear interest from
the due date at the rate of one-half of one percent per month until paid. 
For the 1992 taxable year and each subsequent taxable year before the 1997
taxable year, all taxes imposed on a taxpayer and money withheld by an
employer under this chapter and remaining unpaid after the taxes or money
withheld are due bear interest from the due date at the current monthly rate
of one percentage point above the adjusted prime rate per annum per month
until the tax or money is paid.  For taxable years after the 1996 taxable
year, if the amount of a tax paid is less than the amount that should have
been paid, or an excessive claim for credit has been made, the deficiency and
interest on the deficiency at the current monthly interest rate of one
percentage point above the adjusted prime rate per annum from the time the
tax was due and until paid are due and payable after a final assessment as
provided in Section 880.40.  A deficiency in an estimated payment required
by this chapter shall be treated in the same manner as a tax due and is
subject to the same current monthly interest rate of one percentage point
above the adjusted prime rate per annum from the time the payment was due
until paid.  As used in this section, "adjusted prime rate" means the
average predominant prime rate quoted by not less than three commercial banks
to large businesses, as determined by the Department of Treasury.  For tax
years before the 1997 tax year the adjusted prime rate is to be based on the
average prime rate charged by not less than three commercial banks during the
twelve-month period ending on September 30.  One percentage point shall be
added to the adjusted prime rate and the resulting sum shall be divided by
twelve to establish the current monthly interest rate.  The resulting
current monthly interest rate based on the twelve-month period ending
September 30 becomes effective on January 1 of the following year.  For tax
years after the 1996 tax year, "adjusted prime rate" means that term as
defined in and determined under Section 23(2) of Act 122 of the Public Acts
of 1941, as amended, being section 205.23 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.



   (b)   A person who fails to file a return, pay the tax or remit
withholding when due is liable, in addition to the interest, to a penalty of
one percent of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction
thereof, not to exceed a total penalty of twenty-five percent of the unpaid
tax.  If a return is filed or remittance is paid after the time specified
and it is shown to the satisfaction of the City or the Department of Treasury
that the failure was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the
penalty shall be waived by the Administrator of the Department.  If the
total interest or interest and penalty to be assessed are less than two
dollars ($2.00), the Administrator or the Department shall instead assess two
dollars ($2.00).



   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (d) hereof, if any part of
the deficiency or an excessive claim for credit is due to negligence, but
without intent to defraud, a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) or ten percent
of the total amount of the deficiency in the tax, whichever is greater, plus
interest as provided in subsection (a) hereof, shall be added.  The penalty
becomes due and payable after a final assessment is issued as provided in
Section 880.40.  If a taxpayer subject to a penalty under this subsection
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator or the Department that
the deficiency or excess claim for credit was due to reasonable cause, the
Administrator or the Department shall waive the penalty.



   (d)   If any part of the deficiency or an excessive claim for credit
is due to intentional disregard of this chapter, but without intent to
defraud, a penalty of twenty-five ($25.00) or twenty-five percent of the
total amount of the deficiency in the tax, whichever is greater, plus
interest as provided in subsection (a) hereof, shall be added.  The penalty
becomes due and payable after a final assessment is issued as provided in
Section 880.40.  If a penalty is imposed under this subsection and the
taxpayer subject to the penalty successfully disputes the penalty, the
Administrator or the Department shall not impose a penalty prescribed by
subsection (c) hereof to the tax otherwise due.



   (e)   If any part of the deficiency or an excessive claim for credit
is due to fraudulent intent to evade the tax imposed under this chapter, or
to obtain a refund for a fraudulent claim, a penalty of one hundred percent
of the deficiency, plus interest as provided in subsection (a) hereof, shall
be added.  The penalty becomes due and payable after a final assessment is
issued as provided in Section 880.40.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.38  ADDITIONAL TAX ASSESSMENT; WHEN INTEREST AND PENALTY NOT IMPOSED.



   (a)   Interest or a penalty shall not be imposed on an additional
tax assessment if, within ninety days from final determination of a Federal
tax liability which also affects the computation of the taxpayer's City
income tax liability, the taxpayer prepares and files an amended City income
tax return, showing income subject to the City tax based upon the final
determination of Federal Income Tax liability, and pays the additional tax
shown due thereon or makes a claim for refund of an overpayment.  Interest
shall not be allowed on a refund of the City income tax resulting from a
final determination of Federal tax liability.



   (b)   Interest and a penalty shall not be imposed for
underestimating the tax if the total amount of tax withheld and paid by
declaration equals at least seventy percent or more of the tax shown due on
the final return or seventy percent or more of the tax shown on the
taxpayer's return for the preceding taxable year.



   (c)   An employee shall not be penalized because of the failure of
his or her employer to report or pay tax withheld from the employee when the
employer has in fact withheld the proper amount of tax.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.39  DUE AND UNPAID ASSESSMENT; PROTEST PROCEDURE.



   (a)   For tax years before the 1997 tax year and for tax years after
the 1996 tax year for which a city has not entered into an agreement pursuant
to Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the Administrator
determines that a taxpayer or an employer subject to the provisions of this
chapter has failed to pay the full amount of the tax due or tax withheld, he
or she shall issue a proposed assessment showing the amount due and unpaid,
together with interest and penalties that may have accrued thereon.  The
proposed assessment shall be served upon the taxpayer or employer in person
or by mailing registered or certified mail to the last known address of the
taxpayer or employer.  Proof of mailing the proposed assessment is prima
facie evidence of a receipt of the proposed assessment by the addressee.



   (b)   A taxpayer or employer has thirty days after receipt of a
proposed assessment within which to file a written protest with the
Administrator, or thirty days after receipt of a notice of intent to assess
from the Department, the Administrator or the Department to file a written
protest with the Department, the Administrator or the Department, shall then
give the taxpayer or employer or his or her duly authorized representative an
opportunity to be heard and present evidence and arguments in his or her
behalf.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.40  FINAL ASSESSMENT; DETERMINATION OF RECEIPT.



   (a)   After the hearing as provided for in Section 880.39, the
Administrator or the Department of Treasury shall issue a final assessment
setting forth the total amount found due in the proposed assessment or notice
of intent to assess and any adjustment the Administrator or the Department
may have made as a result of the protest.  The final assessment shall be
served in the same manner as a proposed assessment or notice of intent to
assess.  Proof of mailing of the final assessment is prima facie evidence of
a receipt thereof by the addressee.



   (b)   If a protest under Section 880.35(c) or 880.39(b) is not filed
with respect to a proposed assessment or notice of intent to assess, a
taxpayer or employer is deemed to have received a final assessment thirty
days after receipt of the proposed assessment. 



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.41  FAILURE TO PAY TAX; DEMAND; RECOVERY; PROSECUTION.



   If an employer or taxpayer files a return showing the amount of tax or
withholding due the City, or the Department of Treasury, but fails to pay the
amount to the City or the Department, the Administrator or the Department is
not required to issue a proposed assessment, notice of intent to assess or a
final assessment.  The Administrator or the Department shall issue a ten-day
demand for payment, and if no payment or satisfactory evidence of payment is
made in the ten days, the Administrator or the Department may recover the tax
with interest and penalties in the name of the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction as other debts are recoverable, or prosecute for a violation of
this chapter under Section 880.99, or both.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.42  JEOPARDY ASSESSMENT; PROCEDURE.



   (a)   If the Administrator or the Department of Treasury believes
that collection of the tax withheld from an employee's compensation as
imposed under this chapter will be jeopardized by delay, the Administrator or
Department, whether or not the time otherwise prescribed by this chapter for
making the return and paying the tax has expired, shall immediately assess
the tax and interest and additions provided by this chapter.  The tax,
interest and additions shall become immediately due and payable, and the
Administrator or the Department shall make an immediate notice and demand for
payment, notwithstanding when the withheld tax is otherwise due and payable.



   (b)   If the Administrator or the Department finds that a person
liable for the tax administered under this chapter intends quickly to depart
from the City or to remove property from the City, to conceal the person or
the person's property in the City or to do any other act tending to render
wholly or partly ineffectual proceedings to collect the tax unless
proceedings are brought without delay, the Administrator or the Department
shall give notice of the findings to the person together with a demand for an
immediate return and immediate payment of the tax.  A warrant or
warrant-notice of levy may issue immediately upon issuance of a jeopardy
assessment.  When the warrant or warrant-notice is issued, the tax shall
become immediately due and payable.  If the person is not in default in
making a return or paying a tax prescribed by this chapter, and furnishes
evidence satisfactory to the Administrator or the Department that the return
will be filed and the tax to which the finding relates will be paid, then the
tax shall not be payable before the time otherwise fixed for payment.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.43  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; WAIVER; PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (a)   Except in case of fraud, failure to file a return, failure to
comply with the withholding provisions of this chapter or omission of
substantial portions of income subject to the tax, an additional assessment
shall not be made after four years from the date the return was due,
including extensions thereof, or the tax was paid, whichever is later. An
omission of more than twenty-five percent of gross income is considered a
substantial omission of income.  Under this section a declaration of
estimated tax is not considered a return.



   (b)   If the Federal Internal Revenue Service and a taxpayer execute
a waiver of the Federal statute of limitations, as to a taxable year.  The
expiration of the period within which an additional assessment may be made by
the Administrator or the Department of Treasury, or a claim for refund filed
by the taxpayer, for such taxable year, for City income tax purposes, shall
be six months from the date of expiration of the waiver. 



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.44  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR REFUND.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a tax
erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund is made
within four years from the date the payment was made or the original final
return was due, including extensions thereof, whichever is later, unless the
Administrator or Department of Treasury and the taxpayer mutually agree to
extend the time for assessment or refund.  Under this section a declaration
of estimated tax is not considered a return.  Upon denial of a refund a
taxpayer may follow the same procedure of appeal as provided in the case of a
deficiency assessment.



   (b)   A tax deficiency as finally determined and interest or
penalties thereon shall be paid within thirty days after receipt of a final
assessment if no appeal is made.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.45  INCOME TAX BOARD OF REVIEW; APPOINTMENTS; OFFICERS; RULES OF
PROCEDURE; QUORUM; CONFLICT OF INTERESTS; RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS AND
PROCEEDINGS; CONDUCT OF BUSINESS AT PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE OF HEARING.



   (a)   The governing body of the City shall appoint an Income Tax
Board of Review consisting of residents of the City who are not City
officials or City employees.



   (b)   The Board shall select a Chairperson, Secretary and other
officers as the Board considers necessary and shall adopt rules governing the
procedure for hearings and other procedures.  The rules shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for inspection by any
interested person.  A copy of the rules shall be furnished on request to any
interested person.



   (c)   A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for
any action by or hearing before the Board, or for any other purpose.  A
member of the Board shall not act on a matter in which he or she has a
financial interest other than the common public interest.  A record shall be
kept of the Board's transactions and proceedings.  The record and any other
writing prepared, owned, used in the possession of or retained by the Board
in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the
public in compliance with Act 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended.



   (d)   The business which the Board may perform shall be conducted at
a public hearing of the Board held in compliance with Act 267 of the Public
Acts of 1976, as amended, being Sections 15.261 to 15.275 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.  Public notice of the time, date and place of the hearing
shall be given in the manner required by Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976,
as amended.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.46  NOTICE OF APPEAL; HEARING; CONFIDENTIALITY; PAYMENT OF DEFICIENCY OR
REFUND.



   (a)   A taxpayer or employer may file a written notice of appeal
with the Secretary of the Income Tax Board of Review not more than thirty
days after receipt of a final assessment, denial in whole or in part of a
claim for refund, decision, order or special ruling of the Administrator or
the Department of Treasury.  Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board
shall notify the Administrator or the Department who or which shall forward
within fifteen days, to the Board, a certified transcript of all actions and
findings taken by the Administrator relating to the matter under appeal. 
The appellant or his or her duly authorized representative may inspect the
transcript.



   (b)   The Board of Review shall grant the appellant a hearing at
which the appellant or his or her duly authorized representative and the
Administrator or the Department have an opportunity to present evidence
relating to the matter under appeal.  After conclusion of the hearing the
Board, by a majority of its three members, shall affirm, reverse or modify
the final assessment, denial, decision or order under appeal and furnish a
copy of the decision to the appellant and to the Administrator or the
Department.



   (c)   The provisions of this chapter as to the confidential
character of tax data are applicable to proceedings pending before or
submitted to the Board.



   (d)   A tax deficiency or refund and any interest or penalties on a
deficiency or refund shall be paid within thirty days after receipt by the
taxpayer or employer or by the City or the Department of notice of
determination by the Board if no further appeal is made.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.47  APPEAL TO STATE TAX COMMISSIONER OR TAX TRIBUNAL.



   (a)   A taxpayer, employer or other person aggrieved by a rule
adopted by the Administrator may file a timely appeal to the State
Commissioner of Revenue in the form and manner prescribed by the Commissioner.



   (b)   A taxpayer or employer aggrieved by a final assessment,
denial, decision or order of the Income Tax Board of Review, other than a
decision under subsection (a) hereof, may appeal the assessment, denial,
decision or order to the tax tribunal not more than thirty-five days after
the final assessment, denial, decision or order was issued.  The uncontested
portion of a final assessment, order or decision shall be paid as a
prerequisite to appeal.  An appeal under this subsection shall be perfected
as provided under the Tax Tribunal Act, Act 186 of the Public Acts of 1973,
as amended, being Sections 205.701 to 205.779 of the Michigan Compiled Laws,
and rules promulgated under that Act for the tax tribunal.



   (c)   Not more than thirty-five days after a final order of the tax
tribunal, the taxpayer, employer or other person shall pay the City the
taxes, interest and penalty found due to the City or the Department, and the
City or the Department shall refund to the taxpayer, employer or other person
any amount found to have been overpaid by the taxpayer, employer, or other
person. 



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.48  APPEAL TO COURT OF APPEALS OR SUPREME COURT; PROCEDURE.



   (a)   If a taxpayer, employer or other person or the City or the
Department of Treasury is aggrieved by a decision of the tax tribunal, the
aggrieved party may take an appeal by right from a decision of the tax
tribunal to the Court of Appeals.  The appeal shall be taken on the record
made before the tax tribunal.  The taxpayer, employer or other person or the
City or Department may take further appeal to the Supreme Court in accordance
with the court rules provided for appeals to the Supreme Court.



   (b)   An assessment is final, conclusive and not subject to further
challenge after ninety days after the issuance of the final assessment,
decision or order of the Administrator or the Department, and a person is not
entitled to a refund of any tax, interest or penalty paid pursuant to an
assessment unless the aggrieved person has appealed the assessment in the
manner provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.49  PAYMENT TO TAXPAYER FROM GENERAL FUND OR CITY INCOME TAX TRUST FUND.



   For tax years before the 1997 tax year and for tax years after the 1996
tax year and for which a city has not entered into an agreement pursuant to
Section 9 of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, if a taxpayer is found
by a decision on an appeal to recover any sum paid, and further appeal has
not been taken within the time permitted, the sum shall be paid from the
General Fund of the City.  For tax years after the 1996 tax year and for
which a city has entered into an agreement pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter
1, if a taxpayer is found by a decision on an appeal to be entitled to
recover any sum paid, and further appeal has not been taken within the time
permitted the sum shall be paid from the City Income Tax Trust Fund
established in Section 5 of Chapter 1. 



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.50  VIOLATIONS.



   Each of the following violations of this chapter is a misdemeanor and,
in addition to the interest and penalties provided for in this chapter, shall
be subject to the penalty provided for in Section 880.99:



   (a)   Willful failure, neglect or refusal to file a return required
by this chapter.



   (b)   Willful failure, neglect or refusal to pay the tax, penalty or
interest imposed by this chapter.



   (c)   Willful failure of an employer or person to withhold or pay to
the City a tax as required by this chapter.



   (d)   Refusal to permit the City or an agent or employee appointed
by the Administrator, in writing, to examine the books, records and papers of
a person subject to this chapter.



   (e)   Knowingly filing an incomplete, false or fraudulent return.



   (f)   Attempting to do or doing anything whatever in order to avoid
full disclosure of the amount of income or to avoid the payment of any or all
of the tax imposed by this chapter.



(Ord. 360.  Passed 12-11-93.)



880.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
the general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 882
Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan



882.01   Definitions.



882.02   Review considerations.



882.03   Public purpose.



882.04   Interests of the public.



882.05   Approval and adoption of Plan.



882.06   Boundaries of project area.



882.07   Preparation of initial base year assessment roll.



882.08   Preparation of annual base year assessment roll.



882.09   Establishment of Project Fund; approval of depository.



882.10   Payment of tax increments to Authority.



882.11   Use of moneys in the Project Fund.



882.12   Annual report.



882.13   Refund of surplus tax increments.



882.14   Repealer.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation generally - see CHTR. Art. VIII



   Real estate transfer; documentary stamp tax - see M.C.L.A. §§ 207.501
et seq.



   Municipal tax rates - see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.107a, 211.203



   Development and tax increment financing plan for the Downtown



   Development Authority - see B. R. & T. Ch. 884



882.01  DEFINITIONS.



Where used in this chapter the terms set forth below shall have the following
meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



   (a)   "Base Year Assessment Roll" means the base year assessment
roll prepared by the City Assessor in accordance with this chapter.



   (b)   "Captured Assessed Value" shall have the meaning described in
Act 281.



   (c)   "Eligible Property" shall have the meaning described in Act
281.



   (d)   "Initial Assessed Value" shall have the meaning described in
Act 281.



   (e)   "Local Development Finance Authority", "LDFA" or "Authority"
means the Local Development Finance Authority of the City of Ionia.



   (f)   "Plan" means the "Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing
Plan" prepared by the Authority as transmitted to the City Council by the
Authority for public hearing, and confirmed by this chapter, copies of which
Plan are on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   (g)   "Project Fund" means the Local Development Finance Authority
Project Fund established pursuant to this chapter.



   (h)   "Taxing Jurisdiction" shall mean each unit of government
levying an ad valorem property tax on the eligible property.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.02  REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS.



   As required by Act 281, the Council has, in reviewing the Plan, taken
into account the following considerations:



   (a)   The Development Plan included in the Plan meets the
requirements set forth in Section 15(2) of Act 281, and the Tax Increment
Financing Plan included in the Plan meets the requirements set forth in
Section 12(2), (3) and (4) of Act 281.



   (b)   The proposed method of financing the public facilities is
feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing.



   (c)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of Act 281.



   (d)   The amount of captured assessed value estimated to result from
adoption of the Plan is reasonable.



   (e)   The land to be acquired under the Development Plan is
reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the Plan and the purposes
of Act 281.



   (f)   The Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the Master
Plan of the City.



   (g)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and
utilities, are or will be adequate to service the property described in the
Development Plan.



   (h)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities, to the extent required by the Plan, are reasonably necessary for
the project and for the City.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.03  PUBLIC PURPOSE.



   The City Council hereby determines that the Plan constitutes a public
purpose.



   (a)   (Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.04  INTERESTS OF THE PUBLIC.



   The City Council hereby determines that it is in the best interests of
the public to eliminate the conditions of unemployment, underemployment, and
joblessness and to promote economic growth in the City to proceed with the
Plan.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.05  APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF PLAN.



   The Plan as submitted by the Authority is hereby approved and adopted.
The duration of the Plan shall be from the date of this chapter through
February 8, 2004, except as it may be extended by subsequent amendment of the
Plan pursuant to Act 281. A copy of the Plan and all amendments thereto shall
be maintained on file in the City Clerk's office.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.06  BOUNDARIES OF PROJECT AREA.



   The boundaries of the project area as set forth in the Plan are hereby
adopted and confirmed.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.07  PREPARATION OF INITIAL BASE YEAR ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (a)   Within sixty days of the adoption of this chapter, the City
Assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll.  The initial
base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the project
area on the effective date of this chapter and the amount of tax revenue
derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the eligible
property, excluding millage specifically levied for the payment of principal
and interest of obligations approved by the electors or obligations pledging
the unlimited taxing power of the local governmental unit.



   (b)   The City Assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base
year assessment roll to the City Treasurer, County Treasurer, Authority and
each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year
assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and the tax
increment financing plan contained in the Plan approved by this chapter.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.08  PREPARATION OF ANNUAL BASE YEAR ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   Each year, within fifteen days following the final equalization of
property in the project area, the City Assessor shall prepare an updated base
year assessment roll.  The updated base year assessment roll shall show the
information required in the initial base year assessment roll and, in
addition, the captured assessed value for each eligible property for that
year.  Copies of the annual base year assessment roll shall be transmitted
by the Assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll,
together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with the Plan.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.09  ESTABLISHMENT OF PROJECT FUND; APPROVAL OF DEPOSITORY.



   The Treasurer of the Authority shall establish a separate fund which
shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts in a bank or banks
approved by the Treasurer of the City, to be designated the Local Development
Finance Authority Project Fund. All moneys received by the Authority pursuant
to the Plan shall be deposited in thc Project Fund. All moneys in the Project
Fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the Plan.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.10  PAYMENT OF TAX INCREMENTS TO AUTHORITY.



   The City Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes
are collected on the eligible property, pay that proportion of the taxes,
except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value
bears to the initial assessed value, to the Treasurer of the Authority for
deposit in the Project Fund.  The payments shall be made on the date or
dates on which the City Treasurer and the County Treasurer are required to
remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.11  USE OF MONEYS IN THE PROJECT FUND.



   The moneys credited to the Project Fund and on hand therein from time
to time shall be used annually in the following manner and following order of
priority.



   (a)   First to pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all
outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the Plan, an amount equal to
the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by
maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less
any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund.



   (b)   Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of
principal and interest on bonds  issued pursuant to the Plan to the extent
required by any resolution authorizing bonds.



   (c)   Third, to pay the cost of completing the remaining public
improvements as set forth in the Development Plan to the extent that those
costs are not financed from other sources.



   (d)   Fourth to reimburse the City for funds advanced by it pursuant
to the Plan.



   (e)   Fifth, to pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs
of the Authority and the City pertaining to the Project Area.



   (f)   Sixth, to repay amounts advanced by the City for project
costs, including costs for preliminary plans, and fees for other professional
services.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.12  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Within ninety days after the end of each fiscal year, the Authority
shall submit to the City Council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a
report on the status of the Project Fund.  The report shall include the
amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of
expenditures from the account, the amount of principal and interest on any
outstanding indebtedness, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial
assessed value of the eligible property within the project area, the captured
assessed value of the eligible properties within the project area and the
amount of captured assessed value retained by the Authority, the tax
increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, the
number of jobs created as a result of the implementation of the tax increment
financing plan and any additional information requested by the City Council
or deemed appropriate by the Authority.  The Secretary of the Authority
shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.13  REFUND OF SURPLUS TAX INCREMENTS.



   Annual tax increment revenues in excess of estimated tax increment
revenues or the actual costs of the Plan to be paid by tax increment
revenues, or the actual costs of the Plan to be paid by tax increment
revenues, may be retained by the Authority only for purposes that the
resolution of the Authority's Board are determined to further the development
program in accordance with the Plan.  Any surplus money in the Project Fund
at the end of the year, as shown by the annual report of the Authority, shall
be paid by the Authority to the City Treasurer or the County Treasurer, as
shown by the annual report of the Authority, as the case may be, and rebated
by each to the appropriate Taxing Jurisdiction.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



882.14  REPEALER.



   All resolutions and parts of resolutions, insofar as they conflict with
the provisions of this chapter, are hereby rescinded.



(Res. Unno.  Passed 2-8-94.)



Chapter 884
Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the Downtown Development
Authority



884.01   Findings.



884.02   Public purpose.



884.03   Best interests of the public.



884.04   Approval and adoption of modified plan.



884.05   Preparation of base year assessment roll.



884.06   Preparation of annual tax increment assessment roll.



884.07   Establishment of Project Fund; approval of depository.



884.08   Payment of tax increments to authority.



884.09   Use of moneys in the Project Fund.



884.10   Responsibility for expenditures that exceed the Project Fund.



884.11   Annual report.



884.12   Refund of surplus tax increments.



884.13   Conflicts of laws; severability.



884.14   First Amendment to the Tax Increment Financing and Development
Plan.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation generally - CHTR. Art. VIII



   Real estate transfer; documentary stamp tax - see M.C.L.A. §§ 207.501
et seq.



   Municipal tax rates - see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.107a, 211.203



   Tax increment financing and development plan - see B.R. & T. Ch. 882



884.01  FINDINGS.



   (a)   The development plan included in the Development and Tax
Increment Financing Plan (hereinafter referred to as the Plan) meets the
requirements set forth in Section 17(2) of Act 197 of the Public Acts of
1975, as amended, and the Tax Increment Financing Plan meets the requirements
set forth in Section 14(2) of the Act.



   (b)   The proposed method of financing the development, as set forth
in the Plan, is feasible, and the Downtown Development Authority of the City
of Ionia (hereinafter referred to as the Authority) has the ability to
arrange the financing.



   (c)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of the Act.



   (d)   The land included within the Development Area within the
Downtown District (hereinafter referred to as the Development Area) to be
acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act.



   (e)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the Master
Plan of the City.



   (f)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and
utilities, are or will be adequate to service the Development Area.



   (g)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities, to the extent required by the Plan, are reasonably necessary for
the development project and for the City.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.02  PUBLIC PURPOSE.



   The City Council hereby determines that the Plan constitutes a public
purpose.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.03  BEST INTERESTS OF THE PUBLIC.



   The City Council hereby determines that it is in the best interests of
the public to proceed with the Plan in order to halt property value
deterioration in the Downtown District, to increase property tax valuation,
to eliminate the causes of the deterioration in property values, and to
promote growth in the Downtown District.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.04  APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF MODIFIED PLAN.



   The Plan is hereby approved and adopted, as modified, as provided
herein. The duration of the Plan shall be fifty years from the date of this
chapter or the date of maturity of the last series of bonds pursuant to the
Plan, whichever is later, except as it may be extended by subsequent
amendment of the Plan pursuant to the Act.



   A copy of the Plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on
file in the City Clerk's office.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.05  PREPARATION OF BASE YEAR ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (a)   Within sixty days of the publication of this chapter, the City
Assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll.  The base year
assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the Development Area
on the effective date of this chapter, the initial assessed value of each
parcel of property within the Development Area, and the amount of tax revenue
derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in
the Development Area.



   (b)   The City Assessor shall transmit copies of the base year
assessment roll to the City Treasurer, the County Treasurer, the Authority
and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year
assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this chapter and the tax
increment financing plan contained in the Plan approved by this chapter.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.06  PREPARATION OF ANNUAL TAX INCREMENT ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   Each year, within fifteen days following the final equalization of
property in the Development Area, the City Assessor shall prepare the tax
increment assessment roll.  The tax increment assessment roll shall show the
information required in the base year assessment roll and, in addition, the
amount by which the current assessed value as finally equalized for all
taxable property in the Development Area exceeds the assessed value of the
property as shown on the base year assessment roll (the "captured assessed
value").  Copies of the annual tax increment assessment roll shall be
transmitted by the City Assessor to the same persons as the base year
assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in
accordance with this chapter and the Plan.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.07  ESTABLISHMENT OF PROJECT FUND; APPROVAL OF DEPOSITORY.



   The Treasurer of the Authority shall establish a separate fund which
shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts in a bank or banks
approved by the Treasurer of the City, to be designated the Downtown
Development Authority Project Fund.  All moneys received by the Authority
pursuant to the Plan shall be deposited in the Project Fund.  All moneys in
the Project Fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with
the Plan.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.08  PAYMENT OF TAX INCREMENTS TO AUTHORITY.



   The City Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes
are collected on the property in the Downtown District, pay that proportion
of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that the Captured
Assessed Value (as defined in Act 197) bears to the Initial Assessed Value
(as defined in Act 197), to the Treasurer of the Authority for deposit in the
Project Fund, excluding therefrom the taxes derived from debt millage.  The
payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the City Treasurer and
the County Treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing
jurisdictions.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.09  USE OF MONEYS IN THE PROJECT FUND.



   The moneys credited to the Project Fund and on hand therein from time
to time shall be used annually in the following manner and following order of
priority:



   First, to pay to the City for its payment of debt service on, or to pay
into the debt retirement fund or funds for all outstanding series of bonds
issued pursuant to the Plan or any other series of bonds or other obligations
pledging or committing the use of tax increment revenues of the Authority as
a source of debt service payments, including, without limitation, the City's
contractual payments to the County of Ingham to pay debt service on bonds
issued to finance projects described in the Plan, an amount equal to the
interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal, whether by
maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less
any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund.



   Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of principal of and
interest on bonds issued pursuant to the Plan to the extent required by any
resolution authorizing bonds.



   Third, to pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs of the
Authority and the City pertaining to the Plan, and the Development Area,
including planning and promotion to the extent provided in the annual budget
of the Authority.



   Fourth, to repay amounts advanced by the City for project costs,
including costs for preliminary plans, and fees for other professional
services.



   Fifth, to pay, to the extent determined desirable by the Authority and
approved by the City, the cost of completing any remaining public
improvements as set forth in the Plan, to the extent that those costs are not
financed from other sources.



   Sixth, to pay the cost of any additional improvements to the Plan that
are determined necessary by the Authority and approved by the City Council in
accordance with the Act.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.10  RESPONSIBILITY FOR EXPENDITURES THAT EXCEED THE PROJECT FUND.



   In the event the City issues obligations on behalf of the Authority,
and the City is required in any fiscal year to pay out of its General Fund
any portion of the debt service on such an obligation, the Authority shall be
required to fully reimburse the City from its available funds (but only after
the set aside for debt service for any fiscal year has been met), including,
but not limited to, tax revenues derived from assessed value captured under
tax increment financing (but only after the taxing units have been fully
reimbursed as required under Section B4 of the Tax Increment Financing Plan),
the Authority millage levy or other sources of the Authority.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.11  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Within ninety days after the end of each fiscal year, the Authority
shall submit to the City Council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a
report on the status of the Project Fund.  The report shall include the
amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of
expenditures from the account, the amount of principal and interest on any
outstanding indebtedness, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial
assessed value of the Downtown District, the captured assessed value of the
Downtown District and the amount of captured assessed value retained by the
Authority, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the
prior year, and any additional information requested by the City Council or
deemed appropriate by the Authority.  The Secretary of the Authority shall
cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.12  REFUND OF SURPLUS TAX INCREMENTS.



   Any surplus money in the Project Fund at the end of a year, as shown by
the annual report of the Authority, shall be paid by the Authority to the
City Treasurer or the County Treasurer, as the case may be, and rebated by
each to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.13  CONFLICTS OF LAWS; SEVERABILITY.



   All ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter are to the extent of such conflict hereby
repealed, and each section of this chapter and each subdivision of any
section thereof is hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or
holding of any section or subdivision thereof to be invalid or void shall not
be deemed or held to affect the validity of any other section or subdivision
of this chapter.



(Ord. 337.  Passed 2-6-90.)



884.14  FIRST AMENDMENT TO TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN



   The Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan adopted pursuant to
the provisions of the Downtown Development Authority Act, being Act. 197 of
the Public Acts of 1975, as amended ("Act 197"), by the Downtown Development
Authority of the City of Ionia  ("the Authority") and approved by the City
Council of the City of Ionia, County of Ionia, Michigan, pursuant to Sections
884.01 through 884.13, is hereby amended by approval of this First Amendment
to the Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan (the "First Amendment").



   1.  Section II(C), captioned "DEVELOPMENT PLAN; Description of the
Projects to be Initiated in the Development Area as well as Estimated Costs
and Completion Dates", is hereby amended by addition of the following
paragraph:



   In addition to the Projects described in this Section II(C), the Board
of the Authority intends to undertake the Projects shown on Exhibit A of the
First Amendment.



   2.  Section II(G), captioned "DEVELOPMENT PLAN; Estimate of Cost of
Development, Statement of Proposed Method of Financing the Development and
the Ability of the DDA to Arrange the Financing", is hereby amended to add
the following paragraph under the heading "City of Ionia Limited Tax General
Obligation Bonds Issued Pursuant to Section 16 of Act 197":



   The City may issue limited tax general obligation bonds pursuant to
Section 16 of Act 197 in an amount not to exceed $9,500,000, assuming an
average interest cost of 9% on bonds to be issued in 1991, and assuming the
tax increments to be the amount shown in Table 1 attached to the First
Amendment.  Compliance of the requirement of Section 16 of Act 197 that
annual principal and interest requirements can not exceed 80% of the
estimated tax increment revenue is shown in Table 2 attached to the First
Amendment



   3.  Section III, captioned "TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN", is hereby
amended by addition of the following paragraph:



Any reference in the Plan to Table 2 shall also be deemed to refer to Table 2
attached to the First Amendment, and any reference in the Plan to Table 3
shall also be deemed to refer to Table 2 attached to the First Amendment. 
Table 2 demonstrates that if the City issued general obligation bonds in the
amount shown in Table 2 pursuant to Section 16 of Act l97, the annual
principal and interest requirements of said bonds would not exceed 80% of the
estimated tax increment revenue to be received from the development area. 
Table 3 demonstrates the current millage levied by each taxing jurisdiction
within the development area, the anticipated growth and state equalized
value, and the resulting tax increment revenue to be derived from the
development plan.



   4.  Section III, captioned “TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN", is hereby
further amended to provide that the paragraph appearing after the heading
"Maximum Indebtedness and Duration of Plan" shall read entirely as follows:




MAXIMUM INDEBTEDNESS AND DURATION OF PLAN




The maximum amount of bonded indebtedness to be incurred under this Tax
Increment Financing Plan is $9,500,000, sufficient to pay the estimated costs
of the development, plus any associated costs of engineers, architects,
attorneys, bond printing costs and costs of publication of required notice. 
The maximum duration of the plan is 20 years.



   5.  This First Amendment shall become effective upon enactment by the
City of Ionia of an ordinance approving this First Amendment.




EXHIBIT A OF FIRST AMENDMENT





Description of Projects to be Initiated in Development Area




   1).   Purchase and removal of buildings to facilitate the
construction of a fast-food restaurant.  The property is located on Dexter
Street, on one of the primary  accesses to the downtown parking/shopping
area.  It is currently vacant and is in very poor repair.



   Because of possible problems with soils, the structures would be
removed and soils corrected.  Following clearing of the site, a buyer would
be sought for the property with consideration to the theatre for ongoing
programming in exchange for the properties.



   The project is expected to provide 20 to 40 low-moderate income jobs
whereas none is presently provided.  In addition, marginal tax property
would be replaced with improved S.E.V.



   2).   Purchase of properties now partially in the flood plain,
removal of substandard structures, and filling of the area to provide a
building site for a major shopping facility.



   The improved property would then be sold to a developer for a
comparative figure to other property in the area that is outside the downtown.



   The new facility is expected to employ more than 70 persons in low to
moderate income positions as well as providing the possibility of movement
into management areas. 



   Currently no employment exists in the area to be reclaimed.



   Lighting and other public improvements would be made to the area.



   3).   Restoration of City-owned depot as an arts center.  The
facility is in disrepair and was abandoned by the Central Michigan
Railroad.  The City of Ionia purchased the facility with present earmarked
use as an arts center.  Future use could be some commercial value that would
create other employment, but nothing is currently in the offing.



   4).   Industrial retention project.  A plant is looking at
improvements to its 80-year old facility in Ionia that would accommodate
expansion and retention of approximately 450 jobs in the Ionia area. 
Without the improvements, the employer would be lost.



   Improvements are all infrastructure related such as utility-upgrade and
movement to facilitate future growth.  Among the major issues facing the
plant is a storm sewer system that is inadequate and misplaced with lines
running through the current plant (or under) that have caused flooding and
repeated production problems.



   5).   Sidewalk replacement in the downtown area.  Bids would be
sought to remove and replace all sidewalks with a brick-patterned solid
concrete sidewalk the full length of Main Street and its side street areas.



   6).   Renovation and completion of the Ionia Theatre that is owned
by the Downtown Development Authority.



   The Ionia Theatre was rescued from the wrecking ball and is currently
being renovated inside by a theatre association (non-profit group that leases
the building from the DDA). However, the marquee, seats and curtains remain
to be worked on.



   7).   Completion and fine-tuning of downtown streetscape that would
include trees, shrubs and other improvements in conjunction with sidewalks.



   8).   Relocation of fire station to allow for increased parking in
the 200 block of downtown as well as at the Post Office next door.  The
remaining funds would be City-generated.



   Currently a parking deficiency is noted on the north side of the 200
block as well as the government-office are to the east of this facility.  It
is expected this move will allow for relief of problems .



   9).   Creation of a light industrial park south of Adams Street in
an area that is blighted.  Approximately 11 sub-code structures house
families in this area.  Violations range from unsafe wiring (four have
burned down in the last three years) to roof problems to foundations to
septic failure with raw sewage running on the ground .



   Unfortunately the area will not support any improvements given its
valuation at this time.  It would accommodate approximately three 10-acre
industrial sites or any combination of others.



   10).   Development of recreation/entertainment center at the Ionia
Fairgrounds .



   Currently parks and recreation are lacking in the Ionia area,
particularly in the areas of exhibits, shows and medium to large concerts .



   The fairgrounds is underutilized at this time (City-owned property) and
could be improved for more year-round use.  In addition, a riverwalk should
be constructed to tie the fairgrounds with the southern DDA boundary as well
as other parts of the City.



   The fairgrounds improvements are:



      A).  Grandstand renovation



      B).  Floral building repair and renovation



      C).  Automobile and exhibit building winterizing, repair, and
renovation



      D).  Roadway reconstruction to facilitate traffic.



      E).  Riverwalk construction



      F).  Fencing and restroom construction



   11).   Dexter Corridor Reconstruction



   The Dexter Street Corridor in Ionia needs renovation, landscaping and
repair to the north DDA limits.  It currently handles the heaviest traffic
loads in Ionia County and thereby provides excellent exposure for businesses.



   Costs include:



      A).  Landscaping



      B).  Lighting Improvements



      C).  Property Demolition and Removal



      D).  Street Improvements



      E).  Storm Drainage



      F).  Property Acquisition



      G).  Sidewalk Improvements



      H).  Benches, Flowers, Etc .



   Lighting would be installed the full-length to tie in the downtown
areas; walking trails created and the area improved for new business to
replace sub-standard housing now present.



   12).   Industrial park development on Harrison Street/East Main
Street.



The area is currently underdeveloped land which could house some industrial
sites.  Sewer, storm, water and roadway improvements are needed to create an
approximate park size of 60 acres.



   13).   Creation of a fitness center in the downtown area to
facilitate business development/recruiting efforts as well as housing
improvements.



   The center would house a small pool and weight room area as well as
areas for aerobics-type workouts.  The buildings would need purchase and
improvements made.  The goal would be to develop additional residential
housing in the downtown area to serve medium to upper level income persons as
well as to add employment base in the downtown area.



   14).   Miscellaneous lighting completions at various areas of the
DDA to create a flow through the area.



   15).   Landscaping aids throughout the district that would include
parks, swings and other work.



   16).   Hotel development project that would include clearing of
sites to allow for development of 50 to 60 room hotel project with sale to
developer.



   17).   Entertainment complex for small movies, shows and matinees,
which would include working with developer to acquire and remove substandard
or unused buildings and construct new buildings at their expense.



   18).   Performing stage, farmer's market and public restroom
facilities in the Downtown Center utilizing the area around the depot.  A
stage area, park and landscape would be installed along with purchase and
restoration of an original grainery for a farmer's market.



   19).   Miscellaneous utility improvements in the downtown area to
include undergrounding remaining overhead utilities; storm sewer work on
Dexter and other areas; re-lining of other storm sewer systems and sewer
manholes.



   20).   Removal of non-contributing buildings that would create
additional parking on the north side of Main Street as well as in the area of
Dexter Street in the downtown area.



   The bonding authority of the Downtown Development Authority would be
raised by this section to $9.5 million.



   Total cost of the proposed amendment to the Downtown Development
Authority Plan, in 1991 dollars, is estimated to be $15 .170 million.



   The plan is designed for a four-year completion date with another bond
issue required in 1994 to complete the project.



   The following items will be completed by the spring of 1992 with the
proposed $4.0 million bond issues of July 1991:  Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10(c) roofs, 10(d), l3, 14, 16, 17 ,18.  It should be understood that
bond proceeds will be  utilized following final signing of purchase
agreements with the development officials.  No dollars will be expended
until all necessary building permits and other requirements are met.  This
could cause some items not scheduled for 1992 completion to be moved up in
order for completion .



   It is estimated that the final items would be completed in 1995-96 City
of Ionia fiscal years.  It should also be understood that the dollars
required for final completion may (or may not) be higher than the estimate
provided.



(Ord. 347.  Passed 6-4-91.)



CHAPTER 886
Obsolete Property Rehabilitation District



886.01   Purpose.



886.02   District created.



886.03   Application; contract.



886.04   Use of district.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Downtown Development Authority - see ADM. Ch. 282



   Personal Property Exemption District - see B. R. & T. Ch. 888



   City Planning Commission; Master Plan - see P. & Z. 1202.05



886.01  PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to Act 146 of  the Public Acts of 2000, known as the Obsolete
Property Rehabilitation Act, the Common Council for the City hereby approves
the creation of an Obsolete Property Rehabilitation District-#1, which
provides an exemption from ad valorem property taxes to commercial property
and commercial housing property provided they are located in a qualified
local government unit and other conditions are met. 



(Res. 04-2001-01.  Passed 4-3-01.)



886.02  DISTRICT CREATED.



   The Obsolete Property Rehabilitation District (the "OPRD") shall cover
the property that is contained within the borders of the Downtown Development
Authority.  The OPRD has obsolete property in the area characterized by
obsolete commercial property or commercial housing property as defined by the
State of Michigan and its agencies in an addendum published supplemental to
Act  146 of the Public Acts of 2000, that is incorporated herein by
reference as if fully set out in these Codified Ordinances.



(Res. 04-2001-01.  Passed 4-3-01.)



886.03  APPLICATION; CONTRACT.



   The OPRD shall support the City Master Plan and a contract shall be
developed between an applicant for an OPRD and the City which shall be
approved by the Council prior to submission to the State of Michigan.  Such
contract shall outline all of the obligations and statements made by the
applicant and City and shall become part of the official record.



(Res. 04-2001-01.  Passed 4-3-01.)



886.04  USE OF DISTRICT.



   The Council desires the OPRD be used to improve and rehabilitate
buildings within the District, improve access and traffic management,
increase and/or retain employment, expand business options, and lead to a
reduction in obsolete property within the District.



(Res. 04-2001-01.  Passed 4-3-01.)



CHAPTER 888
Personal Property Exemption District



888.01   Purpose.



888.02   Eligible districts.



888.03   Application; contract.



888.04   Abatement of tax.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Downtown Development Authority District - see ADM. 282.02



   Local Finance Development District - see ADM. 286.08



   Obsolete Property Rehabilitation District - see B. R. & T. Ch. 886



888.01  PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to Act 328 of the Public Acts of 1998, the Council for the
City hereby desires to make available the benefits of Section 9f to
commercial businesses and industry that are eligible under the Act as
contained in the definition for "eligible business" found in Act 24, of the
Public Acts of 1995, M.C.L.A. §§ 207.801 to 207.810  in redevelopment of
obsolete property, brownfield property, or other vacant property within the
boundaries of the City and approves the abatement of personal  property
taxes in eligible districts on eligible investments.



(Res. 04-2001-02.  Passed 4-3-01.)



888.02  ELIGIBLE DISTRICTS.



   The eligible districts, as defined in Act 328 of the Public Acts of
1998, have been identified and are approved as:



   (a)   All property within the Downtown Development Authority
District;



   (b)   All property within the Local Finance Development District;



   (c)   All property within the Brownfield Redevelopment Zone (which
includes the entire City of Ionia);



   (d)   All Industrial Development Districts already in place or that
will be crated by the Common Council.



(Res. 04-2001-02.  Passed 4-3-01.)



888.03  APPLICATION; CONTRACT.



   (a)   The City and its businesses are eligible for the benefits of
Act 328 of the Public Acts of 1998 with the City qualifying as an "eligible
distressed area" as outlined in Section 11 of the State Housing Development
Authority Act of 1966, 1966 P.A. 346, M.C.L.A. §  125.1411.



   (b)   All applications for relief under Act 328 of the Public Acts
of 1998 shall be directed through the Manager's office to the Common Council
for action prior to submission to the State of Michigan.  A contract
outlining the benefits and statements by both the applicant and the City
shall be approved by the Common Council prior to submission to the State of
Michigan.



(Res. 04-2001-02.  Passed 4-3-01.)



888.04  ABATEMENT OF TAX.



   (a)   "New personal property" is defined as property not previously
subject to tax and that is placed in the eligible district after a resolution
is passed by the Council supporting such improvement.



   (b)   The number of years of abatement of tax on the personal
property and the amount abated shall be determined by the number of jobs
created and the level of investment made.



(Res. 04-2001-02.  Passed 4-3-01.)



CHAPTER 890
Low Income Housing Payment in Lieu of Taxes



890.01   Title.



890.02   Purpose.



890.03   Definitions.



890.04   Class of housing developments.



890.05   Establishment of annual service charge.



890.06   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.



890.07   Contractual effect.



890.08   Payment of service charge.



890.09   Duration.



890.10   Valley View Phase I - PILOT.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Taxation generally - see CHTR. Art. VIII



   Utilities - see S.U. & P.S. Chs. 1040 et seq.



890.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Low Income Housing
Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance".



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.02  PURPOSE.



   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens
of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing
for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State
Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, M.C.L.A.
125.1401 et seq., MSA 116.114(1) et seq.). The City is authorized by this Act
to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any
or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount
it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public
necessity, and as the City will be benefited and improved by such housing,
the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption
for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of
the provisions of this chapter for tax exemption and the service charge in
lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this chapter are essential to
the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are
constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption.



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.03  DEFINITIONS.



   All terms shall be defined as set forth in the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State
of Michigan, as amended except as follows:



   (a)   "Act" means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being
Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended.



   (b)   "Annual shelter rent" means the total collections during an
agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing
rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat,
or other utilities furnished to the occupants.



   (c)   "Authority" means the Michigan State Housing Development
Authority.



   (d)   "Housing development" means a development which contains a
significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of
other housing, commercial recreational, industrial, communal, and educational
facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of the development
as it relates to housing for persons of low income.



   (e)   "Elderly persons" shall be those persons as defined in the Act.



   (f)   "Low income persons or families" shall have the same meaning
as found in Section 15(a)(7) of the Act.



   (g)   "Sponsor" means person(s) or entities which have applied to
the Authority for a loan from the Authority to finance a housing development.



   (h)   "Utilities" mean fuel, water, sanitary sewer and/or electrical
service which are paid by the housing development.



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.04  CLASS OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS.



   It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the
tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in
lieu of such taxes shall be multiple family rental projects for low income
persons or families, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It
is further determined that the Ionia Family Apartments is of this class. The
City shall determine by resolution whether a proposed housing project is
within the class of housing developments described in this chapter. Only
those proposed projects which are found to be within such class shall be
eligible to pay a service charge in lieu of tax.



(Ord. 2020-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.05  ESTABLISHMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.



   The housing developments and the property they shall be constructed on,
shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of
construction. The City, acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have
established the economic feasibility of the housing developments in reliance
upon the enactment and continuing effect of this chapter and the
qualification of the housing developments for exemption from all property
taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this chapter, agrees
to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of
all property taxes. Persons filing a certified affidavit with the City
Assessor notifying the City of its exemption as provided in Section 15(a)(1)
of the Act shall in the case of housing developments designated for exclusive
occupancy by elderly persons, pay a service charge equal to four percent of
annual shelter rents and in the case of all other housing developments, pay a
service charge equal to ten percent of annual shelter rents.



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.06  LIMITATION ON THE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE.



   Notwithstanding Section 890.05, the service charge to be paid each year
in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt
and which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be
equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of
the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt.



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.07  CONTRACTUAL EFFECT.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the
contrary, a contract between the City and the Sponsor with the Authority as
third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and
accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by
enactment of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.08  PAYMENT OF SERVICE CHARGE.



   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the chapter
shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to
the City except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before February
28 of each year.



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.09  DURATION.



   This chapter shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as
the Authority's loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the Authority has any
interest in the property, provided that construction of the housing
development commence within one year from the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-01. Passed 1-8-02.)



890.10  VALLEY VIEW PHASE I - PILOT.



   (a)   Project Description.  Valley View Phase I is an existing
project located on North State Street in the City and consists of six
one-bedroom and sixty-six two-bedroom apartments.  The owner proposes the
renovation of the project.  The purpose of the project is to provide housing
for low income persons and families.



   (b)   Determination.  The City hereby determines that Valley View
Phase I is a housing development as defined by this chapter and is entitled
to be exempt from taxation but subject to the provisions of a service charge
for payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT) as set forth in Act No. 346 of the
Public Acts of 1966, as amended.



   (c)   Annual Service Charge.  The amount of the annual service
charge for the units which are occupied by low income persons or families is
hereby established at 10% of the annual shelter rent.  The annual service
charge will be based on a constant 95% occupancy rate of the units which are
subject to the charge.  The annual service charge for the units not occupied
by low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the
property taxes which would be paid on that portion of the development if the
development were not tax exempt.



   (d)   Condition.  The granting of this PILOT is conditioned upon
the developer securing a mortgage from the Michigan State Housing Development
Authority (project sponsor) for renovating Valley View Phase I.



(Ord. 447.  Passed 4-10-07.)



CHAPTER 892
Property Tax



892.01   Property tax administration fee.



892.01  PROPERTY TAX ADMINISTRATION FEE.



   (a)   The City imposes for the years 1988 and thereafter a property
tax administration fee of one percent of the property tax.



   (b)   The City Clerk-Treasurer is hereby directed to collect the one
percent property tax administration fee hereby authorized.



(Res. Unno. Passed 6-7-88.)



Ionia, MI Code of Ordinances


PART TEN – STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE



TITLE TWO – Street and Sidewalk Areas



   Chap. 1020.  Streets Generally.



   Chap. 1022.  Sidewalks.



   Chap. 1024.  Street Trees.



Chapter 1020
Streets Generally



1020.01   Definitions.



1020.02   Excavations, damage and obstructions.



1020.03   Permits, insurance, deposits and bonds.



1020.04   Excavations; permit and security required.



1020.05   Emergency excavations.



1020.06   Backfilling.



1020.07   Utility poles.



1020.08   Maintenance of installations in streets.



1020.09   Curb cuts.



1020.10   Obstructions; permit and security required.



1020.11   Pedestrian passage.



1020.12   Barricades and warning lights.



1020.13   Shoring of excavations.



1020.14   Moving of buildings, etc.; permit and security required.



1020.15   Removal of encroachments and refilling of excavations by City.



1020.16   Temporary street closings.



1020.17   Parades and promotions; closure of streets.



1020.18   Street Administrator.



1020.19   Adoption of standards.



1020.99  Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Curbs and gutters - see M.C.L.A. §§ 91.1, 102.8



   Streets and alleys in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4d,
117.4e, 117.4h



   Excavations generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 554.251 et seq.



   Permit fees - see ADM. 214.05(a)



   Truck routes - see TRAF. 430.01



   Streets in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1230.01



1020.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, as used in this
chapter:



   (a)   "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City of
Ionia.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



   (b)   "Street" shall mean all of the land lying between property
lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the City, and
includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved for future
streets but not yet constructed.



1020.02  EXCAVATIONS, DAMAGE AND OBSTRUCTIONS.



   No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to, any
street in the City, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted
in this chapter.  No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in
any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this
chapter, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary
obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and
other things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of
vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.03  PERMITS, INSURANCE, DEPOSITS AND BONDS.



   Where permits are required in this chapter, they shall be obtained upon
application to the City Manager, upon such forms as he or she shall
prescribe.  There shall be a charge to be determined from time to time by
Council for each such permit, unless otherwise provided.  Such permit shall
be revocable by the City Manager for failure to comply with this chapter,
rules and regulations adopted by Council and the lawful orders of the City
Manager or his or her duly authorized representative.  Permits shall be
valid only for the period of time endorsed.  Application for a permit under
this chapter shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly
complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent regulations of the City,
repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or
within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the City
from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on
account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under
the permit.  Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in
making application for a permit, they shall be in not less than the following
amounts, except as otherwise specified in this chapter:



   (a)   On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one
accident   $1,000,000



   (b)   On account of any one accident resulting in injury to, or
death of, more than one person   $1,000,000



   (c)   On account of damage to property in any one
accident   $1,000,000



   A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such
insurance policy shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit,
such deposit shall be in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) and/or,
in the discretion of the City Manager, a performance bond may be required
depending on the size of the project, except as otherwise specified in this
chapter.  Such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the City
arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit. 
Three months after completion of the work done under the permit, any balance
of such cash deposit shall be refunded.  In any case where the deposit does
not cover all costs and expenses of the City, the deficit shall be paid by
the applicant.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.04  EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT AND SECURITY REQUIRED.



   No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street
without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the Department of
Public Works.  No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a
cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by Section
1020.03, nor shall a permit be issued until the contractor's name, address
and State license number is furnished on the permit.  All licenses shall be
checked by the Community Development Director against State records.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.05  EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS.



   The City Manager may, if the public safety requires immediate action,
grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided
that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the
provisions of this chapter shall be complied with.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.06  BACKFILLING.



   All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by
special permission, shall be backfilled with sand or other material as
indicated in the City's Performance Standards Manual.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.07  UTILITY POLES.



   Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the City Manager shall
prescribe and shall be located in accordance with the directions of the City
Manager.  Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the City Manager shall
from time to time direct.  In the case of City request for relocation, such
relocation shall be done at no expense to the City.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.08  MAINTENANCE OF INSTALLATIONS IN STREETS.



   Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate maintaining
a sidewalk vault, coal hold, manhole, or any other excavation, or any post,
pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or
upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his or her estate, shall
do so only on condition that such item shall be maintained.  It shall be
understood that the estate or agent shall hold the City harmless in any claim
that may arise from such installation and it shall be the duty of the estate
and/or agent to hold harmless the City in any claim arising from such item.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.09  CURB CUTS.



   No opening in or through any curb of any street shall be made without
first obtaining a written permit from the City Manager.  The City Manager
shall have the authority, at his or her discretion, to have the cuts made by
City Personnel, with the applicant charged at current rates, or to allow the
applicant to make the cuts.  Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to
provide access to private property shall comply with the following:



   (a)   No single curb cut shall exceed twenty-five feet, nor be less
than ten feet.



   (b)   The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public
crosswalk shall be fifteen feet.



   (c)   The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving
residential property, shall be twenty-five feet.



   (d)   The maximum number of linear feet of sidewalk driveway
crossings permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise,
shall be forty-five percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and
including 200 linear feet of street frontage, plus twenty percent of the
linear feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet.



   (e)   The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards,
fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, or other
public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to
the City.



   (f)   All construction shall be in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the City Manager.



   (g)   In the case of commercial curb cuts, it shall be the intent of
the City to provide as few cuts as possible to a parcel or development. 
Instead, every effort shall be made to utilize access roads and drives to
achieve the same traffic flows.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.10  OBSTRUCTIONS; PERMIT AND SECURITY REQUIRED.



   No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery
incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent
to said street or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit
from the City Manager.  No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall
post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by
Section 1020.03.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.11  PEDESTRIAN PASSAGE.



   At least six feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for
the free passage of pedestrians, and if the building operations are such that
such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with
substantial railings or sidewalk shelter shall be provided around such
obstruction.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.12  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



   All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and
substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with
approved warning lights.  Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of
traffic shall be in accordance with industry safety standards. 



(Ord 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.13  SHORING OF EXCAVATIONS.



   All openings and excavations shall be properly and substantially
sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins or
washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or sub-surface structure
of the street. 



(Ord 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.14  MOVING OF BUILDINGS, ETC.; PERMIT AND SECURITY REQUIRED.



   No person shall move, transport, or convey any building or other
similar bulky or heavy object, including machinery, trucks and trailers,
larger in width than eight feet eight inches or higher than thirteen feet six
inches above the surface of the roadway, or into, across or along any street,
alley or other public place in the City, without first obtaining a building
permit from the City Manager.  Such permit shall specify the route to be
used in such movement, and no person shall engage in such movement along a
route other than that specified in the permit.  No housemoving permit shall
be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit in the amount of one
thousand dollars ($1,000) and file a liability insurance policy as required
by Section 1020.03.  The deposit shall be used to pay for any damage to
public or private property up to the amount thereof.  Any balance shall be
returned to the applicant on completion of the move. Any deficit shall be
paid by the mover. The cost of trimming any trees or other work performed by
the City shall be paid prior to the movement of the house.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.15  REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS AND REFILLING OF EXCAVATIONS BY CITY.



   Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and
excavations refilled by the City after proper notice to the abutting land
owner.  The expense of such removal or refilling will be charged to the
abutting land owner.  The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be
as prescribed in Chapter 210 of these Codified Ordinances.  The City Council
may by resolution permit the continuance of an existing encroachment.  No
such resolution shall vest any permanent rights in the person owning or
occupying the structure which encroaches upon the street.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.16  TEMPORARY STREET CLOSINGS.



   The City Manager shall have authority to temporarily close any street,
or portion thereof, when he or she shall deem such street to be unsafe or
temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason.  He or she shall cause
suitable barriers and signs to be erected on said street, indicating that the
same is closed to public travel.  When any street or portion thereof shall
have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or
over said street except as the same may be necessary.  No person shall move
or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section
without authority from the City Manager.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.17  PARADES AND PROMOTIONS; CLOSURE OF STREETS.



   Persons seeking to hold parades or other promotional events shall
notify the City and receive a permit for such event.  The person or party
sponsoring the event shall provide the necessary information for justifying
closure of a street or streets with the final action subject to approval by
the City Manager.  In the case of major streets, closure shall be limited
and emergency access provided to abutting properties at all times.  If a
permit to hold such an event is denied by the City Manager, the applicant may
appeal to the City Council which shall have ultimate authority for issuance.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.18  STREET ADMINISTRATOR.



   The City Manager shall be designated to act as City Street
Administrator for the City in all matters with the State of Michigan and
other applicable agencies.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.19  ADOPTION OF STANDARDS.



   The City shall adopt applicable standards for utilities, as well as
construction standards, which standards shall be adhered to in all cases of
construction, repair or reconstruction by contractors.  The standards may be
changed from time to time by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1020.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
the general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 1022
Sidewalks



1022.01   Definitions.



1022.02   Construction and repair; compliance with specifications.



1022.03   Construction permit.



1022.04   Sidewalk construction, repair and maintenance.



1022.05   Hazardous condition.



1022.06   Handicap accessibility.



1022.07   Liability insurance, subrogation, indemnification.



1022.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Failure of property owner to keep sidewalks free of obstructions - see
M.C.L.A. § 103.4



   Sidewalks generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 691.141 et seq.



   Permit fees - see ADM. 214.05(b)



   Duty to keep sidewalks clean - see GEN. OFF. 676.01(d)



   Trees and sidewalks - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.08



   Sidewalks in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1232.05



1022.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Abutting" or "adjacent real property" shall mean land
contiguous to a sidewalk or other public pedestrian way.



   (b)   "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager, or his or her
designee, of the City of Ionia.



   (c)   "Disrepair of a sidewalk" shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following conditions:



      (1)   Holes and cracked, loosened, crumbling or breaking
surfaces.



      (2)   Difference in heights of adjoining sections of sidewalk
deemed hazardous by the City.



      (3)   Insufficient slope to adequately drain water.



      (4)   Any other condition that the City reasonably believes
may constitute a liability risk or safety hazard.



   (d)   "Property owner" shall mean any person having legal or
equitable title to real property.



   (e)   "Sidewalk" shall mean the portion of the street right-of-way
designed for pedestrian travel.



(Ord. 362. Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 456. Passed 2-5-08.)



1022.02  CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.



   No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk except in
accordance with the City's duly adopted municipal standards.



(Ord. 362. Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 456. Passed 2-5-08.)



1022.03  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.



   (a)   Permit Required.  No sidewalk shall be constructed or
repaired unless a construction permit is first applied for and obtained from
the City Manager.  The permit shall be on a form prepared by the City.  The
City Council may by resolution establish fees for the permit.



   (b)   Revocation.  The City Manager may revoke any permit issued
pursuant to this section for violation of this chapter, which shall include
failure to perform the work described in the permit in the manner and within
the time required by the City.  Once a permit is revoked by oral or written
notice to the permit holder, all construction or repair shall cease
immediately.  The applicant may appeal any such order to the City Council,
which order, if affirmed by Council, will act as a revocation of the permit.



   (c)   Inspection.  The City Manager shall have the right to inspect
all work done under any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and to require correction of all work not done according to the
specifications of this chapter.



   (d)   Restoration.  All adjacent or abutting areas disturbed by the
construction or repair shall be restored to the approximate condition which
existed before construction or repair.  Restoration shall include
replacement of sod, replanting of grass and repair or replacement of any
surface or improvement damaged in the course of construction or repair.



   (e)   Fences, Barricades.  Any person making or causing to be made
any excavation or opening in any sidewalk, or excavation in close proximity
to any sidewalk shall, when excavation is not occurring and is unattended,
keep such excavation or opening fenced or barricaded so as to warn all
persons of such excavation or opening and all obstructions.  No unauthorized
person shall remove or interfere in any way with any lighting device, fence
or barrier.



   (f)   Temporary Resurfacing.  All openings and excavations shall be
refilled and temporarily resurfaced as soon as possible.  Such temporary
resurfacing shall be maintained by the person to whom the permit is issued
until the City or person designated by the City shall permanently resurface
such opening.  All refilling shall be done according to the specifications
set forth by the City in each particular case.



(Ord. 362. Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 456. Passed 2-5-08.)



1022.04  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE.



   (a)   Construction; Duty of Owner.  It shall be the duty of the
owner of any real property within the City to construct a sidewalk abutting
or adjacent to such property whenever the City Council, by resolution, shall
determine that the construction of such sidewalk is necessary for the public
health, safety or welfare.



   (b)   Maintenance and Repair; Duty of Owner.  It shall be the duty
of the owner of any real property within the City to maintain and keep in
good repair any sidewalk abutting or adjacent to such property.



   (c)   Resolution to Construct or Repair.  Whenever the City Council
shall determine that it is necessary for the public health, safety or welfare
that a sidewalk be constructed or repaired, it shall adopt a resolution
requiring the construction or repair thereof and shall, in such resolution,
direct the owner of the real property abutting or adjacent to the proposed
location of the sidewalk to be constructed, or the existing sidewalk to be
repaired to complete said work within thirty days from the date of such
resolution.  A copy of such resolution shall be served upon the owner either
personally or by first class mail, addressed to such owner under the name and
at the address as shown upon the City's latest assessment roll.  The
resolution shall provide that the City shall perform the work if the property
owner does not, and that the cost shall be assessed against the property.



   (d)   Failure or Refusal to Construct or Repair.  If the owner of
the property shall fail or refuse to construct or repair a sidewalk abutting
or adjacent to the property within the period of time specified in the
resolution referred to in subsection (c) hereof, the City shall proceed to
have the sidewalk constructed or repaired.  The cost of such construction or
repair shall be charged against and shall be a lien upon the property which
the sidewalk abuts or adjoins.  The lien shall be the type applicable to
special assessments.



   (e)   Participation of City in Cost.  The City may participate in
the cost of construction or repair of any sidewalk under the provisions of
this chapter.  If the City determines to participate in the cost, it shall
so provide in the resolution of the City Council described in subsection (c)
hereof, which shall state the share that the City will pay for the
construction or repair of the sidewalk.



(Ord. 362. Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 456. Passed 2-5-08.)



1022.05  HAZARDOUS CONDITION.



   (a)   Obstructions.  No person shall place or cause to be placed
any object or substance upon a sidewalk that would obstruct it or otherwise
make it hazardous.



   (b)   Snow and Ice.  No person shall permit any snow or ice to
remain on any sidewalk abutting or adjacent to any property owned or occupied
by that person for more than twenty-four hours after the snow or ice has
fallen or formed.  The City reserves the right to remove snow and ice from a
sidewalk if the property owner fails to do so, and to assess the cost against
the property pursuant to Chapter 210 of these Codified Ordinances.  The City
Council may, by resolution, determine that snow and ice shall be removed from
certain sidewalks at the expense of the City.



   Exception:  If the property owner is handicapped or otherwise disabled
and has notified the City of such disability, along with a doctor's statement
of such proof, the City shall provide inmate labor to clear such walks as
available.



   (c)   Water.  No person shall cause or allow water to flow onto a
sidewalk from other property, by any means whatsoever, so as to cause the
surface to be a hazard to users.



   (d)   Trees and Shrubs.  No person shall permit any tree or shrub
to overhang or encroach upon a public sidewalk.  No tree shall be permitted
to overhang a sidewalk so that it is hanging lower than seven feet above the
surface of the sidewalk.



   (e)   Removal.  No person shall remove a sidewalk without providing
for replacement within twenty days.



(Ord. 362. Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 456. Passed 2-5-08.)



1022.06  HANDICAP ACCESSIBILITY.



   All corner lots shall be developed and graded so as to permit handicap
accessibility, and all efforts shall be made by property owners to provide
such access on their public sidewalk.  It shall be acknowledged due to
topographical changes some areas of the City will not permit such
construction, but exceptions shall be documented.



(Ord. 362. Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 456. Passed 2-5-08.)



1022.07  LIABILITY INSURANCE, SUBROGATION, INDEMNIFICATION.



   (a)   Subrogation.  The City shall be subrogated to the adjacent or
abutting property owner's rights of recovery from liability insurance or
other source, for any damages to the City's property and related costs
incurred.



   (b)   Indemnification.  The City shall be indemnified by the owner
of the property adjacent to or abutting the sidewalk for damages incurred by
the City arising out of injury to persons and damage to property of others,
for which the City is liable to pay, on account of any act or neglect of the
property owner.



(Ord. 456. Passed 2-5-08.)



1022.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 1024
Street Trees



1024.01   Definitions.



1024.02   Enforcement of chapter.



1024.03   Permits for tree planting, care and removal.



1024.04   Removal and replacement by City Manager.



1024.05   Spacing of shade trees.



1024.06   Protection of trees from damage.



1024.07   Excavations and driveways near trees.



1024.08   Covering surface near trees; sidewalks.



1024.09   Gas main leakage.



1024.10   Maintenance of private trees.



1024.11   Corner clearance.



1024.12   Pruning.



1024.13   Tree removal for utility line clearance.



1024.14   Companies engaged in trimming and pruning.



1024.15   Registration of all trees.



1024.16   Allocation of species.



1024.17   Tree protection during development.



1024.18   Dutch elm disease.



1024.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Box elder trees, female, as nuisance - see M.C.L.A. § 124.151



   Cutting or destroying trees - see M.C.L.A. §§ 247.235, 247.241,
752.701 et seq.



   Malicious destruction of trees - see M.C.L.A. § 750.382



   Street trees - see P. & Z. 1232.04



   Prohibited trees - see P. & Z. 1286.03(h)



1024.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "Caliper; Single Stem" means the thickness of trees measured
in inches.  A caliper measurement for trees shall be measured twelve inches
above the soil line, or across the stump if the tree has been severed at less
than twelve inches above the soil line.



   (b)   "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager or his or her
authorized representative.



   (c)   "Department" shall mean the Department of Public Works of the
City. 



   (d)   "Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH)" means the tree trunk
diameter measured in inches at a height 4.5 feet above the ground.  If a
tree forks into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its
most narrow point beneath the forks. Measurements shall be made by use of a
circumference to diameter conversion tape.



   (e)   "Dripline" means the vertical line extending from the
outermost edge of the tree canopy to the ground.



   (f)   "Hazardous tree" means a tree that is unsafe due to a
structural defect and constitutes a threat of injury to persons or damage to
property.



   (g)   "Park" shall include all public parks having individual names,
and all areas whether or not owned by the City, or to which the public has
access as a park.



   (h)   "Prohibited species" shall mean any tree of poplar (Populus
Sp.), willow (Salix Sp.), box elder (Acer Negundo), silver maple (Acer
Sacchrium), locust (Robina Sp.), tree of heaven (Ailanthus Altissima),
catalpa (Catalpa Sp.), mulberry (Morus Sp.), American elm (Ulmus Americana)
and Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila).



   (i)   "Pruning" means the cutting or removing any part of the
branching structure of a tree in either the crown, trunk or root areas.



   (j)   "Public utility" shall mean any person owning or operating any
pole, line, pipe or conduit located in any public street or over or along any
public easement or right of way for the transmission of electricity, gas,
telephone service or telegraph service.



   (k)   "Street" shall mean all the land lying between property lines
on either side of all streets, highways and boulevards in the City.



   (l)   "Topping", also known as stubbing, dehorning or lopping,
refers to cutting back of the leader stem or limbs into stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree.



   (m)   "Tree", unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, means
trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation.



   (n)   "1995 ANSI A300" means pruning standards set forth in the
Standard Practices for Trees, Shrubs, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.02  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   The City Manager shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.03  PERMITS FOR TREE PLANTING, CARE AND REMOVAL.



   The City Manager shall have control over all trees located within the
street rights of way and parks in the City, and the planting, care and
removal thereof, subject to the regulations contained in this chapter.  The
owner of land abutting on any street may, upon obtaining prior written
permission of the City Manager, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that
part of the street abutting such owner's land not used for public travel, but
no person shall otherwise prune, spray, plant or remove any tree in any
street or park. Every such permit shall specify the extent of the
authorization and the conditions covered.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.04  REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT BY CITY MANAGER.



   If, in the opinion of the City Manager, it is determined that any
existing tree located on City property or in any street between the curb and
sidewalk needs to be replaced by reason of death, disease, disfigurement or
partial destruction, the City Manager shall remove such tree and replace it
with a new tree.  It is the intent of this chapter to have replaced every
tree removed with a new tree of acceptable species.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.05  SPACING OF SHADE TREES.



   Future plantings of shade and ornamental trees in the streets and parks
of the City will be done by the Department of Public Works in accordance with
prescribed tree planting practices.  No tree shall be planted nearer to the
intersection of any streets than twenty-five feet from the corner of such
intersection.  No tree shall be planted on private property less than nine
feet from the nearest outer line of the street nor less than four feet from
the nearest edge of the sidewalk.  City Council may, upon application of an
adjoining property owner, grant permission to vary from the restrictions
imposed by this section.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.06  PROTECTION OF TREES FROM DAMAGE.



   No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or
shrub, or set any fire within twenty-five feet of any tree, or permit any
fire, or the heat thereof, to injure any portion of any tree.  No toxic
chemicals or other injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be
emptied on, near or about any tree.  No electric wires or any other lines or
wires shall be permitted to come in contact with any tree or shrub in any
manner that shall cause damage, and no person shall attach any electric
insulation to any tree.  No person shall use any tree as an anchor except by
special written permit from the City Manager, and no material shall be
fastened to or hung on any tree.  All persons having under their care,
custody or control, facilities which may interfere with the trimming or
removal of any tree, shall, after notice by the Department of Public Works,
promptly abate such interference in such manner as shall permit the trimming
or removal of such tree by the Department.  The City Manager shall certify
all City permits for construction, installation, altering, moving or razing
of all buildings, utilities, sidewalks, sewers or other operations where
trees or shrubs, or parts thereof, are involved.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.07  EXCAVATIONS AND DRIVEWAYS NEAR TREES.



   Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within five feet of any
tree without written permit from the City Manager.  Any person making such
excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six feet with a good
substantial frame box to be approved by the Department, and all building
material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.08  COVERING SURFACE NEAR TREES; SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall place within the street right-of-way, any stone, brick,
sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and
free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a
sidewalk of authorized width and location.  In the case of sidewalks, every
effort shall be made to place materials to inhibit the growth of root
structures under the sidewalk area.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.09  GAS MAIN LEAKAGE.



   Gas pipes or mains within any public rights of way or on any public
property shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage.  In the event a
leak exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of such pipe and
main, and the leak shall be repaired within twenty-four hours.  Any damage
to shrubbery, trees or grass resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or
main shall be repaired, and the cost of the work, including the cost of
removal and the replacement of any trees, shall be levied against the owner
of the pipe or main causing the damage.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.10  MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE TREES.



   Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street or
right-of-way within the City shall trim the branches so that such branches
shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any
street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of thirteen feet
above the surface of the street or right of way.  Owners shall remove all
dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a menace to the safety of the public.  The City shall have the
right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with
the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or
interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, such
trimming to be confined to the area immediately above the right of way.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.11  CORNER CLEARANCE.



   No person shall place, erect, plant or maintain any sign, fence, wall,
hedge, shrub, tree or other thing between the minimum building set-back line
and the edge of the right of way of any highway, street or public way on a
corner lot in such a location as will obscure the view of on-corning
cross-traffic to the driver of any vehicle crossing or entering the highway,
street or public way from any highway, street or public way or from any
semi-public or commercial driveway which shall be deemed to create a corner
lot for the purposes of this chapter.  For the purposes of this section, any
sign, fence, wall, hedge, shrub, tree or other thing which prevents a clear
view of on-coming cross traffic 500 feet in either direction to the driver of
an automobile vehicle legally stopped with its front bumper even with the
edge of the right of way of the highway, street or public way shall be deemed
to "obscure the view".  However, nothing in this section shall be construed
to require the alteration of the natural grade of the land without due
process of law even though such natural grade may result in an obscured view
across a corner lot as defined herein.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.12  PRUNING.



   All City trees marked by the City with numeric tags shall be trimmed
and pruned in accordance with the 1995 ANSI A300 Standard.  Such standard
shall become a policy of the City and kept with the City Clerk at City Hall
for public compliance.  In no case shall trees be topped or otherwise
improperly pruned by either the City or utility companies.  Should such
action occur, the person or company responsible shall replace the tree with
two trees of a caliper no less than two inches.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.13  TREE REMOVAL FOR UTILITY LINE CLEARANCE.



   If a tree has become such a problem that it cannot be properly trimmed
so as to provide clearance with utility lines, it may be removed, provided at
least two trees are replanted with a caliper of at least two inches.  All
caliper measurements shall be taken in accordance with Section 1024.01.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.14  COMPANIES ENGAGED IN TRIMMING AND PRUNING.



   All companies engaged in trimming or pruning of trees within the City
right of way or on City property shall be licensed and insured.  Prior to
engaging in any activity, proof of insurance and indemnification against the
City for claims shall be provided to the City Clerk.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.15  REGISTRATION OF ALL TREES.



   The City shall register all trees planted in the right of way or on
City property.  Such trees, when of sufficient size, shall be marked with a
numeric tag identifying the tree, species and location.  No tag shall be
removed without the permission of the City.  All records shall be kept with
the Department of Public Works for logging of all maintenance and work
performed on the tree.  If a tree must be removed, the tag number may be
reassigned after notation in the master tree log of the City.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.16  ALLOCATION OF SPECIES.



   It shall be the policy of the City to not plant more than fifty percent
of any specie of tree in any area of the City.  In all cases the species
shall be staggered to prevent loss of tree if infestation or other disease
breaks out.  A list of acceptable planting trees shall be kept at City Hall
by the City Manager for planting in the rights of way.  Non-acceptable trees
shall not be planted in the right of way or on City property.  If such trees
are planted, the City shall remove such trees.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.17  TREE PROTECTION DURING DEVELOPMENT.



   During any type of development the following measures shall be utilized
to protect any tree on site that is not designated for removal.



   (a)   Protective barriers, such as silt fences, bollards, roping or
other such devices as approved by the Department of Public Works, will be
placed around each tree at the drip line of the canopy of each tree to
prevent any type of encroachment under the drip line, or six times the
diameter at breast height (DBH), whichever is greater.



   (b)   Soil disturbance under the canopy of each tree will be limited
to six inches removed or six inches added.  Any soil added under the canopy
of the tree must be a loamy soil mix to ensure that compaction is minimized.



   (c)   Trenching shall be no closer than six times the diameter at
breast height (DBH) to the affected tree nor shall it disrupt more than
thirty percent of the dripline root area.



   (d)   No other types of disturbance or construction shall be allowed
under the dripline of any tree without prior approval by the Department.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.18  DUTCH ELM DISEASE.



   (a)   Definition; Declaration of Nuisance.  All species and
varieties of elm trees (trees of genus elmus) infected with the fungus known
as Dutch elm disease (certostomella Ulmi), as determined by laboratory
analysis by the Michigan Department of Agriculture, are hereby declared to be
a public nuisance.  All species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or
substantially dead and all dead elm wood to which the bark is still attached,
which, because of their condition, may serve as a breeding place for the
European elm bark beetle (Scolytusmultistriatusw), and the native elm bark
beetle (Hylurgopinusrufites), or any other carrier of said disease, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances.



   (b)   Abatement of Nuisance by Owner.  No owner of any lot or
parcel of land in the City shall permit or maintain on any such lot or parcel
of land any dead elm wood or elm tree which is a public nuisance, and it
shall be the duty of the owner of such lot or parcel to promptly remove and
burn any such elm tree or dead elm wood under the supervision and direction
of the City Manager.



   (c)   Inspections.  The City Manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to enter upon any lot or parcel of land in the City at any
reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting any elm trees or dead elm wood
situated thereon.  The City Manager may remove such specimens from any such
trees as are required for the purposes of laboratory analysis, or to
determine whether such tree, because it is dead or substantially dead, may
serve as a breeding place for any carrier of Dutch elm disease.  No person
shall take any action to prevent the City Manager from entering on any lot or
parcel of land in the City for the purpose of such inspection or to interfere
with the City Manager in the performance of any of his or her duties under
this chapter.



   (d)   Notice to Abate; Failure to Comply.  If, as a result of a
laboratory analysis of specimens removed from any elm tree by the City
Manager, it is determined that such tree is a public nuisance as provided
herein, or if the City Manager determines that any dead or substantially dead
elm trees or dead elm wood is a public nuisance as provided herein, the City
Manager shall serve or cause to be served upon the owner of record of the
parcel of land on which said tree or dead elm wood is located, a written
notice requiring such owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
If any person upon whom such notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to
remove and destroy by burning such elm tree or dead elm wood within ten days
after service of such notice, the City Manager may proceed to remove and burn
such tree or dead elm wood and assess the cost thereof against the owner of
such lot or parcel of land, and the amount of such cost shall be paid by the
owner to the City.  Such notice shall be served in the manner prescribed in
Chapter 210 of these Codified Ordinances.



   (e)   Assessment of Cost.  If the City removes from any lot or
parcel of land in the City any infected, dead or substantially dead elm tree
or dead elm wood, which is a public nuisance as provided by this chapter, the
assessment of the cost of the work done by the City against the owner of the
lot or parcel of land involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed
herein for any violation or non-compliance with any provision of this
chapter.  The cost shall be assessed in the manner prescribed in Chapter 210
of these Codified Ordinances.



   (f)   Abatement of Nuisance by City.  Any elm tree or dead elm wood
on property owned by the City which is a public nuisance as defined in this
chapter shall be properly removed and burned under the supervision of the
City Manager at the expense of the City.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1024.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



TITLE FOUR - Utilities



   Chap. 1040.  Water Generally.



   Chap. 1042.  Sewer Use and Industrial Pretreatment.



   Chap. 1043.  Storm Water Management.



   Chap. 1044.  Water and Sewer Rates. (Repealed)



   Chap. 1046.  Gas.



   Chap. 1048.  Electricity.



CHAPTER 1040
Water Generally



1040.01   Purposes.



1040.02   Authority.



1040.03   Definitions.



1040.04   Findings.



1040.05   Establishment of Municipal Water Supply System.



1040.06   Water connections.



1040.07   Water mains and service lines.



1040.08   Turning water service on or off.



1040.09   Water meters.



1040.10   Rates and charges.



1040.11   Water emergency.



1040.12   Additional regulations.



1040.13   Hydrant use.



1040.14   Funding of water supply-system improvements.



1040.15   Injury to facilities.



1040.16   MISS DIG system.



1040.17   Cross-connection prevention.



1040.18   Mandatory connection, exception; new private wells, prohibition,
continuation, abandonment.



1040.19   Geothermal heat systems.



1040.20   Repealer; continuation of prior bond authorizing ordinances.



1040.21   Water well restrictions



 



1040.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Water quality - see Mich. Const. Art. 4, §§ 22.52; M.C.L.A. §§
67.38, 323.1 et seq.



   Water supply generally - see Mich. Const. Art 7. § 24; M.C.L.A. §§
46.171 et seq., 123.11 et seq., 325.201 et seq., 486.51 et seq., 486.101 et
seq.



   Water supply in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4b, 117.4e,
117.4f, 117.35, 123.115



1040.01  PURPOSES.



   (a)   This chapter sets forth the uniform requirements for users of
the Municipal Water Supply System for the City of Ionia and enables the City
of Ionia to comply with applicable State and Federal laws regulating
provision of a potable water supply system.



   (b)   The purpose of this chapter is to consolidate, restate, and
amend all prior ordinances adopted by the City of Ionia for the purpose of
establishing a water supply system in the City, regulating the use of the
water supply system, financing the costs of improvements, enlargements,
extensions, and replacements of the water supply system, and setting the
standards and rules relating to rates and charges to users of the water
supply system.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99.)



1040.02  AUTHORITY.



   By establishing and regulating the water supply system, the City is
exercising the authority granted to the City by Act 94 of the Public Acts of
1933, as amended; Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended; and Article
7, § 21 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963. 



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.03  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   (a)   "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager for the City of
Ionia, or his or her designee.



   (b)   “Commodity Charge” is the cost associated with providing
water to the users.  The Commodity Charge is the actual budget cost of the
operation, maintenance and repair divided by the estimated number of gallons
to be produced for delivery to the users. The Commodity Charge may also
include all or a portion of the annual debt service expense incurred by the
Water Supply System.



   (c)   "Department" shall mean the Public Utilities Department for
the City.



   (d)   "Director" shall refer to the Director of Public Utilities for
the City of Ionia, or his or her designee.



   (e)   “Facilities Maintenance Charge” is the name given to the
costs associated with retiring all or a portion of the debt of the water
supply system.



   (f)   “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, association,
public or private corporation  or public agency or instrumentality.



   (g)   “Premises” shall mean each lot or parcel of land, building
or unit connected to the Water Supply System of the City.



   (h)   “REU” means Residential Equivalent Unit and is equal to
22,000 gallons of metered water usage per quarter.  An REU is the average
use of a residence as established by recognized State and Federal standards.



   (i)   “Treasurer” shall mean the Treasurer for the City of Ionia
or his or her designee.



   (j)   “User” shall mean any person who receives water from or
benefits from the Water Supply System.



   (k)   “Water service lines” shall mean that part of the water
distribution system connecting the water main with the premises served.



   (l)   "Water main" shall mean that part of the water distribution
system located within easement lines or streets designed to supply more than
one water service line.



   (m)   “Water Supply System” shall mean the complete Water Supply
System of the City, including all water mains, connections, pipes, meters,
hydrants, wells, well houses, pumps, water storage facilities, transmission
lines, water service lines and all water treatment facilities, plants, works,
instrumentalities and properties used or useful in obtaining a water supply,
treating and distributing the same for domestic, commercial, industrial,
institutional and/or fire protection purposes, and all other appurtenances
thereto, including all easements, rights and land for such easements, and
including all extensions and improvements thereto which may be acquired or
constructed on behalf of current and future users of the Water Supply System.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.04  FINDINGS.



   (a)   History.  Prior to 1956, the City established a water supply
system by resolution, and thereafter adopted Ordinance Numbers 148, 153, 270,
271, 280, 331 and 378 for the purpose of regulating the water supply system,
establishing rates and charges for use of the water supply system, and
enabling the acquisition, construction, and installation of enhancements, and
improvements to the water supply system.



   (b)   Necessity.  The City has previously found, and currently
reaffirms, that the businesses, industries, governmental and charitable
agencies and residents located in the City need to have potable and otherwise
usable water.



   (c)   Availability of Potable Water.  The City further has
previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the supply of potable water
available from private wells within the City is insufficient to assure that
all businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies, and
residents will have sufficient potable water available for their use and
other water necessary for industrial and fire prevention and control unless
the City offers water to all properties located within the City.



   (d)   Method of Measuring Use of the Water Supply System.  Based on
the advice of its engineers, the City has previously found, and currently
reaffirms, that the most precise method of measuring for use of the water
supply system by any user is by a meter or meters installed and controlled by
the City.



   (e)   Continuation of Service.  The City has previously found and
further reaffirms that in order to provide and continue to provide clean
potable and other usable water to all users of the water supply system, in
quantities necessary for all varieties of use, it is necessary from time to
time to install improvements, enlargements, and extensions and repairs to the
system.



   (f)   Purpose of Rates and Charges.  The City has previously found
and further currently reaffirms that the fairest and most reasonable method
of providing for the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and
improvement of the water supply system, is to charge each user, based in all
cases on amount of use, for (1) the cost of retiring debt secured by the net
revenues of the system issued to pay for improvements and replacements to the
Water System Production Plant; (2) the costs of ongoing repair, replacement
and improvement paid for from the Replacement Fund and Improvement Fund and
budgeted as part of the annual costs of the Water System Production Plant;
and (3) operation, administration and maintenance costs paid for from the
Operating Fund.



   (g)   Proportionality of Classifications of Users According to
Residential Equivalent Units Based on Historic Consumption.  The City has
previously found and further currently reaffirms that, based on the advice of
its engineers, the fairest method of charging its users proportionately for
payment of the costs of improvements to and replacements of the Water System
Production Plant is to impose a flat charge, based on Residential Equivalent
Units (22,000 gallons of metered water per quarter), calculated annually on
the basis of amount of use in the previous year, to classes of users divided
according to annual quantity of use.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99.)



1040.05  ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.



   Based on the above findings and for the purposes set forth above, the
City has previously established and hereby re-establishes the Municipal Water
Supply System, hereinafter referred to as the Water Supply System or the
System, consisting of all of the water mains, pumping and storage facilities,
pressure systems, wells, and all other appurtenances to the water treatment
and distribution system.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99.)



1040.06  WATER CONNECTIONS.



   Applications for water connections shall be made to the City on forms
prescribed and furnished by the City.  Water connections and water meters
shall be installed in accordance with rules and regulations of the City and
upon payment of the required connection fee and meter installation fee.  All
meters shall be installed by and be the property of the City.  Connection
fees shall not be less than the cost of materials, installation and overhead
attributable to such installations.  Every user connected to the City’s
Water Supply System, whether such user is located inside or outside of the
City, shall be subject to the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City
which shall be available for inspection at the City Clerk’s office.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.07  WATER MAINS AND SERVICE LINES.



   The City is responsible for all water mains and water service lines up
to the water shut-off box.  The user is responsible for maintenance of the
water service line from the shut-off box to the building as well as all
inside plumbing.  The City shall furnish the meter and yoke, billing the
same to the property owner on initial installation and then maintaining the
same at the City’s expense.  In no case shall water service lines be
allowed to leak more than twenty-four hours without repair.  In the case of
a line leaking after twenty-four (24) hours and the property owner being
notified, the City shall terminate the water supply by shutting the same off
at the water shut-off box.  Property owners or agents shall be liable for
penalties as contained in Section 1040.99. 



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.08  TURNING WATER SERVICE ON OR OFF.



   No person, other than an authorized employee of the City, shall turn on
or off any water service, unless written authorization is provided by the
City.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.09  WATER METERS.



   (a)   Requirement for Installation.  All premises using water shall
be metered, except as otherwise provided by Code. No person, except a City
employee, shall break or injure the seal of, or change the location of, alter
or interfere in any way with, any water meter. On all new installations there
shall be a shut-off on each side of the meter for the purpose of testing,
inspecting and replacement of the water meter.



   (b)   Access to Meters.  The Department shall have the right to
shut off the supply of water to any premises where the Department is not able
to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the Department shall
at all reasonable hours have the right to enter the premises where such
meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing, or
inspecting the same and no person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with
such employee in the lawful discharge of his or her duties in relation to the
care and maintenance of such water meter.



   (c)   Shut-offs Required for Each Unit.  In the case of
multiple-family living houses, each unit shall be equipped with a shut-off
valve for the purpose of discontinuing water/sewer service if the bill to the
City is not paid. If no such arrangement is provided, then the property owner
is responsible for all delinquent bills regardless of contracts with the
tenant. The City is responsible for providing service and has the right to
discontinue such service. If no such provision is provided by the owner of
the property, then he or she becomes the responsible party.



   (d)   Reimbursement for Damage.  Any damage which a meter may
sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent, or tenant or from
neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well
as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water, or steam from a
boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the City on
presentation of a bill therefore, and in cases where the bill is not paid,
the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on until all charges have
been paid to the City.



   (e)   Meter Failure.  If any meter shall fail to register properly,
the City shall estimate the consumption and bill accordingly.



   (f)   Inaccurate Meters.  A user may require that the meter be
tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge equal to the amount of staff
time (pay plus benefit cost), plus equipment rental, shall be billed for the
testing process. If the meter is found defective, it shall be repaired or an
accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made.



   (g)   Accuracy Required.  A meter shall be considered accurate if,
when tested, it registers not to exceed two (2) percent more to two (2) 
percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter
registers in excess of two (2) percent more than the actual quantity of water
passing through it, it shall be considered "fast" to that extent. If a meter
registers in excess of two (2) percent less than the actual quantity of water
passing through it, it shall be considered "slow" to that extent.



   (h)   Bill Adjustment.  If a meter has been tested at the request
of a user and shall have been determined to register "fast", the City shall
credit the user with a sum equal to the percent "fast" multiplied by the
amount of all bills incurred by said user within the three months prior to
the test. If a meter so tested is determined to be "slow", the City may
collect from the user a sum equal to the percent "slow" multiplied by the
amount of all bills incurred by the user for the prior three (3) months. When
the Department on its own initiative makes a test of a water meter, it shall
be done without cost to the user, other than his or her paying the amount due
the City for water used by him or her as above provided, if the meter is
found to be "slow".



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.10  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (a)   In General. The City Council shall establish rates and charges
for services of the Water Supply System.  The rates and charges set by the
City Council shall take into consideration all aspects of the operation of
the system including administration, operation, maintenance, debt service,
replacement and depreciation. 



   (b)   No Free Service.  No free water service shall be furnished to
any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to a public agency or
instrumentality.



   (c)   Contracts for Service and Rates and Charges for Service
Outside of the City; Franchise Contracts; Outside City Service.  The City
has previously entered into contracts with certain townships whereby the City
has received consideration in exchange for providing certain capital costs,
and other indirect costs, of providing service to users of the Water Supply
System located in those townships. Rates and charges billed for use by the
user of those townships shall be in accordance with the applicable contract.



   In the event a non-resident is served by the Water Supply System and
whose premises is not located within an Act 425 or Franchise Contract area,
the rates charged for Facilities Maintenance Charge and commodity usage shall
be multiplied by one and one-half times for residential service.



   (d)   Payment of Charges by City, Exception.  The City shall pay
for all water used by it at the rates established by ordinance.  The water
used through a fire hydrant by the City is hereby deemed to be a public
benefit and there shall be no charge for service.  Charges against the City
shall be payable in quarterly installments from current funds of the City. 



   (e)   Illegal Disconnection, Connection or Tampering With a Water
Meter.  For illegally disconnecting, connecting or tampering with a water
meter, the property owner shall be charged two times the cost of the last
quarterly billing.  No service shall be provided until such bill is paid in
full.  If not paid, such cost shall be added to the property taxes and
collected as delinquent. 



   (f)   Facilities Maintenance Charge.  The Facilities Maintenance
Charge shall be charged against every premises connected to the Water Supply
System whether water is used or not and shall be calculated on a Residential
Equivalent Unit (REU) basis.  A single family unit is considered one REU. 
In the case of a multiple unit residence, each unit shall be charged one
Facilities Maintenance Charge REU.  In December of each year, or at such
other time as may be deemed appropriate, the City shall review REU
allocations, taking into account factors such as the amount of use for each
class of user in the previous year, and shall adjust such REU allocations as
necessary with the revised allocations effective for the following twelve
month period or until a subsequent review.



   (g)    Fee for Water Turn-On after Disconnection.  If service is
discontinued, a fee, as established by Council, shall be charged to turn the
utilities back on.  In the case of winter shut-offs, no charge shall be made
to turn the utility off.  However, a fee shall be charged to turn service
back on.



   (h)   Final Readings.  At least twenty-four (24) hours notice shall
be given to the City for a final notice reading on a property.  If such time
limit cannot be given, a fee, as established by Council, shall be made to
perform the work on an emergency basis.



   (i)   Contracts for Service.  No user shall receive service from
the Water Supply System without first completing a contract application and
providing evidence of ownership of the property to be served or, if the user
rents or leases the property being served, until providing sufficient deposit
with the City to be retained by the City until the renter leaves the property
being served. No utility service will be activated without a signed contract,
and no billings shall be made to "Occupant" or any person other than the
owner of the property being served, or a tenant who has complied with the
requirements of this Section, or such other person as the City Manager
approves.



   (j)   Billing Cycle; Penalty; Collection.  The City Manager shall
have charge of the reading of all meters and shall have all meters read at
least quarterly.  Bills for water service shall be due and payable when
rendered.  There shall be added to all bills not paid on or before the
twentieth day of the first month following the end of each quarter a penalty
of ten percent of the amount of the bill.  The Treasurer shall be
responsible for collecting all charges and crediting the proper account. 



   (k)   Non-payment of Bills.  All bills not paid shall result in the
termination of water service to the premises. No user who has had his or her
water shut off shall reactivate his or her service by their own action. The
City may disable the service to prevent future reactivation.



   (l)   Liens. By Section 21 of Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as
amended, and by the terms of this chapter, the rates and charges for services
furnished by the Water Supply System shall be liens on the property served.
The City shall certify those rates and charges delinquent for six months or
more to the City tax assessing officer, who shall enter the amount of the
delinquent rates and charges on the tax roll against the premises to which
the service was rendered, and who shall collect the rates and charges and
enforce the lien in the same manner as provided for the collection of ad
valorem property taxes assessed upon the same roll and the enforcement of the
lien for taxes.



      For premises equipped with a separate water shut-off, in all
cases where a tenant represents to the City, by filing an affidavit
evidencing the legal execution of a lease containing a provision that the
lessor shall not be liable henceforth for payment of water or sewage system
bills, then the tenant shall pay to the City a deposit as set by resolution
of the City Council from time to time as security for payment of future rates
and charges. If the tenant fails to pay rates and charges the delinquent
rates and charges shall not become a lien against the premises. The City
shall, however, cease to provide water service to the tenant's premises until
the tenant pays the delinquent charges in full.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.11  WATER EMERGENCY.



   The City Manager may regulate, limit or prohibit the use of water for
any purpose. Such regulations shall restrict less essential water uses to the
extent deemed necessary to assure an adequate supply for essential domestic
and commercial needs and for fire-fighting. No such regulation, limitation or
prohibition shall be effective until twenty-four (24) hours after the
publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Any
person violating such rule or regulation shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.12  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   The City Manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations
concerning the Water Supply System, connection thereto, meter installation
and maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants and water
mains and the appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent with this chapter. 
Such rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the City
Council.  The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until
changed in accordance with this section. 



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.13  HYDRANT USE.



   No person, except an employee of the City in the performance of his or
her duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant except in case of emergency,
without first securing a written permit from the City and paying such charges
as may be prescribed.  Violation of this section shall be a civil
infraction. 



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.14  FUNDING OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS.



   Whenever the City determines that it is necessary to acquire,
construct, furnish and equip improvements, replacements or extraordinary
repairs to the Water Supply System, and to borrow money and issue bonds to
pay those costs, the City shall adopt a separate bond authorizing ordinance
in compliance with the provisions of Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as
amended. 



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.15  INJURY TO FACILITIES.



   No person, except an employee of the City in the performance of his or
her duties, shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a
part of the Water Supply System.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.16  MISS DIG SYSTEM.



   Any person wishing to perform work on a connection to the Water Supply
System shall notify the MISS DIG at least seventy-two (72) hours before
performing the work, and the Department at least twenty-four (24) hours
before performing the work.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.17  CROSS-CONNECTION PREVENTION.



   To comply with certain State and Federal laws, the following
regulations relating to cross-connections in the System shall be enforced.



   (a)   The City of Ionia adopts by reference the Water Supply
Cross-Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health, being R
325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code.



   (b)   It shall be the duty of the Department to cause inspections to
be made of all properties served by the public water supply where
cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible.  The
frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards
involved shall be as established by the City and as approved by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality.



   (c)   The representative of the City of Ionia shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
Water Supply System of the City of Ionia for the purpose of inspecting the
piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections.  On request, the
owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or
systems on such property.  The refusal of such information or refusal of
access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of
cross-connections.



   (d)   The City is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection
in violation of this chapter exists and to take such other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
Municipal Water Supply System.  Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.



   (e)   The potable water supply made available on the properties
served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible
contamination as specified by this chapter and by the State and BOCA Plumbing
Codes.  Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic
purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a
conspicuous manner:



WATER UNSAFE



FOR DRINKING



   (f)   This chapter does not supersede the State Plumbing Code or any
City ordinance, but is supplementary to them.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.18  MANDATORY CONNECTION, EXCEPTION; NEW PRIVATE WELLS, 
PROHIBITION,  CONTINUATION, ABANDONMENT.



   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b), any property or
structure in or on which water is used or consumed and which has City water
“available” to it shall be connected to the City Water Supply System. 
Such connection shall be made within ninety (90) days of written notice from
the City to do so.  For purposes of this section, City water shall be
considered “available” if the City Water Supply System is located within
two hundred (200) feet of the nearest property line of said property.



   (b)   The installation of new private wells is prohibited, except
for properties that do not have City water “available.”  A private well
existing on the date of the adoption of this section may continue to be used
until it is no longer operable, subject to division (c).  A private well
that has been disconnected from any structure on the property that is still
operable shall be used solely for outdoor purposes only.  A private well
that is disconnected from a structure and that is still in service shall be
subject to inspection as part of the City’s cross connection program.



   (c)   When a private well is no longer operable, its use shall be
discontinued and the well disconnected, unless it is repaired within
forty-five (45) days from the date that it becomes inoperable.  A private
well that is inoperable and/or unable to be repaired shall be properly
abandoned within forty-five (45) days of its inoperability in accordance with
the requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.  Proof
of the abandonment shall be filed with the Ionia County Health Department and
the City’s Utilities Department which shall inspect the well to confirm its
proper abandonment.



(Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.19  GEOTHERMAL HEAT SYSTEMS.



   (a)   Geothermal heat pumps.  It is recognized that residential
buildings in the City may be constructed, or be retrofitted with geothermal
heat pumps.  It is recognized that these climate control systems use
substantial amounts of water.  It is also recognized that this water, which
for the purposes of this chapter shall be identified as sending water, can
cause excess wetness or flooding on nearby properties, resulting in
undesirable conditions.  It is further recognized that if sending water
mixes with other water, which for the purpose of this chapter shall be
identified as receiving water, it can have a potentially detrimental impact
on the ecosystem in and around the receiving waters, resulting in undesirable
conditions.



   (b)   Drainage.  Owners of buildings in the City equipped with
geothermal heat pump systems must install a closed loop system that will
continuously process (heated or cooled) sending water and circulate it
through the enclosed or sealed heat pump system, with no discharge of
returning water out of the heat pump.



   (c)   Discharge of water.  No sending water from a geothermal heat
pump system shall be directly or indirectly discharged out of the closed loop
system.



   (d)   Liability.  The owner of a geothermal heat pump system shall
be fully responsible for the proper operation and for the maintenance of the
geothermal heat pump system, and shall he liable for any damage caused by any
discharge of sending water from the system.



   (e)   Penalty.  Violation of this Section shall be deemed a
municipal civil infraction and punishable by a fine commensurate with the
amount or amounts established by the Ionia City Council, as set forth in the
Codified Ordinances. 



(Ord. No. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.20  REPEALER; CONTINUATION OF PRIOR BOND AUTHORIZING ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances and resolutions, or parts of ordinances and resolutions,
which conflict with this chapter, are hereby repealed, to the extent of such
conflict.  This section shall not operate to repeal any provision of any
prior ordinance or resolution adopted by the City, the repeal of which would
impair the obligation of the City or the Water Supply System with regard to
any outstanding bonds of the City secured by a lien on the net revenues of
the Water Supply System. 



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99; Ord. 466. Passed 6-2-09.)



1040.21  WATER WELL RESTRICTIONS.



   (a)   Findings.  The City Council has been informed and hereby
finds that an aquifer in certain areas of the City has been contaminated or
otherwise adversely impacted by hazardous substances and that identified
public health, safety and welfare risks may affect drinking water drawn from
certain areas of such impacted aquifers.  The City Council has determined
that it is necessary and appropriate to prohibit or otherwise restrict the
use of wells to supply water in and from the affected areas in order to
protect City residents by minimizing the health, safety and welfare risks and
minimizing the potential for migration of contaminated groundwater into
presently unaffected groundwater.



   (b)   Definitions.  As used in this section:



      (1)   "Affected parcel" means a parcel of land, any part of
which is located within a restricted zone.



      (2)   "Applicant" means a person who applies or applied for
the establishment of a restricted zone pursuant to this section.



      (3)   "City property" means any interest in real property
owned or held by the City and shall include but not be limited to the
following:



         A.   Real property owned by the City;



         B.   Real property leased by the City as lessee; and



         C.   City streets, alleys or other City rights-of-way or
easements.



      (4)   "Contaminated groundwater" means groundwater in which
there is present concentrations of hazardous substances that exceed drinking
water criteria under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 1976 PA 399, as amended, or
the residential drinking water criteria established by the MDEQ in rules
promulgated pursuant to Part 201, Environmental Remediation, M.C.L.A.
324.20101 et seq.



      (5)   "Domestic use" means the use of water by humans for
drinking, cooking, food preparation and other food-related services,
cleaning, washing, bathing and similar household-type water uses in any
dwelling, or in any building in which commercial/business,
governmental/public or industrial activities are conducted.  The term does
not include water used solely for closed-loop heat pumps, non-contact
cooling, production, or processing purposes of commercial or industrial
enterprises.



      (6)   "Irrigation use" means the use of water for lawn,
garden, or landscaping irrigation on a residential parcel of land.  The term
also includes water used for commercial, agricultural, or farm irrigation. 
A well used primarily for irrigation uses shall connect to the Water Supply
System and shall be plugged/abandoned, unless such use is allowed by the MDEQ
and is consistent with any of the exceptions found in division (e) of this
section.



      (7)   "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, or its successor agency.



      (8)   "Owner" means the holder of record title for a parcel of
land and also the occupant of a parcel of land in possession under a land
contract or lease.



      (9)   "Part 201" means Part 201, Environmental Remediation, of
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), M.C.L.A.
324.20101 et seq., as amended.



      (10)   "Part 213" means Part 213, Leaking Underground Storage
Tanks, NREPA, M.C.L.A. 324.21301 et seq., as amended.



      (11)   "Person" means any individual, partnership,
corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, and any other
group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such
group or unit.



      (12)   "Restricted zone" means an area or areas described
within division (c) of this section for which the prohibition of wells and
the use of groundwater applies and includes parcels of land that are legally
described and depicted in the map(s) attached to Ordinance No. 513 as
Appendix 1, as amended from time to time as provided in this section.



      (13)   "Well" means an opening in the surface of the earth for
the purpose of removing groundwater through non-mechanical or mechanical
means for any purpose other than a public emergency or conducting response
actions that are consistent with NREPA, the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, or other applicable statute.



   (c)   Restricted Zone.  The following described areas in the City
shall be a restricted zone under this section.  It may be referred to by
reference to the name provided in the caption preceding its description. 
Additional restricted zones, along with a map illustrating the restricted
zone and legal descriptions of all affected parcels, may be added by amending
the section in accordance with divisions (k) and (l) of this section and all
other applicable laws.



      (1)   Cleveland Street Restricted Zone.  The Cleveland Street
Restricted Zone is legally described below and depicted in the map attached
to Ordinance No. 513 as Appendix 1.



      (2)   Legal Description:   Beginning at the Center of
Section 20, T7N, R6W, City of Ionia, Michigan; thence along the North-South
1/4 line, South 469 feet; thence East 922 feet; thence South 343 feet to the
North line of the Pere Marquette Railroad right-of-way; thence along said
North line, East 300.5 feet to a point lying 99 feet West of the East line of
the NW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of said Section 20; thence South 315 feet, more or
less, to the Grand River; thence along the bank of the Grand River to the
East line of Mill Street extended; thence along the East line of Mill Street
extended, North 559 feet, more or less, to a point lying 441 feet South of
the centerline of the Pere Marquette Railroad; thence West 33 feet to the
centerline of Mill Street; thence along said centerline, North 66 feet;
thence East 33 feet to the East line of Mill Street; thence along said East
line, North 375 feet, more or less, to the South line of the Pere Marquette
Railroad right-of-way; thence Southeasterly along said South line 933.6 feet
to a line lying 17.75 feet East of the West line of Lot 119 extended,
Merritt's Addition to the City of Ionia as recorded in Liber M, Page 774;
thence parallel with the West line of Lot 119, North 265 feet; thence West
17.75 feet to the West line of Lot 110 of said Merritt's Addition; thence
along said West line, North 101 feet, more or less, to the Northwest corner
of Lot 110; thence along the North line of Lot 110, East 462 feet, more or
less, to the West line of Cleveland Street; thence along the West line of
Cleveland Street, North 165 feet, more or less, to the South line of Bayard
Street; thence along the South line of Bayard Street, East 594 feet, more or
less, to the North-South 1/4 line of said Section 20; thence along said
North-South 1/4 line, South 75 feet, more or less, to the Center of said
Section 20 and the Point of Beginning.



      (3)   Property Tax Id. Nos.:      203-240-000-020-00



                     203-240-000-040-00



                     203-240-000-045-00



                     203-240-000-120-00



                     203-240-000-220-00



                     204-120-000-240-00



                     204-120-000-240-01



                     204-140-000-005-10



                     204-140-000-005-20



   (d)   Prohibition.  Except as provided in division (e) of this
section, no person shall install or utilize, or allow, permit, or provide for
the installation or utilization of a well on any affected parcel.  Any
existing well at the time of the enactment of a restricted zone on any
affected parcel within that restricted zone shall be plugged/abandoned at the
expense of the applicant for that particular restricted zone and as provided
for in division (f) of this section and in accordance with applicable laws,
regulations and ordinances, unless such existing well falls within one of the
exceptions listed in division (e).  Except as provided in division (e), no
person shall use any groundwater from an affected parcel.



   (e)   Exceptions.  A person may install or utilize, or allow,
permit, or provide for the installation or utilization of a well in any
restricted zone if any of the following exceptions applies and the person
complies with the requirements of the exception. The party proposing an
exception to the well prohibition shall conduct all appropriate inquiry and
prepare a due care analysis pursuant to Part 201 or Part 213 of NREPA.



      (1)   Proof of No Influence.  If the MDEQ determines based on
information provided to it by the person seeking this exception that the use
of a well in a restricted zone will not exacerbate existing groundwater
contamination, and that water from the proposed well will not be affected by
contaminated groundwater or that water from the proposed well does not pose a
threat to human health or the environment, and proof of those determinations
is delivered to the City, the well may be so used.



      (2)   Groundwater Monitoring/Remediation.  A well may be used
for groundwater monitoring or remediation as part of a response activity
approved by the MDEQ, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or
their successor agencies.



      (3)   Construction Dewatering.  A well may be used for
construction dewatering if the following conditions are satisfied: (i) the
use of the dewatering well will not result in unacceptable exposure to
contaminated groundwater, possible cross-contamination between saturated
zones, or exacerbation of contaminated groundwater, as defined in Part 201 or
Part 213 of NREPA; and (ii) the water generated by that activity is properly
handled and disposed of in compliance with all applicable laws, rules,
regulations, permit and license requirements, orders and directives of any
governmental entity or agency of competent jurisdiction.  Any exacerbation
caused by the use of the well under this exception shall be the
responsibility of the person operating the dewatering well, as provided in
Part 201 or Part 213 of NREPA.



      (4)   Processing Activities.  If the MDEQ determines that the
use of a well for non-contact heating, cooling, production, or processing
involved in industrial or commercial activities will not cause migration or
exacerbation of contaminated groundwater, and proof of that determination is
delivered to the City, such use of the well under terms and conditions
specified by the MDEQ will be allowed.  All information necessary for the
MDEQ determination described in this division shall be provided by the person
seeking this exception.



      (5)   Public Emergencies.  A well may be used in the event of
a public emergency.  Notice of such use shall be provided to the MDEQ within
a reasonable time thereafter.



   (f)   Sources of Water Supplied for Domestic Use and Irrigation Use.



      (1)   For affected parcels that have a well and are not
already connected to the Water Supply System on the day of enactment of a
restricted zone, the applicant of the restricted zone shall be responsible
for the costs to connect those affected parcels within that restricted zone
to the Water Supply System. Furthermore, for affected parcels that have a
well on the day of enactment of a restricted zone that is used primarily for
irrigation uses, the applicant of the restricted zone shall be responsible
for the costs to connect the irrigation system on the affected parcel within
that restricted zone to the Water Supply System.



      (2)   This section shall not be deemed as affecting the rights
and remedies of an owner, or any other person or entity or of any federal,
state or local government that may exist under any law, regulation, rule,
ordinance, order, agreement, or remedial action plan addressing groundwater
within the City.



      (3)   In no event shall the City be required to incur any
expense or cost under this section, except as may otherwise be approved by
the City Council for a public works project or by a separate agreement with
the applicant, owner, other person or entity, or a governmental body or
agency.



   (g)   Enforcement.  The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall
be the official having the authority to enforce this section.  After the
effective date of this section, the enforcement official shall contact all
owners of affected parcels, which from the information available to the City,
appear to have wells prohibited under this section, giving written notice of
the need to cease using such wells and of the need for establishment of a
domestic use water source as prescribed under division (f) of this section,
or to obtain approval or acknowledgment of an exception under division (e). 
The owner shall immediately take steps to comply with the provisions of this
section with regard to provision of domestic use water within 60 days from
the date of such notice.  Any existing well in violation of this section
shall then be plugged or abandoned in conformance with applicable legal
requirements. Where, upon information available to the enforcement official,
it is suspected that a well is being used on an affected parcel in violation
of this section, the enforcement official may inspect such affected parcel
and serve an appropriate notice and order of such violation requiring that
action be taken promptly by the owner to bring the affected parcel into
compliance.  If the owner fails to act in accordance with such order, the
enforcement official may seek remedies and penalties as provided in division
(h) of this section.



   (h)   Penalty.  Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be liable for a municipal civil infraction under the provisions
of Section 202.99(b).  In addition, the City may seek an order from a court
of appropriate jurisdiction requiring compliance with this section and may
also seek collection of costs and attorney fees associated with such
enforcement action.  Any violation of this section is a public nuisance,
subject to abatement, and any well in violation of this section shall be
immediately taken out of service and lawfully abandoned in compliance with
applicable legal requirements.  A court of competent jurisdiction may order
any person violating any provision of this section to properly and lawfully
remove or abandon a well.



   (i)   Building and Zoning Permits.  No permit for the construction
or alteration of a building or structure nor any permit for any zoning
approval shall be issued by the City Building and Zoning Administrator for
any improvement on an affected parcel that has, or proposes, a water supply
from a well in violation of this section.



   (j)   Administrative Liability.  No officer, agent or employee of
the City or member of the City Council shall render himself or herself
personally liable for any damage that may occur to any person or entity as
the result of any act or decision performed in the discharge of his or her
duties and responsibilities pursuant to the section.



   (k)   Amendment; Repeal.  The MDEQ, an applicant, an owner, an
entity involved in a response or cleanup plan or other interested party may
request in writing to add parcels to or delete parcels from a restricted zone
or to establish an additional restricted zone or to otherwise amend or repeal
this section, and shall provide advance notice to the MDEQ and any applicant
for such restricted zone of any proposed change hereunder, including the
reasons supporting such request.  The City on its own motion and upon
advance notice to the MDEQ and any applicant for such restricted zone, may
also take action to amend or repeal this section as it deems appropriate. 
The amendment or repeal of this section shall be by an appropriate ordinance
adopted in the same manner as this section unless the amendment is for a
release regulated pursuant to Part 213.  If an amendment to this section is
sought for a release regulated pursuant to Part 213, then this section or an
amendment to this section shall be filed with the register of deeds as an
ordinance affecting multiple properties.  Any action to amend or repeal this
section shall be in the sole legislative discretion of the City Council and
shall comply with the publication and notice requirements of Chapter 2.13 of
the City Charter.



   (l)   Notification of Lapse, or Intent to Amend or Repeal.  At
least 30 days prior to any action regarding a proposed amendment or repeal in
whole or in part of this section, the City shall notify the MDEQ and any
applicant of its intent to so act. The City shall also notify the MDEQ and
any applicant that this section may lapse at least 30 days prior to the
section being allowed to lapse.



   (m)   Severability.  The City shall promptly notify the MDEQ and
any applicant upon the occurrence of any event described in Section 202.05
resulting in one or more provisions of this section being severed.



   (n)   Reimbursement of Additional City Construction Costs.  The
Applicant of a restricted zone shall reimburse the City for the reasonable
additional costs the City incurs for dewatering contaminated groundwater or
disposing of soils impacted by contaminated groundwater in connection with
construction activity undertaken by the City on City property in that
restricted zone, provided that the City supplies the applicant with
documentation confirming the amount and necessity of such additional costs,
including the extent to which they exceeded the cost of dewatering or
disposing of materials not impacted by contaminated groundwater.



(Ord. 513.  Passed 7-1-14.)



1040.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



   In addition to the penalty provided in Section 202.99 of these Codified
Ordinances for any person who turns on water service for any building or
residence in the City after such service has been discontinued for leak,
non-payment or other delinquency, such property shall be billed an
administrative penalty of one and one-half times the cost of the last
quarterly bill.  Failure to pay such administrative penalty shall result in
the addition of such cost to the property taxes of the property.



(Ord. Unno.  Passed 9-7-99.)



CHAPTER 1042
Sewer Use and Industrial Pretreatment



1042.01   Purpose and short title.



1042.02   Objectives re: Contract requirements.



1042.03   Objectives re: State and Federal law requirements.



1042.04   Findings re: Public health, safety and welfare.



1042.05   Findings re: Measure of sewer use.



1042.06   Finding re: IRUA rules and regulations and industrial users.



1042.07   Definitions.



1042.08   Abbreviations.



1042.09   Operation, maintenance and control.



1042.10   Mandatory connection.



1042.11   Discharge of sewage.



1042.12   Connection deadline.



1042.13   Building sewer connections.



1042.14   Private sewage disposal systems.



1042.15   Extensions of collection system to service new developments in
the City.



1042.16   Connection of premises located outside the City.



1042.17   Conditions for extension of collection system by property owner.



1042.18   Sewer extension agreements.



1042.19   Enforcement of mandatory connection requirements.



1042.20   Prohibited discharge standards.



1042.21   Federal categorical pretreatment standards.



1042.22   State requirements.



1042.23   Specific pollutant requirements.



1042.24   Special agreement.



1042.25   Notification of violation.



1042.26   Consent orders.



1042.27   Show cause hearing.



1042.28   Compliance orders.



1042.29   Cease and desist orders.



1042.30   Administrative fines.



1042.31   Emergency suspensions.



1042.32   Termination of discharge.



1042.33   Municipal civil infraction.



1042.34   Injunctive relief.



1042.35   Criminal prosecution.



1042.36   Remedies nonexclusive.



1042.37   Water supply severance.



1042.38   Public nuisances.



1042.39   Informant rewards.



1042.40   Contractor listing.



1042.41   Surcharge costs.



1042.42   Rates and charges.



1042.43   Method of measurement.



1042.44   No free service.



1042.45   Contracts for service.



1042.46   Billing cycle; penalty; collection.



1042.47   Non-payment of bills.



1042.48   Liens.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Sewers and sewer systems generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, § 24;
M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq., 67.34, 123.241 et seq., 323.151 et seq.,
325.201 et seq.



   Sewers and sewer systems in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§
117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4f, 117.35



   Industrial wastewater surcharges - see ADM. 214.05(c)(6)



   Industrial cost recovery charges - see ADM. 214.05(c)(7)



1042.01  PURPOSE AND SHORT TITLE.



   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use
of public and private sewers and drains, the installation and connection of
building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the Ionia
Regional Utilities Authority wastewater disposal facility; to prohibit
private sewage disposal systems and exceptions thereto; to provide for the
connection to and the fixing and collection of rates and charges for the use
of the sewage system, the allocation and use of revenues derived therefrom
and the administration of the system; and, to provide penalties for
violations and other matters pertaining thereto.



   (b)   Short Title.  This chapter shall be known as the Sewer Use
and Industrial Pretreatment Chapter of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Ionia and may be cited as such.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.02  OBJECTIVES RE: CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.



   The City of Ionia ("City") and the Townships of Berlin, Easton, Ionia
and Orange (together with the City collectively called the "Constituent
Municipalities") and the Ionia Regional Utilities Authority ("Authority"),
entered into the Ionia Regional Utilities Authority Contract of December 2010
("Contract"), to promote the health and welfare of the residents of the
constituent municipalities. The Contract covers topics pertaining to the
sewage disposal system and collection systems as those terms are used in the
Contract and as adopted herein.  The City, on behalf of the Authority, is
required by the terms of the Contract to: operate, maintain, administer and
manage the sewage disposal system; read its master meters; bill and collect
service charges from the Constituent Municipalities (including the City
itself); account for all collections and from such collections pay all costs
for operation, maintenance, management and administration of the sewage
disposal system. Accordingly, it is necessary for the City, as a Constituent
Municipality, to establish rates and charges for services to its Users
connected to or are required to be connected to its collection system, in
amounts necessary to operate, maintain and administer the sewage collection
and disposal system and to adopt an ordinance that requires users to pay
rates and charges for sewer collection and disposal services. It is the
purpose of the City by enacting and keeping in force and effect this chapter
to comply with the foregoing requirements of the Contract to protect and
promote the health and welfare of the residents of the City.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.03  OBJECTIVES RE: STATE AND FEDERAL LAW REQUIREMENTS.



   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the sewage
collection and disposal system and enables the City to comply with all
applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251
et seq.).  In addition, the objectives of this chapter include the following:



   (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage
collection and disposal system which would interfere with its operation or
contaminate the resulting sludge;



   (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage
collection and disposal system which will pass through, inadequately treated,
into the receiving stream or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with
the sewage collection and disposal system;



   (c)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater
and sludge from the sewage collection and disposal system;



   (d)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the
City's collection system and the City's share of the sewage  disposal system
costs; and



   (e)   To protect the physical integrity of the sewage collection and
disposal system and to provide for the safety of the public and workers on
and in the system.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.04  FINDINGS RE: PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE.



   The City hereby determines that the sewage collection and disposal
system is necessary to protect and preserve the public health, safety and
welfare of the City. This determination is based upon the express
determination of the State Legislature set forth in Section 12752 of the
Michigan Public Health Code:



   Sec. 12752.  Public sanitary sewer systems are essential to the
health, safety, and welfare of the people of the state. Septic tank disposal
systems are subject to failure due to soil conditions or other reasons.
Failure or potential failure of septic tank disposal systems poses a threat
to the public health, safety, and welfare; presents a potential for ill
health, transmission of disease, mortality, and economic blight; and
constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of this
state. The connection to Available Public Sanitary Sewer System at the
earliest, reasonable date is a matter for the protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare and necessary in the public interest which is
declared as a matter of legislative determination.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.05  FINDINGS RE: MEASURE OF SEWER USE.



   The City hereby determines that the most practical, cost-effective and
accurate method, given available technology, of measuring the use of the
sewage collection and disposal system by all users that receive water service
from the City of Ionia's water supply system is by a meter or meters
installed to measure water usage by such user.  Where a water supply system
is not available or is not utilized, a meter or meters installed to the
private well shall be used to measure the water usage. In cases where there
is no water service, or a meter on a private well is either dysfunctional or
does not exist, a residential equivalent unit basis shall be used to
determine usage of the sewage collection and disposal system.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.06  FINDING RE: IRUA RULES AND REGULATIONS AND INDUSTRIAL USERS.



   The City hereby determines that all users, and specifically, industrial
users' compliance with the Ionia Regional Utilities Authority Rules and
Regulations as amended is of outmost importance and those Rules and
Regulations as amended are incorporated herein.  All industrial users shall
refer to the IRUA Rules and Regulations as amended for compliance with
requirements that are unique to the industrial users of the sewage collection
and disposal system. Violations of the Rules and Regulations as amended may
also indicate a violation of this chapter as implicated herein.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.07  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. 



   (a)   "Act" or "the Act."  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.



   (b)   "Applicable County Health Department."  Ionia County Health
Department.



   (c)   "Authority."  The Ionia Regional Utilities Authority, or IRUA.



   (d)   "Available public sanitary sewer system."  City's collection
system located within 200 feet of the nearest property line of a property.



   (e)   "Biochemical oxygen demand" or "BOD."  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° Centigrade expressed in terms of mass
and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).



   (f)   "Building sewer."  The sewer pipe that connects the building
or structure in which sewage originates to the collection system and conveys
the sewage from the building or structure to the collection system.



   (g)   "Capital costs."  All costs associated with the design and
construction of improvements, extensions, expansions or changes to the sewage
disposal system, permitted by applicable laws, including but not limited to
all amounts paid to contractors and subcontractors, construction materials,
engineering fees, construction management fees, costs of acquiring real
property or interests therein, capitalized interest, and legal and financing
costs with respect to indebtedness to pay for all or any part of the cost of
the sewage disposal system.



   (h)   "City."  The City of Ionia.



   (i)   "City Manager."  The person designated by the City to
supervise the operation of the collection system, or his or her duly
authorized representative, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter, or the Contract.



   (j)   "Collection system."  The sewer collection system owned and
controlled by the City.



   (k)   "Color."  The optical density at the visual wave length of
maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent
transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.



   (l)   "Contract."  The Ionia Regional Utilities Authority Contract
of December 2010 by and between the IRUA and the Constituent Municipalities.



   (m)   "Constituent Municipalities."  The incorporating
municipalities that created the IRUA, including City of Ionia, Berlin
Township, Easton Township, Ionia Township and Orange Township.



   (n)   "Cost of operation and maintenance."  The sum of the City's
share of the Authority's operation and maintenance costs, which, for any
period, consist of the costs associated with the City's share of operation,
maintenance, administration and management of the sewage disposal system
(including reasonable reserves) necessary to keep all system facilities in
proper repair and working order and, to the extent deemed necessary,
reasonable reserves for replacement, including any equipment necessary;
reduced by any other revenue collected, including (without limitation):
surcharges collected for treatment of high-strength wastewater, charges for
service to customers outside of the Constituent Municipalities, charges for
acceptance and treatment of septage, remediation water or dewatering water
discharged directly to the system, and proceeds from the sale of assets, and
all costs, direct or indirect, inclusive of all expenditures attributable to
the City's ownership, operation and maintenance of its own collection system.



   (o)   "Discharge."  Any direct or indirect discharge of waste,
waste effluent, wastewater, pollutant, or any combination into any of the
waters of the state or upon the ground or to the collection system.



   (p)   "Discharge permit."  Permit issued by the MDEQ for the
discharge of treated sewage from the sewage disposal system.



   (q)   "Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA."  The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be
used as a designation for the Regional Water Management Division Director or
other duly authorized official of said agency.



   (r)   "Facilities maintenance charge."  The costs associated with
retiring all or a portion of the debt of the sewage collection and disposal
system as applicable to the City (consists of all costs associated with the
collection system and prorated portion of the sewage disposal system's
capital costs and operation and maintenance costs as those terms are used and
defined in the Contract and adopted herein).



   (s)   "Industrial user."  An industry, commercial establishment, or
other entity that discharges wastewater to the collection system, other than,
or in addition to, sanitary sewage.



   (t)   "MDEQ."  Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.



   (u)   "Medical waste."  Isolation waste, infectious agents, human
blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites,
etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.



   (v)   "Natural outlet."  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.



   (w)   "Operation and maintenance costs."  See "cost of operation
and maintenance."



   (x)   "Person."  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
State or local governmental entities.



   (y)   "pH."  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed in standard units.



   (z)   "Pollutant."



      (1)   Substances regulated by categorical standards;



      (2)   Substances discharged to the collection system that are
required to be monitored, are limited in IRUA's discharge permit, or are
identified in IRUA's permit application;



      (3)   Substances for which control measures on industrial
users are necessary to avoid restricting IRUA's approved residuals management
program;



      (4)   Substances for which control measures on industrial
users are necessary to avoid operational problems at the sewage collection
and disposal system;



      (5)   Substances for which control measures on nondomestic
sources are necessary to avoid worker health and safety problems in the
sewage collection and disposal system; or



      (6)   Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



   (aa)   "Pretreatment."  The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants
into the sewage collection and disposal system. This reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process
changes or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the
pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.



   (bb)   "Pretreatment requirements."  Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than
a pretreatment standard.



   (cc)   "Pretreatment standard(s)" or "standards."  Shall mean
prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.



   (dd)   "Private sewage disposal system."  Any septic tank, lagoon,
cesspool, or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sanitary
sewage other than through the City's collection system.



   (ee)   "Prohibited discharge standards" or "prohibited
discharges."  Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in the IRUA Rules and Regulations.



   (ff)   "Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW."  Also known as
the "sewage disposal system," this term is used in the IRUA Rules and
Regulations, and covers the treatment works, as defined by applicable
provisions of the CFR and the Act, that is owned and or operated by IRUA,
including any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances
which convey wastewater to IRUA's treatment plant.



   (gg)   "Replacement."  Obtaining and installing of any equipment,
accessories, and appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the system to maintain the system's capacity and performance and to preserve
its financial integrity.



   (hh)   "Residential equivalent unit."  The estimated sewage
generated by a single family residential user. Also shown as "REU."



   (ii)   "Sanitary sewage."  The liquid or water-carried waste
discharge from dwellings, (including apartment houses, motels and hotels),
office buildings, factories, or institutions.



   (jj)   "Sanitary sewer."  The conveyance which carries sanitary
sewage and into which storm water, surface and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.



   (kk)   "Sewage."  Human excrement and gray water (household
showers, dishwashing operations, etc.)



   (ll)   "Sewage collection and disposal system."  Also called the
"system."  The collective system of the sewage disposal system owned by IRUA
and the collection system owned by the City.



   (mm)   "Sewer."  A pipe or conduit and appurtenances for
transmitting or carrying sewage including any devices necessary for pumping,
lifting, or collecting such sewage.



   (nn)   "Sewer service lateral line."  The sewer line extending from
the sewer main to a building.



   (oo)   "Structure in which sanitary sewage originates."  A building
in which a toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which
generate water-carried sanitary sewage are used or are available for use for
household, commercial, industrial, or other purposes.



   (pp)   "Suspended solids."  The total suspended matter that floats
on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.



   (qq)   "System."  See "sewage collection and disposal system."



   (rr)   "Tap-in fee."  The charge imposed by the City to connect a
building sewer, either directly, or indirectly, to the sewage collection and
disposal system.



   (ss)   "User."  A recipient of services provided by the sewage
collection and disposal system including premises which are connected to and
discharge sewage into the same.



   (tt)   "Wastewater."  Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes,
and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the sewage collection and disposal system.



   (uu)   "Wastewater treatment plant" or "treatment plant."  That
portion of the sewage collection and disposal system designed to provide
treatment of sewage and industrial waste.



   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive or discretionary. The use of
the singular shall be construed to include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.08  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:



   (a)   "BOD."  Biochemical oxygen demand.



   (b)   "CFR."  Code of Federal Regulations.



   (c)   "COD."  Chemical oxygen demand.



   (d)   "EPA."  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



   (e)   "IRUA."  Ionia Regional Utilities Authority.



   (f)   "mg/l."  Milligrams per liter.



   (g)   "NPDES."  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   (h)   "TSS."  Total suspended solids.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.09  OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.



   The operation and maintenance of the sewage collection and disposal
system shall be under the supervision and control of the City of Ionia
subject to the Ionia Regional Authorities Contract of December, 2010, which
has been agreed upon between the City of Ionia and the IRUA. Pursuant to the
terms of this chapter and such contracts, the City has retained the exclusive
right to establish, maintain, and collect rates and charges for sewage
collection, treatment, transmission and debt service, and in such capacity
the City may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as
it deems advisable, and may make such rules or regulations as it deems
advisable and necessary to assure the efficient establishment, operation and
maintenance of the sewage collection to discharge its financial obligations,
and collection of rates and charges as herein provided.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.10  MANDATORY CONNECTION.



   Any property or structure in which sanitary sewage originates and where
there is an available public sanitary sewer system, shall be required to
connect to the collection system, at the owner's expense. Every user
connected to the collection system, whether the user is located inside or
outside of the City, shall be subject to the ordinances of the City and the
IRUA Rules and Regulations as amended, which shall be available for
inspection at City Hall.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.11  DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the City any sewage or other polluted water except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with standards established by the State, U.S.
EPA, IRUA Rules and Regulations, and this chapter.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited upon any public or private property within the City
(or any area under its jurisdiction) any human excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste in any unsanitary manner.



   (c)   No person, when sewage and/or treatment facilities are
available, shall discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sanitary sewage, industrial
wastes or other polluted waters, unless specifically permitted by the
applicable County Health Department.



   (d)   No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage, unless specifically permitted by the applicable County Health
Department or as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.12  CONNECTION DEADLINE.



   As a matter of public health, all connections to the collection system
required hereunder, shall be completed no later than 90 days after the later
of official notice by the City to make said connections or the modification
of a structure so as to become a structure in which sanitary sewage
originates. Newly constructed structures required to connect shall be
connected prior to occupancy thereof.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.13  BUILDING SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   (a)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without
first obtaining a written permit from the City.  No building sewer shall be
covered until after it has been inspected and approved by the City on behalf
of the IRUA.



   (b)   The property owner or the contractor as his or her agent shall
make application for a sewer permit on a form furnished by the City. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information required by this chapter or considered pertinent in the
judgment of the City. A tap-in fee established by resolution of the City
Council shall be paid to the Treasurer at the time the application is filed.
A plumbing permit is also required. If a street opening is required to make
the lead connection, an additional attachment to the permit must be completed
in accordance with the City utility policy, which may be in the form of a
permit issued by the local road commission.



   (c)   All costs, expenses and liabilities incident to the
installation, connection and maintenance of the sewer service lateral line
shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify and
save harmless the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the sewer service lateral
line.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of each property owner to maintain,
clean and repair the sewer service lateral line at his or her own expense as
necessary to keep the lateral line free and clear of obstructions and in good
working order.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the City to maintain, clean and
repair as necessary at its expense the sewer collection system. The City may
repair or replace any broken or crushed sewer service lateral line at the
property owner's expense. The City shall not be responsible for cleaning or
maintenance of sewer service lateral lines at the City's own expense.



      (3)   If any property owner fails to maintain a private sewer
line as required by this chapter, in addition to the other penalties
dictated, the sewer may be declared a public nuisance by the Ionia County
Health Officer and the defect may be corrected by the City. Any costs so
incurred shall be assessed against the property and become a lien on the
property if not timely paid.



   (d)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of
another or on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building.



   (e)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the City, to
meet all requirements of this section.



   (f)   The sewer service lateral line shall be constructed of
materials as required in the City of Ionia's municipal standards, as amended.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.14  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.



   (a)   Except where a collection system is not available within 200
feet of the property upon which the structure in which sanitary sewage
originates, it shall be unlawful to construct any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
or industrial waste.  Any existing facilities shall be disconnected and
abandoned per Health Department requirements if there is an available public
sanitary sewer system.



   (b)   If there is no available public sewer system, the structure in
which sanitary sewage originates shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system which shall be approved by the Health Department.



   (c)   At the time that there is service by an available public
sanitary sewer system, a structure in which the sanitary sewage originates
was served by a private sewage disposal system shall connect to the
collection system in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tank,
cesspools and similar private disposal facilities located on the property
shall be abandoned and discontinued for sanitary sewage disposal use
consistent with the State, County and local regulations.



   (d)   All private sewage disposal systems maintained in compliance
with this chapter shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times at
the sole expense of the owner.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.15  EXTENSIONS OF COLLECTION SYSTEM TO SERVICE NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
CITY.



   (a)   The owner (or developer) of lands in the City proposed for
development (whether by site condominium, subdivision, land division or
otherwise) for which land use approval is received after the effective date
of this sewer connection and rate ordinance, shall work with the municipality
regarding connection to the collection system.



   (b)   If the owner of premises located within the City and served by
an available public sanitary sewer system legally divides the premises, the
owner shall be required to extend the sewage collection and disposal system
such that all resulting divisions of the parent parcel are served by an
available public sanitary sewer system.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.16  CONNECTION OF PREMISES LOCATED OUTSIDE THE CITY.



   Premises located outside the City shall be permitted to connect to the
sewage collection system only upon the consent of the City.  The consent of
the City shall be granted or denied in the exercise of its reasonable
discretion and the continued availability of capacity. To the extent an
extension of the collection system is required, the conditions set forth in
Section 1042.17 (Conditions for extension of collection system by property
owner) shall apply. In its discretion, the City may require the person
requesting the connection of premises located outside the City to provide, at
the sole expense of that person, an engineering report by a consulting
engineer acceptable to the City addressing the cost and feasibility of the
extension.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.17  CONDITIONS FOR EXTENSION OF COLLECTION SYSTEM BY PROPERTY OWNER.



   The owner of premises that currently is located within the City, but
not served by an available public sanitary sewer system, may elect to extend
the collection system and connect his or her premises thereto, subject to the
conditions for sewer extensions set forth in this chapter, unless modified by
the terms of a written agreement between the City and the property owner
pursuant to Section 1042.18, Sewer extension agreements:



   (a)   The sewer main shall be extended to the premises in a public
right-of-way, or in an easement owned by the public to the premises in
question. If the sewer is to be extended for the purpose of serving a new
development, including but not limited to a site condominium, subdivision, or
division of land which involves the installation of a new public or private
road, the sewer main shall be extended throughout such new road so that the
sewer abuts all units or lots within the development, within an easement
dedicated to the public if not located in a public street right-of-way.



   (b)   If a sewer main is extended to a premises, the main shall be
installed across the entire frontage of the premises served, to the border of
the adjacent premises. For developments for which a new public or private
road is constructed, the sewer main shall be extended across the entire
frontage of the development on the existing adjacent public or private road,
in addition to being extended within the new road to all lots or units within
the development. All sewer main extensions shall be located within an
easement dedicated to the public, if not located in a public street
right-of-way.



   (c)   The sewer main shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications approved by the City.



   (d)   Upon completion of the sewer main, verification by the City
that it has been properly constructed, and proof that all contractors have
been paid for the cost thereof (including lien waivers if requested), the
sewer main shall be dedicated to the City, without cost to the City. Upon
acceptance of dedication, the City shall thereafter be responsible for
maintenance of the sewer main. The City shall be assigned, or be a third
party beneficiary of, all construction contracts and material and equipment
warranties.



   (e)   The person responsible for installing the sewer shall also
reimburse the City for the cost of acquisition of right-of-way, if necessary,
including attorney fees, appraisal fees, cost of land title research and all
other expenses of any condemnation proceedings. The person responsible for
installing the sewer shall pay an amount to the City, in advance, at least
equal to the estimated fees for such acquisition. Any excess not required to
complete the improvements shall be refunded to the responsible party; any
shortfall shall be paid before connection of any premises is permitted.



   (f)   The entire cost of installation of the sewer main, including
but not limited to engineering, construction, permits and restoration shall
be paid by the owner or owners of the premises to whom sewer is being
extended.



   (g)   In addition to the extension of a sewer main, as required, the
owner of premises to be connected to the system shall reimburse the City for
the cost of making improvements to downstream facilities, which are necessary
as a result of the additional connections proposed to be made by the owner of
the premises or by a development which will be provided with public sewer,
including but not limited to increasing the size of downstream sewer mains to
provide sufficient capacity, increase in the capacity of lift stations, and
increase in treatment capacity of the POTW. In such a situation, the
responsible party and the City shall enter into an agreement whereby the
responsible party pays to the City, in advance, an amount equal to at least
the estimated cost of making such improvements. Any excess not required to
complete the improvements shall be refunded to the responsible party; any
shortfall shall be paid before connection of any premises is permitted.



   (h)   Once constructed, the extended sewer main shall be available
to additional owners of lands to which service had not been available. Each
subsequent user shall be required to pay a tap-in fee.



   (i)   In its discretion, the City may require the person requesting
the extension or required to construct an extension to provide at the sole
expense of that person an engineering report by a consulting engineer
acceptable to the City addressing the cost and feasibility of the proposed
extension in the context of the foregoing conditions.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.18  SEWER EXTENSION AGREEMENTS.



   The City shall have the authority to negotiate agreements for sewer
extensions within the City with landowners, developers and other
municipalities, which agreements may take into consideration issues of
demand, benefit, capacity, necessity, timing and funding and may provide for
construction advances, prepayment of rates and charges, pay back arrangements
and similar matters.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.19  ENFORCEMENT OF MANDATORY CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   If a structure, in which sanitary sewage originates which is subject to
the mandatory connection requirements as defined in this Article IV, is not
connected to the collection system within the given timeframe identified in
Section 1042.12 (Connection deadline), the City shall notify said property
owner by written notice that connection to the system is required
forthwith.  The giving of said notice shall be made by first class or
certified mail to the property owner on which the structure is located or by
posting such notice on the property. Notice shall provide the owner with the
approximate location of the available public sanitary sewer system and shall
advise the owner of the requirements and the enforcement provisions of this
chapter, IRUA Rules and Regulations, and Sec. 12751 through 12758 of Act 368
of Public Acts of Michigan 1978, as amended.



   (a)   Civil Penalty for Late Connection.  Persons who fail or
refuse to connect to the system within the time prescribed shall be liable
for a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each single family
residential unit multiplied by the number of units and/or multiplying factors
as established by the table of residential equivalents.



   (b)   Civil Action for Late Connection.  In the event that the
required connection is not made to the system within six months after the
date of mailing or posting of the written notice, the City may bring an
action in the manner provided by law in a court of competent jurisdiction for
a mandatory injunction or court order to compel the property owner to
immediately connect the affected property to the available public sanitary
sewer system.



   (c)   By Criminal Proceedings.  Any violation of this chapter
including failure to comply with the mandatory connection requirements of
this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), and costs of prosecution, or  incarceration for a period of not
more than 90 days or both, such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of
the court. Each day that a violation of this chapter shall continue shall be
construed to constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.20  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (a)   Prohibited Substances.  No user shall introduce or cause to
be introduced into the sewage collection and disposal system any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These prohibitions
apply to all users of the sewage collection and disposal system whether or
not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore,
no user may contribute the following substances to the sewage collection and
disposal system:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the sewage collection and disposal system, including, but not limited to,
waste-streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° Fahrenheit
(60° Centigrade) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.



      (2)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 s.u. or greater
than 9.0 s.u., or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW
or equipment, or endangering City personnel.



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction
to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, fat, grease,
garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal
guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble
dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains,
spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mid or glass grinding
or polishing waste, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable oil, or products or
mineral oil in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any
wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to
humans or animals.



      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 104°
Fahrenheit or 40° Centigrade, or which will inhibit biological activity in
the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to
exceed 104° Fahrenheit (40° Centigrade).



      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products
of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through.



      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the sewage collection and disposal system in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.



      (8)   Reserved.



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry in the sewer for maintenance and repair.



      (10)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the IRUA's NPDES permit. Color
(in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent
to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by
more than ten percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.



      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes, except as specifically approved by the City Manager, on behalf of
IRUA, in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.



      (12)   Storm water, surface water, groundwater, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the City, on behalf of IRUA.
Such discharges shall not in any case violate any applicable pretreatment
standards (i.e., local limits).



      (13)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.



      (14)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the City Manager, on behalf of IRUA, in a wastewater discharge permit.
Such discharges shall not in any case violate any applicable pretreatment
standards (i.e., local limits).



      (15)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent
to fail a toxicity test.



      (16)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the sewage
collection and disposal system.



      (17)   Any discharge of fats, oils, or greases of animal,
vegetable or petroleum origin is limited to 100 mg/l.



   (b)   Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the sewage
collection and disposal system. All floor drains located in process or
materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment
facility before connecting with the sewage collection and disposal system.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.21  FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.22  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   All requirements of the State of Michigan concerning industrial
pretreatment are hereby incorporated.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.23  SPECIFIC POLLUTANT REQUIREMENTS.



   All users of the system are subject to and shall abide by the "Specific
Pollutant Requirements" as defined and outlined in the IRUA Rules and
Regulations.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.24  SPECIAL AGREEMENT.



   The City has the right to enter into special agreements with industrial
users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the sewage
collection and disposal system. In no case will a special agreement waive
compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement as laid out in the
IRUA Rules and Regulations. However, the industrial user may request a net
gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
It may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard
from the EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can
prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from
the factors considered by the EPA when establishing that pretreatment
standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor
variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR
403.13.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.25  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever the City, acting on behalf of IRUA, finds that any user has
violated or is violating the IRUA Rules and Regulations, or this chapter, or,
a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the City, on behalf of IRUA, or his or her agent
may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of
the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the City. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the IRUA, and City, on IRUA's behalf, to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.26  CONSENT ORDERS.



   Pursuant to IRUA Rules and Regulations, as amended, the City is
empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance,
or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance on IRUA's behalf. Such orders will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Section
1042.28 (Compliance orders) and Section 1042.29 (Cease and desist orders)
hereof and shall be judicially enforceable.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.27  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   (a)   The City, either on its own authority, or acting under the
authority of IRUA, may order any user which causes or contributes to
violation(s) of this chapter, or IRUA Rules and Regulations, or wastewater
discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, to appear before the City and show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken.  Notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the meeting shall be served personally or registered or by
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30 days prior to the
hearing.  Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user.



   (b)   Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate
enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause
hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the
user.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.28  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   When the City finds that a user has violated or continues to violate
this chapter, the Rules and Regulations, as amended, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within five days. If the user
does not come into compliance within five days, sewer service shall be
discontinued until the violator is in compliance.  Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.29  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (a)   When the City finds that a user is violating this chapter, or
IRUA Rules and Regulations, or the user's wastewater discharge permit, or any
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City, under IRUA's
authority when needed, may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements.



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (b)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.30  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (a)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user
that is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, its wastewater
discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the cost
of correcting said violation or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever
is greater. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis.
In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines
shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.



   (b)   Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer
service charge, and the City shall have such other collection remedies as may
be available for other service charges and fees.



   (c)   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of the unpaid balance, and interest
shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.5% per month. A lien against the
individual user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and
penalties.



   (d)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the City to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the
fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request
has merit, the City shall convene a hearing on the matter within 30 days of
receiving the request from the industrial user. In the event the user's
appeal is successful, the payment together with any interest accruing
thereto, shall be returned to the industrial user. The City may add the costs
of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to
the fine.



   (e)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite
for taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.31  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (a)   The City may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary in order
to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present
or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
the public. The City may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
notice and an opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the sewage collection and disposal system, or which presents or
may present an endangerment to the environment.



      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City
Manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
sewage collection or disposal system or its receiving stream, or endangerment
to any individuals. The City shall allow the user to recommence its discharge
when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set
forth in Section 1042.32 (Termination of discharge) are initiated against the
user.



      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the City, prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under Section 1042.27 (Show cause hearing)
or Section 1042.32 (Termination of discharge).



   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.32  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (a)   In addition to failure to provide advance notice of a transfer
of the wastewater discharge permit rendering the transferred permit voidable
on the date of the facility transfer as also defined in Section 5(f) of the
Rules and Regulations, as amended, any user who or which violates the
following conditions of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders
issued hereunder, is subject to termination of discharge:



      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge.



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge.



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for
the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in general sewer
use requirements sections of this chapter or IRUA Rules and Regulations.



   (b)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and shall be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section
1042.27 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.33  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.



   (a)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or any orders
or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any pretreatment
requirements, or the introduction or discharge of any substance into the
sewage collection and disposal system which causes personal injury or
property damage, or the making of any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, wastewater discharge
permit, order, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained
under this chapter, or the tampering with or rendering inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be deemed a
municipal civil infraction pursuant to Section 202.99 of these Codified
Ordinances.



   (b)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for herein, the fine
for each violation of this chapter shall be not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day, plus costs. Each act of violation, and each day on which
any violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (c)   Increased fines may be imposed for repeat violations as
follows:



      (1)   For any first repeat offense, the fine shall be not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, plus costs;



      (2)   For any second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat
offense, the fine shall be not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
day, plus costs.



   (d)   These provisions shall not replace or relieve the violating
user from injunctive relief, civil penalties, or criminal prosecution where
deemed appropriate by the City.



   (e)   Authorized City Official.  The City Manager, and any
representative designated in writing by the City Manager, is hereby
designated as the authorized City official to issue municipal civil
infraction citations for any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.34  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement,
the City may petition the Circuit Court for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. Such other action as
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the City.
A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to
taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.35  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   (a)   Any user who or which willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both.



   (b)   Any user who or which willfully or negligently introduces any
substance into the sewage collection and disposal system which causes
personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) and be subject to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. This
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury
or property damage available under State law.



   (c)   Any user who or which knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certifications in any application record, report, plan or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained pursuant to this
chapter, or a wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this section, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day or imprisoned not more than
90 days, or both.



   (d)   Any person that maliciously, willfully or negligently breaks,
damages, destroys, uncovers, defaces, tampers with or prevents access to any
structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the sewage collection
and disposal system shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.36  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The enforcement remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive
remedies. The City reserves the right to take any, all or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement
response plan. However, the City reserves the right to take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user. These actions may be taken concurrently.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.37  WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.



   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter, orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water
service to the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's
expense, only after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.38  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   Any violation of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders
issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected
or abated as directed by the City Manager or his or her designee. Any person
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances, and/or IRUA Rules and Regulations, when applicable,
governing such nuisance, including reimbursing the City, or the City on
IRUA's behalf, for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said
nuisance.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.39  INFORMANT REWARDS.



   The City, on behalf of the IRUA, is authorized to pay up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or an amount as otherwise established by the City
for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the
event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or
civil penalty levied against the user, the City is authorized to disperse up
to 10% of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single
reward payment may not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.40  CONTRACTOR LISTING.



   Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing
contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a user found
to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards may be
terminated at the discretion of the City.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.41  SURCHARGE COSTS.



   The surcharge costs as established by the City on behalf of IRUA, as
needed, will be carried on and enforced by the City, on IRUA's behalf.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.42  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (a)   The City Council shall establish rates and charges for
services of the sewage collection and disposal system. The rates and charges
set by the City Council shall take into consideration all costs of operation
and maintenance of the system, in addition to the capital costs of both the
collection and disposal systems.



   (b)   Every premises connected to the sewage collection and disposal
system, whether there is any discharge from the premises or not, shall be
charged a facilities maintenance fee on a residential equivalent unit (REU)
basis. A single family unit is considered one REU. In the case of a multiple
unit residence, each unit shall be charged one REU. In December of each year,
or at such other time as may be deemed appropriate, the City shall review REU
allocations, taking into account factors such as the amount of use for each
class of user in the previous year, and shall adjust such REU allocations as
necessary with the revised allocations effective for the following 12-month
period or until a subsequent review.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.43  METHOD OF MEASUREMENT.



   All premises connected directly or indirectly to the sewage collection
and disposal system through the City's collection system, except as
hereinafter provided, shall make payments to the  City in intervals
determined by the City Council and in amounts computed on the basis of the
metered water to the premises. The users of the system that do not have 
metered potable water shall be charged and shall make payments to the City in
amounts computed based upon the number of "residential equivalents" assigned
to such premises in accordance with a residential equivalence table
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.44  NO FREE SERVICE.



   No free sewage collection and disposal system services shall be
furnished to any person.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.45  CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE.



   No person shall receive service from the sewage collection and disposal
system without first completing a contract application and providing evidence
of ownership of the property to be served or, if the person rents or leases
the property being served, until providing sufficient deposit with the City
to be retained by the City until the renter leaves the property being served.
No utility service will be activated without a signed contract, and no
billings shall be made to "occupant" or any person other than the owner of
the property being served, or an approved renter.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.46  BILLING CYCLE; PENALTY; COLLECTION.



   Bills for sewage collection and disposal system service shall be due
and payable when rendered. There shall be added to all bills not paid on or
before the twentieth day of the first month following the end of each quarter
a penalty of 10% of the amount of the bill. The Treasurer shall be
responsible for the proper account.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.47  NON-PAYMENT OF BILLS.



   All bills not paid shall result in the termination of sewage collection
and disposal system services to the premises which may achieved by either
discontinuing water services to the premises or by blocking the sanitary
sewer service lines that serve the premises.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



1042.48  LIENS.



   (a)   By Section 21 of Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as
amended, and by the terms of this chapter, the rates and charges for services
furnished by the sewage collection and disposal system shall be liens on the
property served. The City shall certify those rates and charges delinquent
for six months or more to the City tax assessing officer, who shall enter the
amount of the delinquent rates and charges on the tax roll against the
premises to which the service was rendered, and who shall collect the rates
and charges and enforce the lien in the same manner as provided for the
collection of ad valorem property taxes assessed upon the same roll and the
enforcement of the lien for taxes.



   (b)   For premises equipped with a separate water shut-off, in all
cases where a tenant represents to the City, by filing an affidavit
evidencing the legal execution of a lease containing a provision that the
lessor shall not be liable henceforth for payment of water or sewage system
bills, then the tenant shall pay to the City a deposit as set by resolution
of the City Council from time to time as security for payment of future rates
and charges. If the tenant fails to pay rates and charges the delinquent
rates and charges shall not become a lien against the premises. The City,
shall, however, cease to provide water service to the tenant's premises until
the tenant pays the delinquent charges in full.



(Ord. 499.  Passed 4-9-13.)



CHAPTER 1043
Storm Water Management




General




1043.01   Statutory authorization and title.



1043.02   Findings.



1043.03   Purpose.



1043.04   Applicability, exemptions and general provisions.



1043.05   Definitions.




Storm Water Permits




1043.06   Permit required.



1043.07   Storm water permit review procedures.



1043.08   Drainage plan.



1043.09   Storm water permit review fees.



1043.10   Construction site runoff controls.



1043.11   Financial guarantee.



1043.12   Certificate of occupancy.



1043.13   No change in approved facilities.



1043.14   Terms and conditions of permits.




Storm Water System, Floodplain and Other Standards, Soil Erosion Control




1043.15   Management of and responsibility for storm water system.



1043.16   Storm water system.



1043.17   Storm water discharge rates and volumes.



1043.18   Floodplain standards.



1043.19   Soil erosion and sedimentation control.



1043.20   Building openings.



1043.21   Sump pump discharge.



1043.22   Public health, safety and welfare.




Prohibitions and Exemptions




1043.23   Prohibited discharges.



1043.24   Exempted discharges.



1043.25   Interference with natural or artificial drains.



1043.26   Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway.




Inspection, Monitoring, Reporting and Record Keeping




1043.27   Inspection and sampling.



1043.28   Storm water monitoring facilities.



1043.29   Accidental discharges.



1043.30   Record keeping requirements.




Enforcement




1043.31   Stop work order.



1043.32   Failure to comply; completion.



1043.33   Emergency measures.



1043.34   Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system.



1043.35   Collection of costs; line.



1043.36   Appeals.



1043.37   Suspension of MS4 access.




Storm Water Easements and Maintenance Agreements




1043.38   Applicability of requirements.



1043.39   Storm water management easements.



1043.40   Maintenance agreements.



1043.41   Establishment of County drains.




Performance and Design Standards




1043.42   Performance standards.



1043.43   Design standards.



1043.44   Lot drainage.



1043.45   Resolution to implement performance and design standards.



1043.46   Responsibility to implement Best Management Practices (BMPs).




Other Matters




1043.47   Interpretation.



1043.48   Catch-line headings.



1043.49   Severability.



1043.50   Other ordinances.



 



1043.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Water generally - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1040



   Issuance of building permits - see P. & Z. 1242.06



   Flood Plain Overlay District - see P. & Z. Ch. 1264



GENERAL



1043.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND TITLE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. 117.1 et seq.; the Drain Code of 1956, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. 280.1 et seq.; the Land Division Act, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. 560.1 et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as amended, being M.C.L.A.
141.101, et seq.; and the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. 324.101 et seq.; Section 401(p) of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean Water Act), as amended,
being 33 USC 1342(p) and 40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123 and 124; and other
applicable State and Federal laws.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.02  FINDINGS.



   The City finds that:



   (a)   Water bodies, roadways, structures and other property within,
and downstream of the City are at times subjected to flooding;



   (b)   Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public
and is also a danger to the natural resources of the City and the region;



   (c)   Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds,
resulting in increased storm water runoff rates and volumes, increased
flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport
and deposition;



   (d)   Storm water runoff produced by land development contributes to
increased quantities of water-borne pollutants;



   (e)   Increases of storm water runoff, soil erosion, and non-point
source pollution have occurred as a result of land development, and cause
deterioration of the water resources of the City and downstream
municipalities;



   (f)   Increased storm water runoff rates and volumes, and the
sediments and pollutants associated with storm water runoff from future
development projects within the City will, absent reasonable regulation and
control, adversely affect the City's water bodies and water resources, and
those of downstream municipalities;



   (g)   Storm water runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source
pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation of storm water
runoff from development;



   (h)   Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly
degrade the City's water bodies and water resources;



   (i)   Illicit discharges enter the Municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) through either direct connection (e.g. wastewater piping either
mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm drains) or indirect
connections (e.g., infiltration into the storm drain system or spills
connected);



   (j)   Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges
and connections contained in this chapter and implementing the same will
address many of the deleterious effect of illicit discharges;



   (k)   Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in
this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious
effects of storm water runoff;



   (l)   Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of
the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 07-2002-12. Passed 8-12-02.)



1043.03  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum storm water
management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the
following objectives:



   (a)   To reduce artificially induced flood damage;



   (b)   To minimize increased storm water runoff rates and volumes
from identified new land development;



   (c)   To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses,
culverts and bridges, and other structures;



   (d)   To encourage water recharge into the ground where geologically
favorable conditions exist;



   (e)   To prevent an increase in non-point source pollution;



   (f)   To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their
biological functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes;



   (g)   To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and
streambed stability;



   (h)   To reduce erosion from development or construction projects;



   (i)   To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water
resources by means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion,
and runoff pollution;



   (j)   To reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion
and on-point source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were
developed without storm water management controls meeting the purposes and
standards of this chapter;



   (k)   To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water
bodies and, to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to
protect water bodies from degradation resulting from changing land use where
there are insufficient storm water management controls;



   (l)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user;



   (m)   To prohibit illicit discharges and connection to the Municipal
separate storm sewer system;



   (n)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 07-2002-12. Passed 8-12-02.)



1043.04  APPLICABILITY, EXEMPTIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (a)   This chapter shall apply to any development site which
requires approval of a plat, a site development plan, building permit, or any
other permit for work which will alter storm water drainage characteristics
of the development site, provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply
to the following:



      (1)   The installation or removal of individual mobile homes
within a mobile home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to
the construction, expansion, or modification of a mobile home park.



      (2)   Farm operations and buildings, except dwellings,
directly related to farm operations. This exemption shall not apply to
greenhouses and other similar structures.



      (3)   Plats with preliminary plat approval and other
developments with final land use approval prior to the effective date of
chapter, where such approvals remain in effect.



   (b)   This chapter shall apply to all discharges entering the storm
drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 07-2002-12. Passed 8-12-02.)



1043.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section unless the
context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise:



   (a)   "Authorized enforcement agency." Employees or designees of the
Director of the Municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.



   (b)   "Base flood." A flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   (c)   "Base flood elevation." The high water elevation of the base
flood, commonly referred to as the "100 year flood elevation".



   (d)   "Base flood plain." The area inundated by the base flood.



   (e)   "Best Management Practices (BMPs)."  A practice, or
combination of practices and design criteria that comply with the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality's Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan
Watersheds, or equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the
purposes of this chapter (including, but not limited to minimizing storm
water runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into storm water) as
determined by the City Engineer, and, where appropriate, the standards of the
Ionia County Drain Commissioner.



   (f)   "Building opening."  Any opening of a solid wall such as a
window or door, through which floodwaters could penetrate.



   (g)   "City." The City of Ionia



   (h)   "Clean Water Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33
USC 1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated
thereunder.



   (i)   "Construction site storm water runoff." Storm water runoff
from a development site following an earth change.



   (j)   "Design Engineer."  Registered and licensed professional
engineer responsible for the design of a drainage plan.



   (k)   "Detention."  A system which is designed to capture storm
water and release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure
at a controlled rate.



   (l)   "Developed" or "development." The installation or construction
of impervious surfaces on a development site that require, pursuant to State
law or local ordinance, the City's approval of a site plan, plat, site
condominium, special land use, planned unit development, rezoning of land,
land division approval, private road approval or other approvals required for
the development of land or the erection of buildings or structures, provided,
however, that for purposes of Sections 1043.06 through 1043.14 only,
"developed" or "development" shall not include the actual construction of, or
an addition, extension or modification to, an individual single-family or a
two-family detached dwelling.



   (m)   "Developer." Any person proposing or implementing the
development of land.



   (n)   "Development site." Any land that is being or has been
developed, or that a developer proposes for development.



   (o)   "Discharger." Any person or entity who directly or indirectly
discharges storm water from any property. "Discharger" also means any
employee, officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who
participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or
omission which is or results in a violation of this chapter.



   (p)   "Drain." Any drain as defined in the Drain Code of 1956, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. 280.1, et seq., other than an established County or
intercounty drain.



   (q)   "Drainage."  The collection, conveyance, or discharge of
ground water and/or surface water.



   (r)   "Drainageway." The area within which surface water or ground
water is carried from one part of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot
or parcel or to adjacent land.



   (s)   "Earth change." Any human activity which removes ground cover,
changes the slope or contours of the land, or exposes the soil surface to the
actions of wind and rain. Earth change includes, but is not limited to, any
excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative
roots. Normal landscaping and changes are exempted.



   (t)   "EPA." The United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   (u)   "Erosion." The process by which the ground surface is worn
away by action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.



   (v)   "Exempted discharges." Discharges other than storm water as
specified in Section 1043.24 of this chapter.



   (w)   "Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)." The agency of
the Federal government charged with emergency management.



   (x)   "Flood" or "flooding." A general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resorting from the
overflow of water bodies or the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface
water runoff from any source.



   (y)   "Flood-proofing." Any structural and/or non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures or property that reduce or
eliminate flood damage to land, or improvements utilities and structures.



   (z)   "Floodplain." Any land area subject to periodic flooding.



   (aa)   "Flood protection elevation (FPE)." The base flood elevation
plus one foot at any given location.



   (bb)   "Floodway." The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved to carry and discharge a base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth of a
foot due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage.



   (cc)   "Grading." Any stripping, excavating, filling, and
stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its excavated
or filled condition.



   (dd)   "Hazardous materials." Any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, safety, property or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   (ee)   "ICDC." Ionia County Drain Commissioner.



   (ff)   "Illicit connection." Any method or means for conveying an
illicit discharge into water bodies or the City's storm water system.



   (gg)   "Illicit discharge." Any discharge to water bodies that does
not consist entirely of storm water, discharges pursuant to the terms of an
NPDES permit, or exempted discharges as defined in this chapter.



   (hh)   "Impervious surface." Surface that does not allow storm water
runoff to slowly percolate into the ground.



   (ii)   "Lowest floor." The lowest floor or the lowest enclosed area
(including a basement), but not including an unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure which is usable solely for parking of vehicles or building access.



   (jj)   "MDEQ." Michigan Department of Environment Quality.



   (kk)   "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
storm water discharge." A permit issued by the EPA (or by a state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   (ll)   "Non-storm water discharge." Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   (mm)   "NPDES." National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.



   (nn)   "Overland flow-way." Surface area that conveys a concentrated
flow of storm water runoff.



   (oo)   "Person." An individual, firm, partnership, association,
public or private corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or any other
legal entity.



   (pp)   "Plan." Written narratives, specifications, drawings,
sketches, written standards, operating procedures, or any combination of
these which contain information pursuant to this chapter.



   (qq)   "Pollutant." A substance discharged which includes, but is
not limited to the following: any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids,
yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment,
incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
wastes, biological wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial and
agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a
pollutant under the Clean Water Act.



   (rr)   "Premises." Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of
land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   (ss)   "Property owner." Any person having legal or equitable title
to property or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over
any property.



   (tt)   "Retention." A system which is designed to capture storm
water and contain it until it infiltrates the soil or evaporates.



   (uu)   "Soil erosion." The stripping of soil and weathered rock from
land creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling
formation of new sedimentary deposits.



   (vv)   "State of Michigan Water Quality Standards." All applicable
State rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the
provisions of Section 3106 of Part 31 of 1994 PA 451, as amended.



   (ww)   "Storm drain." A system of open or enclosed conduits and
appurtenant structures intended to convey or manage storm water runoff,
ground water and drainage.



   (xx)   "Storm water permit." A permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.



   (yy)   "Storm water pollution prevention plan." A document which
describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm
water, storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent practicable.



   (zz)   "Storm water runoff." The runoff and drainage of
precipitation resulting from rainfall or snowmelt or other natural event or
process.



   (aaa)   "Storm water runoff facility." The method, structure, area,
system, or other equipment or measures which are designed to receive,
control, store, or convey storm water.



   (bbb)   "Stream." A river, stream or creek which may or may not be
serving as a drain, or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed,
and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water.



   (ccc)   "Wastewater." Any water or other liquid, other than
uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility.



   (ddd)   "Water body." A river, lake, stream, creek or other
watercourse or wetlands.



   (eee)   "Watershed." A region draining into a water body.



   (fff)   "Wetlands." Land characterized by the presence of water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or aquatic
life.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 07-2002-12. Passed 8-12-02.)



STORM WATER PERMITS



1043.06  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (a)   A developer shall not engage in any development without first
receiving a storm water permit from the City pursuant to Section 1043.07 of
this chapter.



   (b)   The granting of a storm water permit shall authorize only such
development for which the permit is required, subject to the terms of the
permit, and it shall not be deemed to approve other development or other land
use activities.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.07  STORM WATER PERMIT REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   'The City shall grant a storm water permit, which may impose terms and
conditions in accordance with Section 1043.14 of this chapter, and which
shall be granted only upon compliance with each of the following requirements:



   (a)   The developer has submitted a drainage plan complying with
Section 1043.08 of this chapter.



   (b)   The drainage plan contains a description of an adequate,
temporary storm water retention system to prevent construction site storm
water runoff, satisfying the requirements of Section 1043.10 of this chapter,
and the developer has obtained a soil erosion permit, if necessary.



   (c)   One of the following conditions is satisfied:



      (1)   The developer provides:



         A.   A permanent on-site storm water system sufficient
to provide on-site detention of storm water runoff in a 25 year storm event;
and



         B.   A direct connection for all storm water runoff that
will be discharged from and through the development site in a 100 year storm
event; or



      (2)   The developer provides a permanent on-site storm water
system with a restricted outlet designed to result in no net increase in
storm water runoff volume or rate onto any adjacent property in a 100 year
storm event.



   (d)   The developer has paid or deposited the storm water permit
review fee pursuant to Section 1043.09 of this chapter.



   (e)   The developer has paid or posted the applicable financial
guarantee pursuant to Section 1043.11 of this chapter.



   (f)   The developer provides all easements necessary to implement
the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter
including, but not limited to, Section 1043.39 of this chapter. All easements
shall be acceptable to the City in form and substance and shall be recorded
with the Ionia County Register of Deeds.



   (g)   The drainage plan is designed in conformity with the City's
design and performance standards for drains and storm water management
systems, as set forth in Sections 1043.42 through 1043.44 of this chapter.



   (h)   All storm water runoff facilities shall be designed in
accordance with the then-current BMPs.



   (i)   The developer provides the required maintenance agreement for
routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of all storm water runoff
facilities and in compliance with the approved drainage plan and this chapter
including, but not limited to, Section 1043.40 of this chapter. The
maintenance agreement shall be acceptable to the City in form and substance
and shall be recorded with the Ionia County Register of Deeds.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.08  DRAINAGE PLAN.



   The developer shall provide a drainage plan to the City for review and
approval by the City. The drainage plan shall identify and contain all of the
following:



   (a)   The location of the development site and water bodies that
will receive storm water runoff. Storm water discharges shall outlet within
the same drainage basin or district where flow originates and generally may
not be diverted to another drainage basin/district



   (b)   The existing and proposed topography of the development site,
including the alignment and boundary of the natural drainage courses, with
contours having a maximum interval of one foot (using  USGS datum). The
information shall be superimposed on the pertinent Ionia County soil map.



   (c)   The development tributary area to each point of discharge from
the development.



   (d)   Calculations for the final peak discharge rates.



   (e)   Calculations for any facility or structure size and
configuration.



   (f)   A drawing showing all proposed storm water runoff facilities
with existing and final grades.



   (g)   The sizes and locations of upstream and downstream culverts
serving the major drainage routes flowing into and out of the development
site. Any significant off-site and on-site drainage outlet restrictions other
than culverts should be noted on the drainage map.



   (h)   An implementation plan for construction and inspection of all
storm water runoff facilities necessary to the overall drainage plan,
including a schedule of the estimated dates of completing construction of the
storm water runoff facilities shown on the plan and an identification of the
proposed inspection procedures to ensure that the storm water runoff'
facilities are constructed in accordance with the approved drainage plan.



   (i)   A plan to ensure the effective control of construction site
storm water runoff and sediment track-out onto roadways.



   (j)   Drawings, profiles, and specifications for the construction of
the storm water runoff facilities reasonably necessary to ensure that storm
water runoff will be drained, stored, or otherwise controlled in accordance
with this chapter.



   (k)   A maintenance agreement, in form and substance acceptable to
the City, for ensuring maintenance of any privately-owned storm water runoff
facilities. The maintenance agreement shall include the developer's written
commitment to provide routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of the
facilities and, in the event that the facilities are not maintained in
accordance with the approved drainage plan, the agreement shall authorize the
City to maintain any on-site storm water runoff facility as reasonably
necessary, at the developer's expense. Such agreement shall be signed prior
to issuance of construction permits and shall be recorded on the deed for the
property for perpetual maintenance.



   (l)   The name of the engineering firm and the registered
professional engineer that designed the drainage plan and that will inspect
final construction of the storm water runoff facilities. Should a storm water
system, as built, fail to comply to the City's design and performance
standards, it is the developer's responsibility to design and construct at
his or her expense, any additional and/or alternative storm water management
facilities. Such additional facilities shall be subject to approval by the
City of Ionia.



   (m)   All design information must be compatible for conversion to
City of Ionia Geographic Information System (CIGIS).



   (n)   Any other information necessary for the City to verify that
the drainage plan complies with the City's design and performance standards
for drains and storm water management systems.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.09  STORM WATER PERMIT REVIEW FEES.



   (a)   All expenses and costs incurred by the City directly
associated with processing, reviewing and approving or denying a storm water
permit application shall be paid (or reimbursed) to the City from the funds
in a separate escrow account established by the developer, as provided in
division (b) of this section. The City may draw funds from a developers
escrow account to reimburse the City for out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
the City relating to the application. Such reimbursable expenses include, but
are not limited to, expenses related to the following:



      (1)   Services of the City Attorney directly related to the
application.



      (2)   Services of the City Engineer directly related to the
application.



      (3)   Services of other independent contractors working for
the City which are directly related to the application.



      (4)   Any additional public hearings, required mailings and
legal notice requirements necessitated by the application.



   (b)   At the time, a developer applies for a storm water permit, the
developer shall deposit with the City Clerk, as an escrow deposit, an initial
amount as determined by resolution of the City Council for such matters and
shall provide additional amounts as requested by the City in such increments
as are specified in said resolution. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow
account after the application has been fully processed, reviewed, and the
final City approval and acceptance of the development has occurred will be
refunded to the developer with no interest to be paid on those funds. At no
time prior to the City's final decision on an application shall the balance
in the escrow account fall below the required initial amount. If the funds in
the account are reduced to less than the required initial amount, the
developer shall deposit into the account an additional amount as determined
by Ionia City Council resolution, before the application review process will
be continued. Additional amounts may be required to be placed in the escrow
account by the developer, at the discretion of the City.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.10  CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROLS.



   Prior to making any earth change on a development site regulated by
this chapter, the developer shall first obtain a soil erosion permit issued
in accordance with Part 91 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as
amended, if one is required. The developer shall install storm water runoff
facilities and shall phase the development activities so as to prevent
construction site storm water runoff and off-site sedimentation. During all
construction activities on the development site, the City Engineer may
inspect the development site to ensure compliance with the approved
construction site runoff controls.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.11  FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.



   (a)   The City Engineer shall not approve a storm water permit until
the developer submits to the City, in a form and amount satisfactory to the
City, a letter of credit or other financial guarantee for the timely and
satisfactory construction of all storm water runoff facilities and site
grading in accordance with the approved drainage plan. Upon certification by
a registered professional engineer that the storm water runoff facilities
have been completed in accordance with the approved drainage plan including,
but not limited to, the provisions contained in Section 1043.08(h) of this
chapter, the City may release the letter of credit, or other financial
guarantee subject to final City acceptance and approval.



   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, the amount
of the financial guarantee shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), unless
the City determines that a greater amount is appropriate, in which case the
basis for such determination shall be provided to the developer in writing.
In determining whether an amount greater than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) is appropriate, the City shall consider the size and type of the
development, the size and type of the on-site storm water system, and the
nature of the off-site storm water runoff facilities the development will
utilize.



   (c)   The City Community Development Director may reduce or waive
the amount of the financial guarantee for a development that will not
increase the percentage of impervious surface of the development site by more
than ten percent.



   (d)   This chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as
relieving a developer of its obligation to pay all costs associated with
on-site private storm water runoff facilities as well as those costs arising
from the need to make other drainage improvements in order to reduce a
development's impact on a drain consistent with adopted design standards.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.12  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until storm water runoff
facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved drainage plan;
provided, however, the City may issue a certificate of occupancy if an
acceptable letter of credit or other financial guarantee has been submitted
to the City, for the timely and satisfactory construction of all storm water
runoff facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved drainage
plan.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.13  NO CHANGE IN APPROVED FACILITIES.



   Storm water runoff facilities, after construction and approval, shall
be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the approved drainage
plan, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except in
accordance with the approved drainage plan, or in accordance with approved
amendments or revisions in the plan.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.14  TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.



   In granting a storm water permit, the City may impose such terms and
conditions as are reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter. A developer shall comply with such terms and conditions.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



STORM WATER SYSTEM, FLOODPLAIN AND OTHER STANDARDS, SOIL EROSION CONTROL



1043.15  MANAGEMENT OF AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORM WATER SYSTEM.



   The City is not responsible for providing drainage facilities on
private properly for the management of storm water on said property. It shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to provide for, and maintain,
private storm water runoff facilities serving the property and to prevent or
correct the accumulation of debris that interferes with the drainage function
of a water body.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.16  STORM WATER SYSTEM.



   All storm water runoff facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local ordinances, and
rules and regulations.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.17  STORM WATER DISCHARGE RATES AND VOLUMES.



   The City is authorized to establish minimum design standards for storm
water discharge release rates and to require dischargers to implement on-site
retention, detention or other methods necessary to control the rate and
volume of surface water runoff discharged into the storm water drainage
system, in the following circumstances:



   (a)   A parcel of land is being developed an a manner that increases
the impervious surface area of the parcel; or



   (b)   The discharge exceeds the City-calculated pre-development
discharge characteristics for the subject property, and the City determines
that the discharge is a violation of the drainage, flooding or soil erosion
regulations of this chapter.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.18  FLOODPLAIN STANDARDS.



   (a)   All new buildings and substantial improvements to existing
buildings shall be protected from flood damage up to the Flood Protection
Elevation (FPE) and shall be in accordance with all applicable Federal, State
and local ordinances, and rules and regulations. Floodway alteration shall be
permitted only upon review and approval by the City, in accordance with an
approved drainage plan.



   (b)   A drainage plan. providing for the filling or alteration of a
floodway may include provisions for maintaining stability of the banks of
streams or other water bodies, by means of the establishing of buffer zones
and other means of providing protection of the slopes and banks of water
bodies.



   (c)   Within any required buffer zone, no earth change shall take
place except in accordance with the approved drainage plan.  Such a plan may
also include provisions for the replacement of floodplain storage volume,
where such storage volume is lost or diminished as a result of approved
development.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.19  SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.



   (a)   All persons who cause, in whole or in part, any earth change
to occur shall provide soil erosion and sedimentation control so as to
adequately prevent soils from being eroded and discharged or deposited onto
adjacent properties or into a storm water drainage system, a public street or
right-of-way, wetland, creek, stream, water body, or floodplain. All
development shall be in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and
local ordinances, rules and regulations.



   (b)   During any earth change which exposes soil to an increased
risk of erosion or sediment track-out, the property owner and other persons
causing or participating in the earth change shall do the following:



      (1)   Comply with the storm water management standards of this
chapter.



      (2)   Obtain and comply with the terms of a soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit if required by law.



      (3)   Prevent damage to any public utilities or services
within the limits of grading and within any routes of travel or areas of work
of construction equipment.



      (4)   Prevent damage to or impairment of any water body on or
near the location of the earth change or affected thereby.



      (5)   Prevent damage to adjacent or nearby land.



      (6)   Apply for all required approvals or permits prior to the
commencement of work.



      (7)   Proceed with the proposed work only in accordance with
the approved plans and in compliance with this chapter.



      (8)   Maintain all required soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures, including but not limited to, measures required for
compliance with the terms of this chapter.



      (9)   Promptly remove all soil, sediment, debris, or other
materials applied, dumped, tracked, or otherwise deposited on any lands,
public streets, sidewalks, or other public ways or facilities, including
catch basins, storm sewers, ditches, drainage swales, or water bodies.
Removal of all such soil, sediment, debris or other materials within  24
hours shall be considered prima facie compliance with this requirement,
unless such materials present an immediate hazard to public health anal
safety.



      (10)   Refrain from grading lands at locations near or
adjoining lands, public streets, sidewalks, alleys, or other public or
private property without providing adequate support or other measures so as
to protect such other lands, streets, sidewalks, or other property from
settling, cracking or sustaining other damage.



      (11)   Request and obtain inspection of soil erosion and
sedimentation control facilities, by the City at such frequency as required
by the City.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.20  BUILDING OPENINGS.



   (a)   No building opening shall be constructed below the following
elevations:



      (1)   One foot above the 100-year floodplain.



      (2)   The building opening established at the time of plat or
development approval and on file in the City Engineering Department.



      (3)   Three feet above the top of any downstream culvert.



      (4)   Four feet above the bottom of any permanent and defined
drain.



   (b)   A waiver from elevations stated in Section 1043.19(a) may be
granted by the City Engineer following receipt of a certification from a
registered professional engineer demonstrating that the proposed elevation
does not pose a risk of flooding.



   (c)   Upon completion of construction of the structure's foundation
and/or slab on grade, a registered land surveyor shall certify any minimum
building opening elevation specified by this chapter. This certificate shall
attest that the building opening elevation complies with the standards of
this chapter. The permittee for the building permit shall submit the
certificate to the City Building Inspections official prior to the
commencement of framing and/or structural steel placement. If the surveyor
should find that the minimum building opening elevation is below the
elevation specified in division(a)(2) or (3) of this section, that opening
must be raised using a method that meets with the approval of the City. After
reconstruction, a registered land surveyor or engineer shall re-certify that
the minimum building opening elevation complies with the standards of this
chapter prior to the commencement of framing and or structural steel
placement.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.21  SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE.



   (a)   Whenever building footing drains are required or utilized, a
direct connection between the footing drains through a sump pump-check valve
system to a storm sewer is required. A gravity system is not permitted.



   (b)   A storm water lateral shall be provided for each parcel at the
time of storm sewer construction.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.22  PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE.



   Protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall be a primary
consideration in the design of all storm water runoff facilities.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS



1043.23  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (a)   No person shall discharge to a water body, directly or
indirectly, any substance other than storm water or an exempted discharge.
Any person discharging storm water shall effectively prevent pollutants from
being discharged with the storm water, except in accordance with best
management practices.



   (b)   The City is authorized to require dischargers to implement
pollution prevention misuses, utilizing BMPs, necessary to prevent or reduce
the discharge of pollutants into the City's storm water drainage system.



   (c)   Illicit Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the Municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct, or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited
except as described as follows:



      (1)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



      (2)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (d)   Illicit Connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
section if the person connects a line conveying wastewater to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 07-2002-12. Passed 8-12-02.)



1043.24  EXEMPTED DISCHARGES.



   The following non-storm water discharges shall be permissible, provided
that they do not result in a violation of State of Michigan water quality
standards:



   (a)   Water supply line flushing;



   (b)   Landscape irrigation;



   (c)   Diverted stream flows;



   (d)   Rising ground water;



   (e)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm drains;



   (f)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



   (g)   Discharges from potable water sources;



   (h)   Foundation drains;



   (i)   Air conditioning condensate;



   (j)   Individual residential car washing;



   (k)   Dechlorinated swimming pool water;



   (l)   Street wastewater;



   (m)   Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities; or



   (n)   Discharges for which a specific Federal or State permit has
been issued.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.25  INTERFERENCE WITH NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL DRAINS.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam,
confine, pave, alter the course of, or otherwise interfere with any natural
or constructed drain, or drainageway without first submitting a drainage plan
to the City and receiving approval of that plan. Any deviation from the
approved plan is a violation of this chapter. This section shall not
prohibit, however, necessary emergency action so as to prevent or mitigate
drainage that would be injurious to the environment, the public health,
safety, or welfare.



   (b)   No filling, blocking, fencing or above-surface vegetation
planting shall take place within a floodway.



   (c)   For an overland flow way:



      (1)   Silt screen fences shall not be permitted below the top
of the bank of a water body.



      (2)   Chain link fences shall be permitted if the City
determines that the fence will not obstruct or divert the flow of water.



      (3)   If a fence is removed by the City for drain access or
drain, maintenance, the fence shall be replaced by the owner of the fence at
the owner's expense.



      (4)   No shrubs or trees shall be planted below the top of the
bank of a water body.



   (d)   Shrubs, trees or other above-ground vegetation shall not be
planted over the top of an underground storm sewer or over the top of the
easement within which the storm sewer has been installed.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.26  STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS IN DRAINAGEWAY.



   Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
store or stockpile within a drainageway any hazardous or toxic materials
unless adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to
prevent any such materials from entering a drainageway.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



INSPECTION, MONITORING, REPORTING AND RECORD KEEPING



1043.27  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   To assure compliance with the standards in this pervasively regulated
area, the City may inspect and/or obtain storm water samples from storm water
runoff facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the
City's properly identified representative to enter upon the premises of the
discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or
sampling. The City shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice of
such inspection and/or sampling. The City or its properly identified
representative may place on the discharger's property the equipment or
devices used for such sampling or inspection.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.28  STORM WATER MONITORING FACILITIES.



   A discharger of storm water runoff shall provide and operate equipment
or devices for the monitoring of storm water runoff, so as to provide for
inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water body
or a storm water runoff facility, when directed in writing to do so by the
City. The City may require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment
and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling
and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse
effects from or as a result of such discharges may occur. All such equipment
and devices for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.29  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   (a)   Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a water body
any substance other than storm water or an exempted discharge shall
immediately inform the City concerning the discharge. If such information is
given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with
the City within five days. The written report shall specify:



      (1)   The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof.



      (2)   The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the
discharge.



      (3)   All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge,
and all measures proposes to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrence.



      (4)   The name and telephone number of the person making the
report, and the name of a person who may be contacted for additional
information on the matter.



   (b)   A properly-reported accidental discharge shall be an
affirmative defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this
ordinance against a discharges for such discharge. It shall not, however, be
a defense to a legal action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain
recovery of costs or to obtain other relief as a result of or arising out of
the discharge. A discharge shall be considered properly reported only if the
discharges complies with all the requirements of Section 1043.29(a).



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.30  RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENT.



   Any person subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no
less than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents,
memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on magnetic
or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records, relating to
monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or storm water
runoff from any property.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



ENFORCEMENT



1043.31  STOP WORK ORDER.



   Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or
in part, a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City is authorized
to issue a stop work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations
or adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or
who are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop
work order shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The City may also
undertake or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective
measures so as to prevent violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce
the effects of noncompliance herewith. The cost of any such protective
measures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the properly upon which
the work is being done and the responsibility of any person carrying out or
participating in the work, sad such cost shall be a lien upon the property.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.32  FAILURE TO COMPLY; COMPLETION.



   In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, the City may, after the giving of reasonable
notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the
owner shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the City for all costs of such
work.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.33  EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to
protect public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life,
injury or damage to property, the City is authorized to carry out or arrange
for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the
cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this
chapter, and shall promptly reimburse the City for all of such costs.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.34  COST RECOVERY FOR DAMAGE TO STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.



   A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City as the
result of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or
causes damage to, or impairs a storm drain, or violates any of the provisions
of this chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties
levied by the EPA or MDEQ for violation of an NPDES permit, attorney fees,
and other costs and expenses.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.35  COLLECTION OF COSTS; LIEN.



   Costs incurred by the City and the Drain Commissioner pursuant to
Sections 1043.31, 1043.32, 1043.33, and 1043.34 shall be a lien on the
premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the
Public Acts of 1933, as amended from time to time. Any such charges which are
delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the City
Treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises
and the costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same
manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and
the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful
enforcement methods, the City or the Drain Commissioner shall have all
remedies authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.36  APPEALS.



   Any person as to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied
may appeal in writing, not later than 30 days after the action or decision
being appealed from, to the Ionia City Council the action or decision whereby
any such provision was so applied. Such appeal shall identify the matter
being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The City Council shall consider
the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the
action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the City Council may
consider the recommendations of the City Engineer and the comments of other
persons having knowledge of the matter. In considering any such appeal, the
City Council may grant a variance from the terms of this chapter so as to
provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed, but only
upon finding that the following requirements are satisfied:



   (a)   The application of the chapter provisions being appealed will
present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development
site; provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the
need for the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to
comply with the chapter; and



   (b)   The granting of the relief requested will not substantially
prevent the goals and purposes sought to be accomplished by this chapter, nor
result in less effective management of storm water runoff.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.37  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (a)   Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations.
The City may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to
the MS4 or the environment or to minimize danger to persons.



   (b)   Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any
person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval
of the City.



(Ord. 07-2002-12. Passed 8-12-02.)



STORM WATER EASEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS



1043.38  APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS.



   The requirements of Sections 1043.39 through 1043.41  concerning storm
water easements and maintenance agreements shall apply to all persons
required to submit a drainage plan to the City for review and approval.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.39  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENTS.



   The developer shall provide all storm water management easements
necessary to implement the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply
with this chapter in form and substance required by the City and shall record
such easements as directed by the City. The easements shall assure access for
proper inspection and maintenance of storm water runoff facilities and shall
provide adequate emergency overland flow-ways.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.40  MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.



   The developer shall provide all storm water maintenance agreements
necessary to implement the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply
with this chapter in form and substance as required by the City, and shall
record such agreements as directed by the City. The maintenance agreements
shall, among other matters, assure access for proper inspection and
maintenance of storm water runoff facilities and adequate emergency overland
flow-ways.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.41  ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNTY DRAINS.



   Prior to final approval, all storm water management facilities for
platted subdivisions shall be established as County drains, as authorized in
Section 433, Chapter 18 of the Michigan Drain Code (PA 40 of 1956, as
amended) for long-term maintenance.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS



1043.42  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   In order to achieve the goals and purposes of this chapter, the
following three storm water management zones (Zones A, B and C) are hereby
established. The Zones are shown on the map attached as Appendix A of
original Ordinance 07-2002-10 and incorporated herein by reference.



   (a)   Zone A. Zone A represents areas which require the most
protective storm water management regulations. The goal of this zone is to
preserve the natural condition of water bodies included in it, in whole or in
part Zone A has, in general, little impervious surface area and few storm
water facilities. In this zone, when site conditions permit infiltration of
storm water runoff shall be required, rather than the directed flow of storm
water runoff into water bodies. This storm water management practice provides
greater protection for surface water quality, and also assists in augmenting
stream base flow, reduction of flash storm flows and prevention of stream
bank erosion. Section 1043.43 of this chapter specifies design criteria for
Zone A, in order that the volume and rate of storm water runoff are
controlled at predevelopment levels.



   (b)   Zone B. Zone B represents developed areas that have
significant impervious surfaces and storm water runoff facilities in place.
The goal of Zone B is the control of storm water runoff in order to prevent
further destabilizing of streams and other water bodies. In this zone, the
use of detention ponds, the maintenance and enhancement of buffer strips and
other measures to reduce directly connected impervious areas are specified in
Section 1043.43 of this chapter for the achieving of the storm water
management standards applicable to Zone B. The management practices for this
zone are intended to maintain existing water quality and to alleviate adverse
downstream impact on water bodies.



   (c)   Zone C. Zone C consists of highly urbanized areas, or areas
where there has been significant modification of drainageways. The amount of
impervious surface area in Zone C is generally greater than 25 percent. Among
the measures required in Zone C, as stated in Section 1043.43 of this
chapter, are the use of sediment basins, the maintenance and enhancement of
buffer strips along water bodies and the reduction of impervious surface
areas that are directly connected to water bodies. An important element of
storm water management practice in Zone C is the control and prevention, of
sedimentation, in order to reduce pollution of water bodies.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



   (d)   Storm Water Management Zones.



      (1)   In any single development site, up to three different
detention volumes may be calculated to determine the staged outlet elevations:



         A.   Water quality control;



         B.   Bank erosion control; and



         C.   Flood control.



   These volumes are not intended to be additive; the flood control volume
shall include the water quality control and bank erosion control volumes.



      (2)   The default flood control volume shall be based on
detaining the 25-year storm frequency so long as the downstream storm water
conveyance has adequate capacity and includes an acceptable emergency
overland floodway. If the design engineer determines the downstream
conveyance system is not adequate or an acceptable emergency overland
floodway does not exist, then the flood control volume shall be based on
detaining the 100-year storm.



      (3)   The Planning Commission, as part of its ongoing Master
Plan Work, shall designate the Storm Water Management Zones.



   (e)   Flood Plain Protection.



      (1)   Natural floodway filling or alteration shall not be
allowed without review and approval by the City and compliance with the
Floodplain Regulatory Authority found in Part 31, Water Resources Protection,
of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as
amended (NREPA) on watercourses with contributing drainage area of two square
miles or greater. If a floodway has not been mapped, the applicant's
consultant shall provide the floodway delineation to the City for approval.



      (2)   Natural floodway fringe filling or alteration shall not
be allowed without review and approval by the City and compliance with the
Floodplain Regulatory Authority found in Part 31, Water Resources Protection,
of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as
amended (NREPA) on watercourses with contributing drainage are of two square
miles or greater. If a floodplain has not  been mapped, the applicant's
consultant shall provide the floodplain delineation including the floodway,
to the City for approval.



      (3)   To provide for streambank stability, a buffer zone is to
be established and called out on a recorded plat, an approved block grading
plan, a site plan, or an improvement plan. This zone shall consist of
existing natural tree and vegetation slope protection within a minimum of 25
feet from the ordinary high-water mark. This buffer zone shall be maintained
as is, that is, no earth change or disturbance is to take place.



      (4)   Replacement of lost floodplain shall meet the following
criteria:



         A.   Replacement of the loss of floodplain storage
volume at a one to one ratio unless watershed conditions warrant a higher
ratio. This applies to floodplain associated with rainfall events up to a
100-year frequency. The grading plan shall provide for an equivalent volume
of storage for floodplains associated with more frequent events such as 10
and 25 year frequencies.



         B.   Storm water detention does not apply toward the
replacement volume.



         C.   Floodplain storage volume shall be computed above
the seasonal high ground water level only.



         D.   The inflow and outflow rates to the area shall be
consistent with predevelopment rates.



         E.   Up to 50 percent of the floodplain mitigation
storage volume may be used for snow storage.



         F.   The proximity of the floodplain mitigation area
shall provide for an equivalent hydrologic impact to the receiving stream and
adjacent parcels.



(Res. 07-2002-01R. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.43  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The design standards for storm water runoff facilities for Zones A, B
and C, as described in Section 1043.42, are the following:



 

 

Zone A

 

Zone B

 

Zone C



Criteria
 
High quality waters. Meets water quality standards. Less than 10%
imperviousness.
 
Degraded physical, biological or water quality indicators. 10% to 25%
imperviousness.
 
Heavily degraded physical, biological or water quality indicators. Greater
than 25% imperviousness.


Storm Water Management Standards
 
Use infiltration basins, infiltration trenches, extended detention basins,
and/or constructed wetlands. Maintain and enhance buffer strips.
 
Use detention ponds, maintain and enhance buffer strips, and reduce directly
connected impervious area.
 
Use sediment basins, maintain and enhance buffer strips and reduce directly
connected impervious area.


Water Quality Control
 
Detain the first 0.5" of runoff from the contributing watershed, with
detention per Zone B and infiltration where conditions permit, or provide
equivalent treatment.
 
Detain the first 0.5" of runoff from the contributing watershed for 24 hours
or provide equivalent treatment.
 
Provide sedimentation control within the drainage system.


Bank Erosion Control
 
Rate of release shall be limited to 0.05 cfs/acre for a 2-year storm event.
 
None
 
Storm water runoff shall not exceed the capacity of the downstream conveyance
system.


Flood Control
 
Detention with infiltration when conditions permit. Release rate of 0.13
cfs/acre per KCDC rules.
 
Release rate of 0.13 cfs/acre per KCDC rules.
 
Direct conveyance of storm water runoff with the capacity of downstream
system.



 



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.44  LOT DRAINAGE.



   (a)   Any drainage situation not involving any public property water
is the responsibility of the proper owner.



   (b)   In plat and site plan review, the City will only review
private property drainage for the purpose of assuring that private property
can be drained.



   (c)   Lot grading and private property drainage is a civil matter
among the property owners affected.



   (d)   To aid contractors and builders in grading private property, a
lot grading plan will be required on all development and such information
shall be disbursed along with the building permit. This lot grading plan must
show:



      (1)   Any established minimum building opening.



      (2)   Floodway and floodplain elevations.



      (3)   All storm sewers, the rise, grades, invert elevations
and top of casting elevations.



      (4)   All storm sewer laterals.



      (5)   All utility and drainage easements and their full
description.



      (6)   Minimum basement elevation for sanitary sewer.



      (7)   Direction of drainage on each lot.



      (8)   Elevations of any constructed surface drainage
facilities.



      (9)   Surface grading of the entire parcel.



   (e)   A minimum rear yard of 25 feet prior to any drainage
encumbrance is required. This will allow opportunity for rear yard use for
sheds, play equipment, etc., without concern about water damage or
inconvenience.



   (f)   Prior to construction of any structure on a parcel or lot upon
which a floodway easement, floodplain and drainageway exists, the permittee
must obtain from the City, a copy of the approved plans showing the location
and design elevations of that floodway, floodplain and drainageway. Upon
completion of the structure and prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit,
the permittee must provide a certification from a registered land surveyor
that the floodway, floodplain and drainageway grades and dimensions are as
designed. If the floodway, floodplain and drainageway does not conform to the
approved plans, the floodway, floodplain and drainageway must be
reconstructed and certified prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for
that lot or parcel. Concurrent floodway, floodplain and drainageway
reconstruction and issuance of an occupancy permit are permitted only if that
action does not present a danger to the safety and welfare of any affected
property. To permit concurrent action, the permittee shall provide the City
with a performance bond, a letter of credit, or a cash deposit to cover the
cost of said reconstruction at a dollar amount established by the City.



(Res. 07-2002-01R. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.45  RESOLUTION TO IMPLEMENT PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The Council of the City may adopt a resolution establishing more
detailed design and performance standards for storm water runoff facilities,
consistent with the terms of this chapter, and in order to further implement
its goals and purposes.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.46  RESPONSIBILITY TO IMPLEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs)



   The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge or prohibited materials or other wastes into the Municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and
non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or
premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
Municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be
part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 07-2002-12. Passed 8-12-02.)



OTHER MATTERS



1043.47  INTERPRETATION.



   Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their
common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases defined in
Section 1043.05 of this chapter shall be construed according to the
respective definitions given in that section. Technical words and technical
phrases that are not defined in this chapter but which have acquired
particular meanings in law or in technical usage shall be construed according
to such meanings.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.48  CATCH-LINE HEADINGS.



   The catch-line headings of the subchapters and sections of this chapter
are intended for convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting
the meaning or interpretation of the text of the subchapters or sections to
which they may refer.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.49  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and
if any part or provision of this chapter should be declared invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect any other part or provision of the chapter.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.50  OTHER ORDINANCES.



   This chapter shall be in addition to other ordinances of the City, and
shall not be deemed to repeal or replace other ordinances or parts thereof
except to the extent that such repeal is specifically provided for in this
subchapter.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



1043.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be responsible for a Municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine
of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense, and not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a subsequent offense, plus
costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions as authorized under Chapter 87
of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 and other applicable laws, including,
without limitation, equitable relief provided, however, that the violation
stated in division (b) of this section shall be a misdemeanor. Each day such
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall
make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine for each day. The
rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and in
addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission or determination
of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, "subsequent offense" means
a violation of the provisions of this chapter committed by the same person
within 12 months of a previous violation of the same provision of this
chapter for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to
be responsible.



      (3)   The City Director of Community Development is authorized
to issue Municipal civil infraction citations to any person alleged to be
violating any provision of this chapter.



   (b)   Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work
order issued under Section 1043.31 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than 93
days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and such person shall also pay such
costs as may be imposed in the discretion of the court.



   (c)   Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this
chapter shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.



(Ord. 07-2002-10. Passed 7-2-02.)



Chapter 1044
Water and Sewer Rates



EDITOR’S NOTE:  Chapter 1044 was repealed in it’s entirety by Ord. 466
passed 6-2-09.



Chapter 1046
Gas



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 1046.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Utilities generally - see CHTR. Art. IX



   Gas plants and systems in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4e,
117.4f



   Oil and gas generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 319.1 et seq., 486.251 et seq.



   Fees - see ADM. 214.05



   Standards for utilities in streets - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.19



   Gas main leakage - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.09



   Utilities in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1230.01



Chapter 1048
Electricity



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 1048.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Utilities generally - see CHTR. Art. IX



   Electricity generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, §§ 24, 25; M.C.L.A.
§§ 486.201 et seq.



   Electrical Code in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 1174b et
seq., 117.4f



   Fees - see ADM. 214.05



   Utility poles - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.07



   Standards for utilities and streets - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.19



   Tree removal for utility line clearance - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.13



   Utilities in subdivisions - see P. & Z. 1230.01



   National Electrical Code - see B. & H. Ch. 1426



TITLE SIX – Other Public Services



   Chap. 1060.  Garbage, Rubbish and Recycling.



   Chap. 1062.  Parks and City Cemeteries.



CHAPTER 1060
Garbage, Rubbish and Recycling



EDITOR'S NOTE: This chapter was repealed and re-enacted in its entirety by
Ordinance 05-2002-01, passed July 2, 2002, codified herein.



1060.01   Definitions.



1060.02   Purpose and intent of chapter; findings.



1060.03   Contract for residential refuse and recycling.



1060.04   Residential refuse and recyclables; fees.



1060.05   Commercial refuse.



1060.06   Miscellaneous regulation of refuse and recyclables.



1060.07   License for licensed haulers.



1060.08   Enforcement; adoption of rules and regulations; authority of
certain officers to issue tickets.



1060.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Garbage and refuse generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq.,
123.241 et seq., 123.361 et seq.



   Municipal authority - see M.C.L.A. §§ 123.301 et seq.



   Solid waste dumpsters - see P. & Z. 1286.03(m)



1060.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them this section:



   (a)   "Act 94" means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as
amended.



   (b)   "Act 279" means Act 279, Public Acts of Michigan, 1909, as
amended.



   (c)   "Ash" shall mean the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke or other combustible materials including incinerator ash and residue.



   (d)   "Authorized garbage bags" shall mean plastic bags or labels
for holding residential refuse pursuant to Section 1060.04(e)(8). The bag
size shall be 30 gallon.



   (e)   "Bulk waste" shall mean any item that is too large for
placement in a residential refuse container or a recycling container. "Bulk
waste" shall include such things as mattresses, furniture, small appliances,
and tires. "Bulk waste" shall be free of all liquids.



   (f)   "City" shall mean the City of Ionia, Michigan.



   (g)   "Commercial establishments" shall mean all household units
containing eleven or more residential units, all businesses, non-profit
organizations, churches, governmental agencies, and other such institutions
which cannot be classified as residential structures.



   (h)   "Commercial refuse" shall mean the miscellaneous waste
material such as garbage, rubbish, ash, and debris resulting from operation
of commercial establishments.



   (i)   "Contractor" shall mean the entity selected by the City
Council pursuant to Section 1060.03 of this chapter that enters into a
contract with the City to carry out the City's responsibility to collect and
dispose of residential refuse, recyclables, yard waste, bulk waste, or any
portion thereof.



   (j)   "Debris" shall mean the remains of something broken down or
destroyed.



   (k)   "Director" shall mean the Director of the City Department of
Community Development.



   (l)   "Domestic refuse" shall mean the waste material resulting from
the usual routine of housekeeping including garbage, rubbish, and ash.



   (m)   "Garbage" shall mean decomposable solid waste which consists
of rejected food waste being the waste accumulation of animal, fruit or
vegetable matter intended for or used as food or utilized for preparation,
cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, and
of animal and fowl excrement.



   (n)   "Licensed hauler" shall mean an entity granted a license to
operate as a licensed hauler within the City pursuant to Section 1060.07 of
this chapter and who has paid all applicable license fees and charges.



   (o)   "Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City.



   (p)   "Municipal refuse" shall mean refuse granted by the City or on
property owned by the City.



   (q)   "Recyclables" shall mean paper, plastics, tin, aluminum, or
glass and as may be more specifically defined by rule or regulation.



   (r)   "Refuse" shall mean decomposable and nondecomposable solid
waste, except body wastes. Refuse shall include garbage, rubbish, ash and
debris. Refuse shall not include recyclables, yard waste or bulk waste.



   (s)   "Residential contract" shall mean the contract entered into
between the City and the contractor pursuant to Section 1060.03 of this
chapter.



   (t)   "Residential refuse" shall mean refuse from residential
structures within the City.  "Residential refuse" shall not include oils and
greases, pesticide products, paints, thinners, lacquers, recyclables, yard
waste or bulk waste.



   (u)   "Residential refuse container" shall mean receptacles
designated by the Manager for use in the collection of residential refuse
pursuant to this chapter.



   (v)   "Residential structure" shall mean any building or structure
containing ten  residential units) or less within the City.



   (w)   "Residential unit" shall mean a single-family house, and each
unit of a condominium, cooperative, duplex house, or apartment building that
is used for residential purposes.



   (x)   "Rubbish" shall mean nondecomposable solid waste, excluding
ash, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste such as paper,
cardboard, cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, rubber, nags, leather,
straw, scrap tires, auto parts, furniture and appliances.



   (y)   "System" shall mean the City of Ionia Residential Refuse
Collection and Recycling System, which shall include all facilities,
equipment, other property and contracts of the City dedicated to and used in
connection with providing for the collection of residential refuse,
recyclables, yard waste, and bulk waste from the residential structures in
the City.



   (z)   "Yard waste" shall mean grass clippings, leaves, plants and
branches no larger than four feet in length or three inches in diameter.



   (aa)   "Yard waste container" shall mean the receptacles designated
by the Manager for use in the collection of yard waste pursuant to this
chapter.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02.)



1060.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT OF CHAPTER; FINDINGS.



   It is the intent of City Council that this Chapter be liberally
construed for the purposes of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of
preparation, collection, disposal and recycling of refuse, and for the
maintenance of public and private property in a clean, orderly, and sanitary
condition to ensure the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the community.
In support of this intent the City Council finds that:



   (a)   There is a need to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the residents, businesses, and public and private agencies and visitors to
the City by regulating the creation, collection and disposal of refuse within
the City; and



   (b)   The City Council has investigated several methods of
regulating the creation, collection and disposal of refuse within the City
and raising the funds for the cost of such regulation and has determined that
the fairest, most economical, most accurate and practiced method of
apportioning such costs among the residents, businesses, and public and
private entities who create such refuse is to:



      (1)   Enter into a contract with a contractor to provide for
the collection and disposal of residential refuse and recyclables and
establish rates and charges to pay the costs therefor, as provided in Section
1060.03;



      (2)   Require commercial establishments to arrange for
licensed haulers to provide for the collection and disposal of commercial
refuse; and



      (3)   Enter into a contract or contracts with one or more
licensed haulers to provide for the collection and disposal of Municipal
refuse.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 449. Passed 4-10-07.)



1060.03  CONTRACT FOR RESIDENTIAL REFUSE AND RECYCLING.



   (a)   Bids for the Residential Contract.  The City Council shall in
its discretion enter into a contract and grant a license to a person,
corporation, partnership or firm for the hauling, transporting and handling
of refuse from residential structures within the City.  The City Council
shall use the competitive bidding process for such purpose and shall make its
selection based upon the capability, performance and bid price offered by the
contractor.  The City Council may engage the services of the contractor
pursuant to a written contract for a period of one or more years and may
renew such contract with or without seeking further bids.



   (b)   Notice to Other Licensed Haulers; Exclusivity. If a contract
has been executed between the City and one or more licensed haulers, then the
City must notify all other licensed haulers (licensed under Section 1060.07)
of the contract.  It shall be unlawful for any entity, other than a
contractor, to collect, disturb, or transport residential, recyclables, yard
waste or bulk waste for a fee, if that service is provided by a contractor.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 449. Passed 4-10-0.)



1060.04  RESIDENTIAL REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES; FEES.



   (a)   Creation of the System. There is hereby established the City
of Ionia Residential Refuse Collection and Recycling System pursuant to Act
94, which shall include all facilities, equipment, other property and
contracts of the City dedicated to and used in connection with providing for
the collection of residential refuse and recyclables from the residential
structures in the City.



   (b)   Contractor; Collection of Residential Refuse and Recyclables;
Prohibition Against Scavenging.



      (1)   During the term of the residential contract, the
contractor shall collect residential refuse and recyclables from residential
structures as provided under this section. It shall be unlawful for any
entity other than the contractor to collect, salvage or scavenge, or
otherwise take or remove residential refuse and recyclables from residential
structures placed for collection at curbside.



      (2)   Residential refuse containers shall be stored in an area
such that visibility from the street is minimized to the extent possible. The
owner or occupant may, however, request and receive a waiver of this rule
from the Director.



   (c)   Use of Residential Refuse Containers and Recycling Containers.



      (1)   The Contractor shall provide each residential unit
within a residential structure with a recycling container for each category
of recyclables to be collected and a residential refuse container of the size
selected by the owner or occupant of the residential unit. From the date such
containers are delivered, the owner or occupant of a residential unit within
a residential structure shall use residential refuse containers and recycling
containers to dispose of all residential refuse and recyclables generated on
such residential structure that is not disposed of through a sink grinder or
other environmentally-acceptable means. In the event an owner or occupant of
a residential unit within a residential structure has more residential refuse
than can be accommodated by his or her residential refuse container, such
owner or occupant may place excess residential refuse in authorized garbage
bags or tags purchased from the City Hall and/or any other municipally
authorized location.



      (2)   Residential refuse containers and recycling containers
shall not be placed under the eaves of any building or in areas that will
allow water to mix with the refuse or recyclables. Except when placed near
the curb for weekly collections, residential refuse containers and recycling
containers shall not be visible in accordance with Section 1060.04(b)(2)
"Bulk Waste".



      (3)   Residential refuse containers and recycling containers
damaged through the carelessness of the owner or occupant of the residential
unit shall be replaced by contractor and the cost thereof shall be charged to
the owner or occupant. The Director shall arbitrate any disputes concerning
the causation of damage to or loss of residential refuse containers and
recycling containers. The contractor at no cost to the owner or occupant of a
residential unit will replace residential refuse containers or recycling
containers stolen or those damaged by contractor's vehicles.



   (d)   Collection of Residential Refuse and Recyclables.



      (1)   The contractor shall collect residential refuse and
recyclables from residential structures on a weekly basis on days determined
by agreement between the contractor and the Director. Residential refuse
containers and recycling containers shall be placed at the front of the curb
line in plain view from the roadway no earlier than noon on the day prior to
the scheduled collection day. All recyclables shall be clean, dry and placed
in recycling containers. The residential refuse containers and recycling
containers shall be removed by the owner or occupant within 15 hours from the
time the containers are emptied by the contractor.



      (2)   The owner or occupant of a residential structure shall
be responsible for ensuring that the collection area on the residential
structure is free of residential refuse, recyclables, yard waste, and bulk
waste following collection.



      (3)   The contractor shall prepare, publish and distribute,
subject to approval of same by the Director, a schedule of collections in a
manner designed reasonably to give notice thereof to all residents of the
City, subject to the following requirements:



         A.   The notice of the schedules of collection shall
contain the following information: the day of the week upon which collection
shall be made for each collection district, a City map that delineates the
collection districts by street, the name, address and telephone number of the
contractor, the proper location for residential refuse containers and
recycling containers pending collection, the time of day at which the
containers must be so placed.



         B.   The notice must be published not less than two
weeks prior to the beginning of any change in the collection service schedule.



         C.   Collection times shall be between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of the day scheduled for collection. No regular collection
shall be made on any Sunday.



         D.   All schedules and routings are subject to approval
by the Director.



         E.   Collections shall not be scheduled on the following
holidays: New Year's  Day, Independence Day, Thanksgiving Day, Memorial Day,
Labor Day and Christmas Day. When the above holidays fall during the week,
the collection schedule for the week shall be delayed one day for the
remainder of the week.



      (4)   The contractor shall include in any publication under
this chapter or as part of compliance with the terms thereof the name of
contractor, the address of contractor, the telephone number or numbers of
contractor, the address of the local office of contractor and a statement as
to the manner and method by which complaints regarding service may be made
and shall be resolved.



      (5)   The contractor shall make no changes to operational,
collection or material preparation procedures without receiving approval of
the City at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any such change. The
contractor shall assist the City, either financially or in a manner
acceptable to the City, with the dissemination of notices to collection
points informing users of the system of the changes.



      (6)   The contractor shall maintain an office for receipt of
service calls and complaints. The office shall be open and available for
calls Monday through Friday each week from 7:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. The
office shall contain at least two telephone lines with a toll-free number for
Ionia and listed under the name of contractor in the local telephone
directories. Contractor shall provide an employee attendant in such office
during all hours that such office is required to be open to accept and
resolve complaints, orders for special pickup service or to receive
instructions. In the event collection activities continue later than 6:00
p.m. on weekdays or anytime on a Saturday, an employee shall remain in
service until all route collection activities are completed. The contractor
shall also provide a Customer Service Representative who will visit the City
Administrative Offices weekly to handle complaints, concerns or requests with
residents or City staff



   (e)   Fees for Collection and Disposal of Residential Refuse and
Recyclables.  The City Council shall establish, by resolution, fair and
suitable rates and charges for the collection of residential refuse and
recyclables and apportion such rates and charges among the residential units
of the residential structures receiving services of the system. In addition,
the rates and charges established by the City Council shall conform to the
following:



      (1)   Such charges shall be established so as to reimburse the
City for all costs incurred by the City under the contract and for the
administration and operation of the system, including without limitation,
personnel, legal, rent, postage, the cost of public bidding, and other
similar and related costs.



      (2)   Rates and charges shall not be established to produce a
surplus or profit



      (3)   All rates and charges for services of the system
furnished to a residential unit of a residential structure shall be payable
quarterly by the owner or occupant of a residential unit and shall be a lien
upon the residential unit. The Manager may include the bill for services of
the system on any regular billing of the City or in any other manner approved
by the City Council.



      (4)   If a bill for services of the system are not paid by the
due date indicated therein, a ten percent administrative processing charge
shall be added to the bill. A ten percent  administrative charge shall be
added to each successive bill until paid in full. Those charges delinquent
for six months or more shall be certified annually to the City Tax Assessor
and entered as a lien on the next tax roll against the residential unit, or
in the case of apartments the residential structure, to which such charges
relate. The rates and charges shall be collected, and the lien may be
enforced, in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed
upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for the taxes; and the rates
and charges shall be collected; provided however that in the event the owner
of a residential unit provides written notice and a copy of any applicable
lease to the Director that a tenant of the residential unit is responsible
for the rates and charges of the system, then the delinquent charges imposed
on such residential unit shall not become a lien on the premises if the owner
of such residential unit provides a cash deposit to the Director in the
amount of the greater of fifty dollars ($50.00) or three times the average
charge for residential units in the system. The Director may seek collection
of any charges of the system by any lawful means, including the denial of
service to any residential unit.



      (5)   The fiscal year of the system shall be from July 1
through June 30.



      (6)   An owner or occupant of a residential unit within a
residential structure may elect not to receive services of the system and
avoid incurring charges and fees for any period of at least 30 days, provided
that the residential unit premises shall not be occupied during such period.
To make such an election, the owner or occupant of a residential unit must
file a written notice with the Director at least two weeks prior to the
period of nonservice, indicating the dates when the residential unit will not
be occupied. There shall be a five dollar ($5.00) charge for processing each
request to suspend services of the system.



      (7)   The owner or occupant of a residential unit may elect to
receive residential refuse collection by purchasing authorized garbage bags
(or tags). There shall be a requirement to purchase a minimum of ten bags at
the outset in order to receive this service. The bags must be placed on the
berm or curbside for collection in the same manner as residential refuse
containers. The contractor will collect refuse in the authorized garbage bags
(or with tags) at no additional cost.



   (f)   Fund for Residential Refuse and Recyclables. Fees imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the City's Solid Waste Fund. 
The City shall pay out of this fund those expenses incurred under the
contract or costs described in this chapter.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 449. Passed 4-10-07; Ord. 503.  Passed
6-4-13.)



1060.05  COMMERCIAL REFUSE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a commercial
establishment to accumulate refuse on the premises of such establishment or
to dispose of refuse other than through the services of a licensed hauler
authorized pursuant to Section 1060.07 of this chapter. Should food materials
be disposed of through sink grinding systems, the amounts may not exceed
limits established in Chapter 1042.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02.)



1060.06  MISCELLANEOUS REGULATION OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES.



   (a)   Burning or Burying. No person shall throw or discard any
refuse, recyclables, or bulk waste upon the ground or bury the same on any
premises, public or private, or burn the same in any manner within the City
limits. Yard waste may be composted if done so in a manner that does not
produce odors offensive to surrounding properties and as long as such
production is not offensive in view to surrounding properties or the
street.  No burning shall be permitted.



   (b)   Depositing or Scattering. No person shall deposit or scatter
refuse or recyclables, yard waste, or bulk waste on any public street, alley
or public property within the City.



   (c)   Cleanliness. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant
of any building, whether residential or commercial to maintain such buildings
in a clean and orderly manner and to dispose of all refuse, recyclables, yard
waste, or bulk waste in compliance with City ordinances and any rules and
regulations issued thereunder.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02.)



1060.07  LICENSE FOR LICENSED HAULERS.



   (a)   As used in this section, "residential refuse" shall refer to
residential refuse and recyclables.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to collect,
disturb or transport refuse for a fee on the streets, alleys or public places
of the City without first obtaining a license, as provided under this
section, to be a licensed hauler.



   (c)   The City Council shall establish by resolution, after
receiving recommendations from the Manager, regulations, procedures and forms
to permit entities to obtain a license to collect, transport and dispose of
residential refuse and commercial refuse within the City.



      (1)   There shall be no limit on the number of entities
licensed to transport commercial refuse. Each entity approved as a licensed
hauler for commercial refuse shall furnish a performance bond in the amount
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and file with the City Clerk copies of
all required insurance.



      (2)   The contractor shall be the only entity licensed to
transport residential refuse. However, if there is no active contract between
the City and a contractor, there shall be no limit on the number of entities
licensed to transport residential refuse. Each entity approved as a licensed
hauler for residential refuse shall furnish a performance bond of five
thousand ($5,000.00), and file with the City Clerk copies of all required
insurance.



   (d)   The City, after notice and a hearing, may revoke the license
of any licensed hauler who fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or applicable State or Federal laws. The license of such licensed
hauler shall not thereafter be granted or renewed until such time as the
person or entity has remedied all violations and has demonstrated compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and applicable State and Federal laws.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02; Ord. 449. Passed 4-10-07.)



1060.08  ENFORCEMENT; ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY OF
CERTAIN OFFICERS TO ISSUE TICKETS.



   The enforcement of this Chapter shall be the duty of the Manager, who
is hereby authorized to adopt reasonable rules and regulations subject to the
approval of the City Council to carry out the intent of this chapter.
Department of Community Development inspectors and public safety officers are
authorized to issue tickets for violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 05-2002-01. Passed 7-2-02.)



1060.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any section of this chapter shall be considered a civil
infraction for which fines are established in Section 202.99 of these
Codified Ordinances.



(Ord. 503. Passed 6-4-13.)



CHAPTER 1062
Parks and City Cemeteries



1062.01   Policy of the City.



1062.02   Time of opening and closing.



1062.03   Certain uses prohibited without City permission.



1062.04   Certain uses prohibited without Council permission.



1062.05   Use of sound amplification equipment prohibited without City
Manager permission.



1062.06   Exclusive permits prohibited.



1062.07   Special permits.



1062.08   General regulations.



1062.09   Overnight camping, sleeping or parking.



1062.10   Ionia Free Fair Association.



1062.11   Authorized overnight fishing and camping.



1062.12   Unauthorized overnight presence.



1062.13   Alcoholic beverages.



1062.14   Motorcycles.



1062.15   Fireworks.



1062.16   Disorderly conduct.



1062.17   Protection of park property; erection of structures.



1062.18   Service and repair of autos.



1062.19   Glass bottles.



1062.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Parks generally - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, § 23



   Municipal cemeteries - see Mich. Const. Art. 7, § 123; M.C.L.A.  §§
128.1 et seq.



   Parks and recreation facilities in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §§
117.4e, 117.5



   Sale of park property - see M.C.L.A. § 117.5



   Vacation of cemeteries - see M.C.L.A. §§ 128.51 et seq.



   Recreation Department - see ADM. Ch. 246



   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 692



   Parks and Recreation Commission - see ADM. Ch. 288



1062.01  POLICY OF THE CITY.



   It shall be the policy of the City of Ionia to provide Municipal parks
and cemeteries for the general public to use in a reasonable and orderly
manner, without exclusion of anyone from a park or cemetery during the hours
the parks and cemetery are open.  In order to  protect parks, park
equipment and the cemetery property from vandalism, the Public Safety
Department is empowered to exclude all unauthorized persons during the time
the parks and cemeteries are closed.  It shall also be the intent of the
City to provide access to all park facilities for persons of all races and
handicaps.  If a City park is not handicap-accessible because of the
topography of the City, free transportation shall be made available to
handicapped persons to a park of their choosing in the City system that is
handicap-accessible.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.02  TIME OF OPENING AND CLOSING.



   Municipal parks and cemeteries owned or operated by the City of Ionia
shall be closed during all other hours than those posted below.  Closing and
opening hours for Municipal parks shall be as follows:



   (a)   Oak Hill Cemetery - 8:00 a m. to 8:30 p.m. in summer; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. in winter.



   (b)   Fairgrounds - 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., exclusive of fair-time
activities.



   (c)   Neighborhood Parks (which includes the Meijer Skatepark) -
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except by reservation for special events (weddings,
etc).



   (d)   Facilities that are lighted for evening use such as tennis
courts, skating rinks, ball diamonds, etc., not being used for City or school
organized recreational programs, shall be closed at 10:00 p.m.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 06-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1062.03  CERTAIN USES PROHIBITED WITHOUT CITY PERMISSION.



   Any person desiring to use any Municipal park or cemetery at a time
other than that provided for in Section 1062.02 shall file an application
with the Recreation Director on forms to be furnished by the Recreation
Department and shall not use the park until permits are granted, and in
accordance with Section 1062.07.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.04  CERTAIN USES PROHIBITED WITHOUT COUNCIL PERMISSION.



   No person shall advertise, promote, sponsor, operate or conduct an
assembly attended by more than 100 persons in any City park without the prior
permission of the City Council.  An assembly is deemed to be any event
designed to attract the attendance of persons, including, but not limited to,
a concert, show, exhibition, performance, speech, display or other form of
entertainment.  An assembly is deemed not to include Recreation Department
games and events, Free Fairgrounds events arranged in and through the Free
Fair Association, and events sponsored by the City of Ionia.  Permission for
an assembly shall be granted in the reasonable discretion of the City Council
based on, but not limited to:



   (a)   The number of persons reasonably expected to attend such
assembly;



   (b)   The nature of the assembly in terms of whether the assembly
will be likely to interfere with residents in the area or the park or with
the ordinary use of the park by the public; and



   (c)   The time of the assembly.



   The City Council, in granting permission, may attach such conditions as
it deems necessary for the public health, safety and welfare, including, but
not limited to, conditions for sanitation, noise control and clean-up of the
park.  The City Council may, in its discretion, require an applicant for
permission to obtain a public liability insurance policy and to post a cash
or surety bond for the faithful performance by the applicant of such
conditions as the City Council may require.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.05  USE OF SOUND AMPLIFICATION EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED WITHOUT CITY
MANAGER PERMISSION.



   No sound amplification equipment may be used in any City park without
the prior permission of the City Manager.  Permission shall be granted in
the reasonable discretion of the City Manager, based on whether such sound
amplification will be likely to interfere with residents in the area of the
park or with the ordinary use of the park by the public.  The City Manager,
in granting permission, may attach such conditions as it deems necessary,
including, but not limited to, the specific location of the equipment, the
time of use, and the maximum noise level at which such sound amplification
equipment may be operated.



1062.06  EXCLUSIVE PERMITS PROHIBITED.



   No permit shall be issued for the exclusive use of a park, and no
permit shall exclude the public from the portion of the park not covered by
the permit or charge any admittance fee for entering the park, except as
hereinafter provided. 



(Ord 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.07  SPECIAL PERMITS.



   Any individual, club, organization or association desiring to use a
park, or a portion of a park, for a use not otherwise permitted by a section
of this Code of Ordinances, must apply for and receive a special permit,
under the following conditions:



   (a)   If the event or use is a money-raising affair, whether to
cover costs of operation or for profit, the individual, club, organization or
association shall file an application with the Recreation Director, and pay
to the Recreation Director a fee, as established from time to time by the
City Council. The application, among other information, must designate the
park, or portion of the park, desired, where ticket sales will be set up or
money is to be collected, and how much per person or other unit of
measurement, the location of which shall be under the control of the City
Manager. The fee for the permit may be waived or refunded, at the discretion
of the City Manager.



   (b)   If an individual, the club, organization or association
desires to allow participants to possess or consume alcoholic beverages
during the use or event applied for, then the individual, club, organization
or association shall file an application with the Director of Public Safety,
and pay an application fee at City Hall, as established from time to time by
the City Council. The application, among other information, must designate
the expected number of participants, the hours, during the event, during
which alcohol will be consumed, and the methods used to prevent possession or
consumption by minors and non-participants. The Director of Public Safety
shall then submit a recommendation regarding the approval of the permit to
the City Manager. Upon receipt of the application and recommendation, the
City Manager may approve the special permit for alcohol possession or
consumption. No permit shall be issued for possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages having a higher alcoholic content than beer or wine. In
addition to the application fee, the City Manager may require reimbursement
for law enforcement and other City services related to the event. The method
of collecting and calculating this fee shall be described in the special
permit for alcohol possession or consumption.



(Ord. 09-2005-02.  Passed 11-1-05; Ord. 463.  Passed 10-7-08.)



1062.08  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   The following general regulations shall be in force in all parks and
public grounds:



   (a)   Injury to Park Property.  No person shall obstruct any walk
or drive in any public park or playground and no person shall injure, mar or
damage in any manner any monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree,
fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplace, or other public
property within or pertaining to any park or playground.



   (b)   Waste Containers.  No person shall place or deposit any
garbage, glass, tin cans, papers or miscellaneous waste in any park or
playground, except in containers provided for that purpose.



   (c)   Ball Games.  No person shall engage in any baseball, football
or softball throwing or other violent or rough exercise or play in any public
park or other public place, except in such areas or spaces designated for
such exercises or play by the Director.



   (d)   Picnics.  Picnics may be held in such parts of any park as
shall be designated for that purpose by the Director of Recreation subject to
any rules or regulations.



   (e)   Open Fires.  No person shall kindle or build fires in any
park or playground, except in fireplaces or stoves in any park provided for
that purpose.  Upon leaving such fire, it shall be the duty of the person
last using it to see that the fire is extinguished.



   (f)   Vehicles in Parks.  No person shall drive or park any vehicle
in any park or playground except in spaces set aside and designated as
parking areas by the Director.  Driving and parking on all streets and
public ways within any park or bordering on the same shall be subject to all
of the provisions of the Code regulating traffic generally and to such
additional rules and regulations as the City Manager shall adopt pursuant to
this chapter.



   (g)   Linear Park.  The Grand River Linear Rivertrail system is
designed and intended for  non-motorized vehicle usage only.  No motor
vehicles of any kind (including mopeds, ORV's, motorcycles, etc.) shall be
allowed on the trail.  In addition, advertising, writing, carving and other
similar acts are prohibited from placement on the east and west Grand River
bridges.  Violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor
offense.



   (h)   Meijer Skatepark.  The City operates a skatepark that shall
be open to both bicycles and skateboards/skaters.  Bicycles shall have use
of the park during even hours: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 for the one hour period. 
Skates and skateboarders shall have use of the park during odd hours: 1, 3,
5, 7, 9, 11 for the one hour period.  All use of the park shall be at the
user's risk; no risk shall be borne by the City and the City assumes no
liability for the actions of users.  Protective pads and equipment are
strongly recommended but the park is not monitored and it is the user's
responsibility to ensure proper usage.



   (i)   Additional Rules.  The City Manager is hereby empowered to
make such additional rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the
City Council, pertaining to the conduct and use of parks and public grounds,
as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and
the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no person shall
fail to comply with such rules and regulations.



(Ord. 06-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1062.09  OVERNIGHT CAMPING, SLEEPING OR PARKING.



   No overnight camping, sleeping, or parking shall be permitted, nor
shall any vehicle be stored or parked, in any public park or public property
during those hours the park or public grounds are closed, except as may be
otherwise provided in these Codified Ordinances.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.10  IONIA FREE FAIR ASSOCIATION.



   This chapter shall not interfere with the Ionia Free Fair Association
when the Association operates in accordance with the lease between the City
of Ionia and the Ionia Free Fair Association.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.11  AUTHORIZED OVERNIGHT FISHING AND CAMPING.



   The area of Riverside Park adjacent to the Grand River and Bertha Brock
Park may be used for overnight fishing and overnight camping of trailers or
campers that have self-contained sewer facilities.  Fishing and camping
overnight during hours the Park is closed will be allowed on a one day-one
night basis by special permit secured at the Recreation Department.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.12  UNAUTHORIZED OVERNIGHT PRESENCE.



   No person shall loiter or remain upon any public park or playground
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to employees of the City of Ionia in the course of
their duties or to activities being held under the auspices of the Recreation
Department.  The City Manager is hereby empowered to waive this section when
such action will serve the public benefit and welfare.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.13  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   No person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages in a park at any
time, unless he or she is a participant in an event for which an individual,
or a club, organization or association has received a special permit for
alcoholic possession or consumption, as described in Section 1062.07, or
similar ordinance.  “Participant” is defined in Section 606.01 of this
Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94; Ord. 09-2005-03.  Passed 11-1-05; Ord. 463. 
Passed 10-7-08.)



1062.14  MOTORCYCLES.



   No motorcycles, motor scooters, motor bicycles or motor cars commonly
known as "go carts" shall be permitted in any public park, linear park, or
playground.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.15  FIREWORKS.



   No person shall bring into a park, or have in his or her possession, or
set off or otherwise cause to explode, in a park, any firecrackers,
torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks or explosives, or discharge them or
throw them into any park area from land or highway adjacent thereto, provided
only that a special permit may be granted therefor by the City Manager and
Public Safety Director which should include restrictions as to time and
location.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.16  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or
other areas in a park, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive,
insulting or indecent language or behavior, or engage in any disorderly
conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.17  PROTECTION OF PARK PROPERTY; ERECTION OF STRUCTURES.



   No person shall willfully mar, deface, disfigure, tamper with, displace
or remove any building, tables, benches, fireplaces, trees, shrubs, flowers
or any other park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.  No structure, booth, tent or stall shall be erected on park
property for any purpose without permission from the City Manager.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.18  SERVICE AND REPAIR OF AUTOS.



   No person shall clean, wash, polish, repair, or in any manner service
any motor vehicle or trailer in any public park or playground or cause the
same to be done.  For the purpose of this chapter, the term "repair" shall
be deemed to mean the replacement of old, worn-out parts of the vehicle with
new parts, and the term "service" shall be deemed to mean the draining of
oil, sludge, gasoline and water and other engine cooling fluids for the
purpose of replacing same with a new supply.  This prohibition shall not
apply to the changing of deflated tires or the performing of necessary
emergency work on a disabled car for the purpose of immediate movement.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.19  GLASS BOTTLES.



   No glass bottles shall be allowed in any park.  Plastic, aluminum or
other similar containers are allowed, but must be disposed of in the proper
containers.  Failure to do so shall result in a charge of littering under
applicable City ordinances.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1062.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



PART TWELVE – PLANNING AND ZONING CODE



TITLE TWO – Planning



   Chap. 1202.  City Planning Commission.



Chapter 1202
City Planning Commission



1202.01   Planning Commission.



1202.02   Membership; compensation; vacancies.



1202.03   Removal from office.



1202.04   Officers; meetings; rules; records.



1202.05   Annual report.



1202.06   Expenditures.



1202.07   Master plan; preparation; contents; adoption; review.



1202.08   Public works approval by Commission and Council.



1202.09   Capital improvement plan; exemption to prepare.



1202.10   Subdivision of land.



1202.11   Powers and duties.



1202.12   Approval, ratification, and reconfirmation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Municipal planning commissions - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 et seq.



   County planning commissions - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.101 et seq.



   Authority re Zoning Code - see P. & Z. 1242.01, 1242.02, 1274.02,
1276.02 et seq.



   Authority re Planned Unit Development - see P. & Z. 1266.05(g)



   Authority re site condominiums - see P. & Z. 1272.05



1202.01  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The Planning Commission for the City of Ionia shall be designated as
the City of Ionia Planning Commission with the powers and duties hereinafter
set forth, said Commission being created pursuant to Act 33 of the Public
Acts of 2008, State of Michigan, as amended. 



(1975 Code § 5.241) (Ord. 467. Passed 8-4-09)



1202.02  MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION; VACANCIES.



   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, one (1)
ex-officio members and six  (6) appointed members.  All members shall have
full voting rights. The ex-officio members shall be the Mayor, one (1) member
from the City Council selected by the City Council. The six (6) appointed
members shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall represent, insofar as is
possible, different professions or occupations and be representative of
important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental,
educational, and social development of the city. Persons appointed to the
Planning Commission shall be qualified electors of the city, except that one
(1) member may be a non-qualified elector who resides outside the municipal
boundaries of the city.  An employee of the city shall not be eligible to
serve as a member of the Planning Commission..  Such appointments shall be
subject to approval by a majority vote of the members of the City Council. 
All members of the Planning Commission shall serve as such without
compensation.  The term of the ex-officio members shall correspond to their
respective official tenure.  The term of each appointed member shall be
three years or until a successor takes office.  Vacancies occurring
otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the Mayor, subject to the approval by a majority of the
members of the City Council. 



(1975 Code § 5.242)  (Ord. 432.  Passed 3-8-06; Ord. 467. Passed 8-4-09.)



1202.03  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   The City Council may remove a member of the Commission for misfeasance,
malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public
hearing.  Before casting a vote on a mater on which a Commission member may
reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the Commission
member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the Planning
Commission.  The Commission member is disqualified from voting on the matter
if so provided by the Rules of Procedure of the Planning Commission or by a
majority vote of the remaining Commission members.  Failure of a Commission
member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this
Chapter constitutes malfeasance in office. 



(Ord. 467. Passed 8-4-09)



1202.04  OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RULES; RECORDS.



   The Commission shall elect its Chairperson, Vice Chairperson  and
Secretary and create and fill such other of its offices as it may
determine.  The ex-officio member shall not be eligible to service as
Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson.  The Commission shall adopt rules for the
transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public
record. A copy of the rules adopted by the Commission shall be forwarded to
the City Council for approval.  Once approved, the rules shall be filed,
with the City Clerk.  In addition, a copy of all resolutions, transactions,
findings, determinations and other official action, shall be furnished to the
City Clerk within five (5) days after such action. 



(1975 Code § 5.243) (Ord. 467. Passed 8-4-09)



1202.05  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Commission shall prepare an annual written report and provide the
report to the City Council concerning the operations and the status of
planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the City
Council related to planning and development. 



(Ord. 467. Passed 8-4-09)



1202.06  EXPENDITURES.



   The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within
the amounts appropriated for the purpose by Council, which shall provide the
funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the Commission's work.



(1975 Code § 5.244) (Ord. 467. Passed 8-4-09)



1202.07  MASTER PLAN; PREPARATION; CONTENTS; ADOPTION; REVIEW.



   The Planning Commission shall prepare and approve a master plan as a
guide for development within the planning jurisdiction subject to the
requirements contained in the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33
of 2008, as amended.  The planning jurisdiction may include any areas
outside of the City boundaries that, in the Planning Commission’s judgment,
are related to the planning of the City.



   (a)   Master Plan Preparation.  In preparation of the Master Plan
the Planning Commission shall do all of the following:



      (1)   Make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of
present conditions and future growth within the planning jurisdiction with
due regard to its relation to neighboring jurisdictions.



      (2)   Consult with representatives of adjacent local units
government in respect to their planning so that conflicts in master plans and
zoning may be avoided.



      (3)   Cooperate with all departments of the state and federal
governments and other public agencies concerned with programs for economic,
social, and physical development within the planning jurisdiction and seek
the maximum coordination of the City’s programs with these agencies.



   (b)   Master Plan Contents. The Master Plan shall address land use
and infrastructure issues and may project twenty (20) years or more into the
future.  The Master Plan shall include maps, plats, charts, and descriptive,
explanatory, and other related matter and shall contain the Planning
Commission’s recommendations for physical development of the City.  In
addition the Master Plan shall contain the following:



      (1)   A land use plan map.



      (2)   A description of the general location, character and
extent of streets,  railroads, airports, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways,
bridges, waterways, sanitary sewers and water supply systems, facilities for
flood prevention, drainage, pollution prevention and other public utilities
and structures.



      (3)   Recommendations as to the general character, extent, and
layout of redevelopment or rehabilitation of blighted areas; and the removal,
relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use, or
extension or streets, grounds, open spaces, buildings, utilities, or other
facilities.



      (4)   Recommendations for implementing any of the Master
Plan’s proposals.



      (5)   Such sub-plans for certain geographic areas of the
planning jurisdiction if, because of the unique physical characteristics of
that area, more intensive planning is necessary.



   (c)   Master Plan Adoption.  The Master Plan shall be adopted under
procedures set forth in the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of
2008, as amended.



   (d)   Master Plan Review.  At least once every five (5) years after
adoption of a Master Plan, the Planning Commission shall review the Master
Plan and determine whether to commence the procedure to amend the Master Plan
or adopt a new plan.  The review and its findings shall be recorded in the
minutes of the meeting or meetings of the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 467. Passed 8-4-09.)



1202.08  PUBLIC WORKS APPROVAL BY COMMISSION AND COUNCIL.



   Whenever the Commission shall have adopted the Master Plan of the City
or one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park
or other public way, ground, or open space, or public or private building or
structure, shall be constructed or authorized in the City or in such planned
section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall
have been submitted to and approved by the Commission, provided that in case
of disapproval the Commission shall communicate its reasons to the Council in
writing, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a
recorded vote of not less than five members, provided, however, that if the
public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility is one the
authorizing or financing of which does not under the law or Charter
provisions governing the same, fall within the province of the Council, then
the submission to the Planning Commission shall be by the board, commission
or body having jurisdiction and the Planning Commission's disapproval may be
overruled by said board, commission or body by a vote of not less than
two-thirds of its membership.  The failure of the Planning Commission to act
in any case within thirty-five (35) days from and after the date of official
submission to it shall be deemed approval. 



(1975 Code § 5.248) (Ord. 467; Passed 8-4-09.)



1202.09  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN; EXEMPTION TO PREPARE.



   Article IV entitled Financial Procedures of the Charter of the City of
Ionia requires the City Manager to prepare and submit to the City Council a
Capital Improvement Plan for the City.  Based on the City Charter the
Planning Commission is hereby exempt from the requirements contained in the
Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, regarding
the preparation of a Capital Improvement Plan.  The Planning Commission may
recommend to the City Manager and/or the City Council programs for public
structures and improvements and for the financing thereof.



(1975 Code § 5.249) (Ord. 467; Passed 8-4-09.)



1202.10  SUBDIVISION OF LAND.



   The Planning Commission shall review and make recommendations on all
plats before action by the City Council.  The procedures followed by the
Planning Commission in reviewing plats shall be as set forth in Part Twelve
of the Codified Ordinances of Ionia.



(Ord. 467; Passed 8-4-09.)



1202.11  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth
in Michigan Planning Act being PA 33 of 2008, as amended and as set forth in
the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, being PA 110 of 2006, as amended.  In
addition, duties shall include the following:



   (a)   Take such action on petitions, staff proposals and City
Council requests for amendments to the zoning ordinance.



   (b)   Take such action on petitions, staff proposals and City
Council requests for amendments to the master plan.



   (c)   Prepare and adopt bylaws for the transaction of business, and
keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations.



   (d)   Review subdivision and condominium proposals and recommend
appropriate actions to the City Council.



   (e)   Prepare special studies and plans, as deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission or City Council and for which appropriations of funds
have been approved by the City Council.



   (f)   Attend training sessions, conferences, or meetings as needed
to properly fulfill the duties of a member of the Planning Commission and for
which appropriations of funds have been approved by the City Council, as
needed.



(Ord. 467; Passed 8-4-09.)



1202.12  APPROVAL, RATIFICATION, AND RECONFIRMATION.



   All official actions taken by the Planning Commission preceding the
Commission created by this ordinance are hereby approved, ratified and
reconfirmed.  Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective
date of this ordinance shall continue with the Planning Commission created by
this chapter, subject to the requirements of this ordinance, and shall be
deemed a continuation of any previous Planning Commission.  This ordinance
shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication.



(Ord. 467; Passed 8-4-09.)



TITLE THREE – Land Division



   Chap. 1210.  Land Division



Chapter 1210
Land Division



1210.01   Definitions.



1210.02   Purpose.



1210.03   Prior approval required.



1210.04   Application for land division approval.



1210.05   Procedure for review and approval.



1210.06   Divisions not subject to review and approval.



1210.07   Approval of land divisions.



1210.08   Noncompliance.



1210.99   Penalty.



1210.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings given to them herein:



   (a)   "Act" shall mean the Land Division Act being Public Act 591 of
1996, as amended.



   (b)   "Accessible" shall mean a parcel that is accessible if one or
both of the following are met:



      (1)   The parcel has an area where a driveway or easement
provides vehicular access to an existing street or road and meets all
applicable location standards of the road authority, or has an area where a
driveway or easement can provide vehicular access to an existing street or
road and meet all such applicable location standards.



      (2)   The parcel is served by an existing easement that
provides vehicular access to an existing street or road and that meets all
applicable location standards of the local road authority, or can be served
by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing
street or road and that will meet all such applicable location standards.



   (c)   "Division" or "land division" shall mean the partitioning or
splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or
her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or
assigns for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of
building development that results in one or more parcels of less than forty
acres or the equivalent as defined in the act, and that satisfies the
requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the act.  "Division" or "land
division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent
parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent
parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site
unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the act, this chapter and
other applicable ordinances.



   (d)   "Exempt split" or "exempt division" shall mean the
partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor
thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors or assigns that does not result in one or more
parcels of less than forty acres or the equivalent.



   (e)   "Forty acres or the equivalent" shall mean either forty acres,
a quarter-quarter section containing less than thirty acres, or a
governmental lot containing not less than thirty acres.



   (f)   "Parcel" shall mean a continuous area of land which can be
described as stated in Section 102(g) of the act.



   (g)   "Parent parcel" or "parent tract" shall mean a parcel or
tract, respectively, lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997.



   (h)   "Resulting parcel" or "resulting parcels" shall mean one or
more parcels which result from an authorized land division.



   (i)   "Road authority" shall mean the governmental authority having
jurisdiction over a public street or road.



   (j)   "Tract" shall mean two or more parcels that share a common
property line and are under the same ownership.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the provisions of the act;
to establish minimum requirements and procedures for the approval of such
land divisions; to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not
comply with applicable ordinances and the act; to maintain orderly
development of the community; and to promote the health, safety, and welfare
of residents by establishing reasonable standards for review and approval of
land divisions.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.03  PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (a)   Land in the City shall not be divided without the prior review
and approval of the City in accordance with this chapter.



   (b)   Although the following are not land divisions as defined by
the act and this chapter, the following shall satisfy the requirements of
Sections 1210.04, 1210.05, and 1210.07, and the requirements of any other
applicable ordinances:



      (1)   Any property transfers between two or more adjacent
parcels, where the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent
parcel;



      (2)   Any alteration, addition, relocation, or removal of a
lot line of a parcel or lot existing at the time of adoption of this chapter.



   (c)   Staff Approval.  Land in the City shall not be divided
without the review and approval of the City Assessor and Community
Development Director or other official designated by the City Manager, in
accordance with this chapter and the act.  Review and approval shall be
required before making any land division either by deed, land contract, lease
for more than one year or for building development.



   (d)   Planning Commission Approval.  Land divisions which result in
the creation of more than four new lots by metes and bounds description shall
be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the
same procedures and criteria for the review of all other land divisions and
as required by Chapters 1220 through 1232, Subdivision Regulations, as
contained in this Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.04  APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL.



   A proposed division shall not be considered filed with the City, nor
shall the time period stated in this chapter commence, until all of the
requirements for an application for land division approval have been complied
with.  A proposed land division shall be filed with the Community
Development Director and shall include the following:



   (a)   A completed application, as provided by the City, including
all required attachments.



   (b)   Proof of an ownership interest in the land which is the
subject of the proposed division, or written consent to the application,
signed by the owner of such land.



   (c)   A land title search, abstract of title, or other evidence of
land title acceptable to the Community Development Director which is
sufficient to establish that the parent parcel or parcel or parent tract of
land which is the subject of the proposed division was lawfully in existence
not less than ten years from the date of the application for land division.



   (d)   A copy of each deed or other instrument of conveyance which
contains the statement required by section 109(3) of the act concerning
conveyance of the right to make further divisions.



   (e)   A tentative parcel map accurately drawn to scale showing the
parent parcel or parent tract which is the subject of the application.  A
tentative parcel map shall include:



      (1)   Date, north arrow, scale, and the name of the person or
firm responsible for the preparation of the tentative parcel map;



      (2)   Proposed boundary lines and the dimensions of each
parcel;



      (3)   An accurate parcel map and legal description of each
resulting parcel;



      (4)   A drawing or written description of all previous land
divisions from the same parent parcel or parent tract, identifying the
number, area and date of such divisions, sufficient to establish that the
parcel to be divided was lawfully in existence not less than ten years from
the application for land division;



      (5)   The location, dimensions and nature of proposed ingress
or egress from any existing public or private streets;



      (6)   Accessibility of each proposed division, including the
location of any public or private street, driveway or utility easement to be
located within any resulting parcel.  Copies of the instruments describing
and granting such easements shall be submitted with the application;



      (7)   The location of all public utility easements serving the
parcel; and,



      (8)   The location of any existing structures and other site
improvements including wells, septic systems along with setbacks of existing
buildings and structures.



   (f)   Proof that all due and payable taxes or installments of
special assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided are paid in
full.



   (g)   Other information reasonably required by the Community
Development Director or Planning Commission in order to determine whether the
proposed land division qualifies for approval.



   (h)   Payment of the application fee and other applicable fees and
charges to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of
this chapter and the act established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.05  PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (a)   A proposed land division shall be approved, approved with
conditions, or disapproved by the Community Development Director and the
Assessor, or by the Planning Commission if the land division results in the
creation of more than four new lots by metes and bounds description. 
Approval shall be based upon satisfaction of the following requirements:



      (1)   The application requirements contained in Section
1210.04 are met.



      (2)   All resulting parcels to be created by the proposed land
division(s) shall fully comply with the applicable lot area and lot width
requirements of the City's zoning ordinance for zoning district(s) in which
resulting parcels are located.



      (3)   Each resulting parcel shall have the depth to width
ratio as specified by the City's zoning ordinance for the zoning district(s)
in which the resulting parcel is located.  If the City's zoning ordinance
does not specify a depth to width ratio, each resulting parcel which is ten
acres or less in area shall have a depth which is not more than four times
the width of the parcel.  The width and depth of the resulting parcel shall
be measured in the same manner as provided by the City's zoning ordinance for
the measuring of the minimum width and maximum depth of parcels.  A depth
that is more than four times the width of the parcel may be permitted by the
Community Development Director or the Planning Commission based upon the
following standards:



         A.   Exceptional topographic or other physical
conditions;



         B.   Compatibility with the surrounding lands;



         C.   Other conditions which at the discretion of the
Community Development Director or the Planning Commission is sufficient to
render the required depth to width ratio impractical or undesirable.



      (4)   Each resulting parcel shall have a means of vehicular
access. If a means of vehicular access to a resulting parcel does not
lawfully exist at the time a land division is applied for, the proposed
division shall not be approved unless the following requirements are
satisfied:



         A.   If a driveway is proposed as a means of access,
each resulting parcel shall have an area where a driveway will lawfully
provide vehicular access in compliance with applicable City ordinances.



         B.   If an easement is proposed as a means of access,
the proposed easement shall be in writing and signed by the owner within
which the easement is to be located.  Such easement shall provide a lawful
means of access over and across such parcel, in compliance with applicable
City ordinances.  The Community Development Director may require that all
such easements be in recordable form and be recorded with the Ionia County
Register of Deeds within the time required by Section 1210.07.



         C.   If a new public street is proposed as a means of
access, the applicant shall provide proof that the road authority having
jurisdiction has approved the proposed layout and construction design of the
street and of utility easements and drainage facilities associated therewith.



      (5)   The proposed division, together with any previous
division(s) of the same parent parcel or parent tract shall not result in a
number of resulting parcels that is greater than permitted under section 108
of the act.



      (6)   Each resulting parcel that is a development site (as
defined by the act) shall have adequate easements for public utilities from
the resulting parcel to existing public utility facilities.



   (b)   The Community Development Director and Assessor, or the
Planning Commission, shall approve or disapprove a proposed land division
within forty-five days after the complete filing of the proposed division
with the Community Development Director, and shall provide the person who
filed the application written notice whether the application is approved,
approved with conditions, or disapproved and, if disapproved, all the reasons
for the disapproval.



   (c)   An applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Community
Development Director and Assessor, or the Planning Commission, may, within
thirty days of the decision, file a written appeal of the decision to the
City Council, which shall consider and decide the appeal by a majority vote
of the members present and voting at a public meeting.  At least ten days'
written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting at which the appeal
is to be considered shall be given to the applicant by regular, first-class
mail, directed to the applicant's address as shown in the application or in
the written appeal.  The City Council may affirm or reverse the decision of
the Community Development Director and Assessor, or the decision of the
Planning Commission, in whole or in part, and its decision shall be final.



   (d)   The Community Development Director and Assessor shall maintain
a record of all land divisions approved by the City.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.06  DIVISIONS NOT SUBJECT TO REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (a)   A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat as
regulated by the City's subdivision regulations and the act.  However, a
division of an already platted lot shall be subject to review and approval
under this chapter.



   (b)   Property developed in accordance with the City's site
condominium regulations and the State of Michigan's Condominium Act (Public
Act 59 of 1978, as amended).



   (c)   Mobile home parks developed in accordance with the City's
mobile home park district regulations.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.07  APPROVAL OF LAND DIVISIONS.



   (a)   A decision approving a land division shall be effective for
ninety days after such approval by the Community Development Director and
Assessor, or the Planning Commission, or, if appealed, by the City Council,
unless all of the following requirements is satisfied within such ninety day
period:



      (1)   A deed or other recordable instrument of conveyance,
accurately describing the resulting parcel(s), shall be recorded with the
Ionia County Register of Deeds, and a true copy showing proof of ownership
filed with the assessor; or,



      (2)   A survey accurately showing the resulting parcel(s)
shall be recorded with the Ionia County Register of Deeds, and a true copy
showing proof of such recording, shall be filed with the assessor.  Such
survey shall comply with the minimum requirements of Public Act 132 of 1970,
as amended.



      (3)   Property corners and survey markers denoting the new
parcel(s) are physically placed on the parcel(s) in accordance Public Act 132
of 1970, as amended.



   (b)   If the actions required in subsection (a) hereof are not
satisfied, such land division shall, without further action of the City, be
revoked.



   (c)   The approval of a land division is not a determination that
the resulting parcels comply with other applicable ordinances or regulations.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.08  NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Any parcel created inconsistent with or in violation of this chapter
shall not be eligible for issuance of building permits, zoning approvals or
other land use or building approvals under other City ordinances such as
special land use approval or site plan approval, nor shall any such parcel be
established as a separate parcel on the tax assessment roll.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



1210.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of this chapter shall be considered a civil infraction for
which fines are established in Section 202.99(b)(3) of the City Code.



(Ord. 454.  Passed 12-4-07.)



TITLE FOUR – Subdivision Regulations



   Chap. 1220.  General Provisions and Definitions.



   Chap. 1222.  Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.



   Chap. 1224.  Preliminary Plat Application and Review Procedures.



   Chap. 1226.  Preliminary Plat.



   Chap. 1228.  Final Plat Application and Review Procedures.



   Chap. 1230.  Design Standards.



   Chap. 1232.  Improvements.



   Chap. 1234.  Signs.



          Appx. I    -  Sign Regulations Table



          Appx. II    -  Measurement of Signs



Chapter 1220
General Provisions and Definitions



EDITOR'S NOTE:  A document entitled Municipal Standards for the City of
Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan, the January, 1998, edition, which document
contains design and construction standards for subdivision and land
development, is on file with the City Clerk.  Copies may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk.



1220.01   Legal basis; purpose.



1220.02   Fee schedule.



1220.03   Definitions.



1220.04   Scope and conflict.



1220.05   Certification of plats and drawings.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L.A. § 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. § 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. §
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



   Division of parcels of land - see ADM. 210.20



1220.01  LEGAL BASIS; PURPOSE.



   (a)   These Subdivision Regulations are enacted pursuant to Act 288
of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, the Subdivision Control Act of
1967.  These Subdivision Regulations are intended to provide for the proper
and orderly subdivision of land in the City, to provide for adequate and
essential public improvements and utilities, and to promote the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1220.02  FEE SCHEDULE.



   Any person filing a plat pursuant to these Subdivision Regulation shall
pay fees established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, and
until the fee is paid the plat shall not be considered or reviewed.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1220.03  DEFINITIONS.



   All terms used in these Subdivision Regulations shall have the meanings
and definitions given by Act 288.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1220.04  SCOPE AND CONFLICT.



   The provisions of these Subdivision Regulations apply to all platted
subdivisions of land within the City.  Where these Regulations provide a
standard stricter than that required by Act 288, these Regulations shall
control



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1220.05  CERTIFICATION OF PLATS AND DRAWINGS.



   All plats and drawings submitted under these Subdivision Regulations
shall be prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor and/or engineer, as
applicable.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



Chapter 1222
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty



EDITOR'S NOTE:  A document entitled Municipal Standards for the City of
Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan, the January, 1988, edition, which document
contains design and construction standards for subdivision and land
development, is on file with the City Clerk.  Copies may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk.



1222.01   Administration and enforcement generally.



1222.02   Variances.



1222.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L.A. § 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. § 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. §
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



   Division of parcels of land - see ADM. 210.20



1222.01  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.



   (a)   No plat shall be transmitted to any County or State approving
authority for official action until each plat shall have been, in the first
instance, approved by the City Council in accordance with the requirements of
these Subdivision Regulations.



   (b)   No person shall sell or convey any lot in any plat by
reference thereto until such plat has been duly recorded in the office of the
Ionia County Register of Deeds.



   (c)   No building permit shall be issued, and no public sewer or
water service shall be provided, for any dwelling or other structure located
on a lot or plot subdivided or sold in violation of these Regulations.  The
fact that final plat approval has not been received from the State of
Michigan shall not prevent a building permit from being granted for not more
than three buildings, or for the maximum number of land divisions which would
be permitted under Act 288 without plat approval, whichever is less.  No
building may be occupied or used, however, until all required improvements
have been completed and necessary utilities installed.



   (d)   Any act or failure to act done in violation of the provisions
of these Regulations is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1222.02  VARIANCES.



   (a)   A variance from the provisions of these Subdivision
Regulations may be granted as follows:



   (b)   If the proprietor demonstrates that literal enforcement of
these Regulations is impractical, or will impose undue hardship in the use of
land because of special or peculiar conditions pertaining to the land, the
City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may permit a
variance or variances which are reasonable and within the general policy and
purpose of these Regulations.  The City may attach conditions to the
variance.



   (c)   A petition for a variance shall be submitted along with the
preliminary plat.  Notice that request for a variance has been received
shall be included in the notice of public hearing on the preliminary plat
provided therein, and the variance shall be considered during the process of
considering the preliminary plat.  If a request for a variance arises
because of unforeseen circumstances after preliminary plat review, a request
for a variance may be submitted, and a recommendation made by the Planning
Commission to the City Council, after public hearing following notice given
in accordance with Section 1226(a).



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1222.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.



   (d)   A violation of these Subdivision Regulations is a Municipal
civil infraction, for which the fine shall be not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the first
offense and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two
thousand, five hundred dollars ($2,500) for any subsequent offense, in the
discretion of the Court, in addition to all other costs, damages and expenses
provided by law.  For purposes of this section, “subsequent offense”
means a violation of these Regulations committed with respect to a separate
incident by the same person within twelve months of a previous violation of
these Regulations for which said person admitted responsibility or was
adjudicated to be responsible.  Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.  The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder,
public official or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in
or maintains such violation may each be found responsible for a Municipal
civil infraction and be liable for the penalties herein provided.  Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City Council or any other public official
or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain
or prevent any violation of these Regulations or of the Subdivision Control
Act.



   (e)   In addition to any other available remedy, the City Council
may, in its discretion, bring an action in its own name to restrain or
prevent any violation of these Regulations or any continuance of such
violation.  In such case, the person found violating these Regulations shall
pay the City’s costs and expenses in enforcing these Regulations, including
its attorney’s fees.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



Chapter 1224
Preliminary Plat Application and Review Procedures



EDITOR'S NOTE:  A document entitled Municipal Standards for the City of
Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan, the January, 1998, edition, which document
contains design and construction standards for subdivision and local
development, is on file with the City Clerk.  Copies may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk.



1224.01   Submission of plats.



1224.02   Preliminary plat; required information.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L.A. § 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. § 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. §
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



   Division of parcels of land - see ADM. 210.20



   Preliminary plats - see P. & Z. Ch. 1226



1224.01  SUBMISSION OF PLATS.



   The proprietor of any land proposed to be subdivided shall submit
twelve copies of a preliminary plat, together with supplementary documents,
containing the information required by Act 288 and these Regulations, to the
Zoning Administrator, who shall forward the plans to the Commission for its
next meeting.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1224.02  PRELIMINARY PLAT; REQUIRED INFORMATION.



   The following information shall be submitted for tentative approval of
the preliminary plat.  Maps shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to
one inch.



   (a)   The name or title of the proposed subdivision.



   (b)   A legal description of the proposed plat.



   (c)   The name, address and telephone number of the proprietor,
developer, record owner and subdivider.




   (d)   A statement of the intended use for the proposed plat and
showing land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the
common use of property owners in the subdivision, and stating the location,
dimensions and purpose of such land.



   (e)   A small scale vicinity map showing the location of the project
within the City, and the name and location of abutting subdivisions.



   (f)   The location, dimensions and approximate grade and radius of
proposed and existing streets, alleys and highways included in the plat.



   (g)   The location of all existing features affecting the
subdivision, such as railroads, buildings, trees, ditches, watercourses and
other physical features.



   (h)   The location and size of all existing and proposed public
water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage pipes, equipment, fire hydrants,
catch basins and other facilities.



   (i)   The location of utility and drainage easements.



   (j)   If the proposed plat is contiguous to other lands owned by the
applicant, a map showing the street layout and access for subsequent
development.



   (k)   If the proposed subdivision is not to be served by public
sewer and water systems, a written statement from the Ionia County Health
Department regarding the suitability of the soils for on-site septic systems.



   (l)   Location and dimension of lots, radii of all curves and
approximate location of all setback lines.  Lot width shall be shown for
each lot, at the required setback line.



   (m)   When any part of the subdivision lies within or abuts a
floodplain area:



      (1)   The floodplain, as established by the State Department
of Natural Resources, shall be shown within a contour line.



      (2)   The contour line shall intersect the sidelines of the
lots.



      (3)   The sidelines shall be dimensioned to the traverse line
from the street line and the established floodplain (contour) line.



      (4)   The floodplain area shall be clearly labeled on the plat
with the words "floodplain area."



   (n)   Two copies of any proposed covenants and deed restrictions to
be imposed upon the use of property in the subdivision or a statement in
writing that none is proposed.  If common areas are to be reserved for use
by the residents of the subdivision, copies of an agreement indicating how
the area will be maintained shall be submitted.



   (o)   Property lines, dimensions and building setback distances and
all structures, lot lines and wetlands within 100 feet of the site.



   (p)   Existing and proposed topographic elevations at two-foot
intervals on the site and to a distance of fifty feet outside the boundary
lines of the site.



   (q)   The direction of storm water drainage and how storm water
runoff will be handled as well as a statement describing where storm water
will be ultimately discharged such as a creek, stream, lake or wetland.



   (r)   The location of abutting streets, rights-of-way, service
drives, curb cuts and access easements serving the site, as well as driveways
opposite the site and driveways within 100 feet on either side of the site. 
Also driveway width, curb radii and design of proposed deceleration lanes.



   (s)   Street lighting, if any, including the type of fixture as well
as the method of shielding illumination from adjacent properties and roadways.



   (t)   The location and type of significant existing vegetation,
watercourses and water bodies, including County drains and man-made surface
drainageways, floodplains and wetlands.



   (u)   The location of existing and proposed slopes which are twenty
percent or greater, which may be altered by the development or the
construction of buildings within the development.



   (v)   Zoning and use of the proposed subdivision and adjacent
properties.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



Chapter 1226
Preliminary Plats



EDITOR'S NOTE:  A document entitled Municipal Standards for the City of
Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan, the January, 1998, edition, which document
contains design and construction standards for subdivision and local
development, is on file with the City Clerk.  Copies may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk.



1226.01   Tentative approval procedure.



1226.02   Final approval procedure.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L.A. § 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. § 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. §
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



   Division of parcels of land - see ADM. 210.20



   Submission of preliminary plats - see P. & Z. 1224.01



   Required information in preliminary plats - see P. & Z. 1224.02



1226.01  TENTATIVE APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   (a)   A preliminary plat shall be referred to the Planning
Commission, which shall consider it and make a recommendation to the City
Council.  Such consideration and recommendation shall take place following a
public hearing by the Planning Commission on the preliminary plat.  For such
hearing, notice shall be given in accordance with Section 1240.07 of the
Codified Ordinances of Ionia.



   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval, approval with
conditions, or disapproval of a plat within sixty-three (63) days after the
proposed plat is submitted to the Planning Commission.  If applicable
standards under the State of Michigan Land Division Act, PA 288 of 1967 and
the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations contained in Title Four -
Subdivision Regulations of the Codified Ordinances of Ionia are met, the
Planning Commission shall recommend approval of the plat.



   If the Planning Commission fails to act within the required period, the
plat shall be considered to have been recommended for approval, and a
certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission upon
request of the proprietor.  The proprietor may waive this requirement and
consent to an extension of the sixty-three (63) day period.  The basis for
any recommendation of disapproval of a proposed plat shall be stated upon the
records of the Planning Commission.



   The preliminary plat, together with the meeting minutes showing the
action of the Planning Commission thereon, shall be referred to the City
Council for review and action.



(Ord. 469. Passed 10-6-09.)



   (b)    The City Council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary
plat not later than thirty (30) days after the date of preliminary plat by
the Planning Commission. A resolution approving a plat shall state: the
nature and character of the improvements that will be required to be made by
the Proprietor; the periods of time within which the respective improvements
must be completed; and any conditions relating thereto. If the preliminary
plat is not approved, the City Council shall set forth in writing its reasons
for rejection and provide a copy to the Proprietor.



   (c)   Tentative approval under this section shall confer upon the
Proprietor, for a period of one year, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation
and street layout. The duration of such tentative approval may be extended by
the City Council.



(Ord. 389. Passed 3-6-01.)



1226.02  FINAL APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   (a)   Following tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the
City Council, the Proprietor shall:



      (1)   Submit the preliminary plat to all other reviewing
authorities as required by Act 288.



      (2)   Submit a list of all such authorities to the City Clerk,
certifying that the list shows all approving authorities as required by Act
288.



      (3)   Submit all approvals to the City Clerk after they have
been secured.



   (b)   Following a determination that all required approvals have
been secured, the Clerk shall forward the approved copies of the preliminary
plat, together with all communications from the reviewing agencies, to the
City Council as soon as possible prior to the next regularly scheduled
meeting.



   (c)   The City Council shall, within twenty days after submission:



      (1)   Consider and review the preliminary plat and approve it
if the proprietor has met all conditions specified for approval of the
preliminary plat.



      (2)   Instruct the City Clerk to notify the proprietor of
approval or rejection in writing.



   (d)   Final approval of the preliminary plat under this section
shall confer upon the proprietor, for a period of two years from the date of
approval, the rights granted under Act 288.  This period may be extended by
the City Council.



   (e)   Following final approval of the preliminary plat, the
proprietor may proceed to install the proposed streets, utilities and other
improvements approved on the preliminary plat.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-9-01.)



Chapter 1228
Final Plat Application and Review Procedures



EDITOR'S NOTE:  A document entitled Municipal Standards for the City of
Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan, the January, 1998, edition, which document
contains design and construction standards for subdivision and land
development, is on file with the City Clerk.  Copies may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk.



1228.01   Submittal requirements.



1228.02   Time limitations; examination of plat.



1228.03   Improvements; monuments.



1228.04   Security for completion.



1228.05   Certifications of approval.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L.A. § 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. § 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. §
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



   Division of parcels of land - see ADM. 210.20



1228.01  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   Final plats shall be prepared and submitted as provided in Act
288.



   (b)   A written application for approval and all recording and other
City and State fees shall accompany all final plats.



   (c)   The proprietor shall submit proof of ownership of the land
included in the final plat in a form satisfactory to the City.



   (d)   The City may require such other information as it deems
necessary to establish whether the proper parties have signed the plat.



   (e)   As-built plans of all installed improvements, and/or final
plans for all required improvements not installed or completed, shall be
submitted.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1228.02  TIME LIMITATIONS; EXAMINATION OF PLAT.



   (a)   The final plat shall be submitted not less than twenty days
prior to the next regular meeting of the City Council.  For any plat
submitted thereafter, the applicant shall pay an additional fee established
by resolution, for the cost of calling a special meeting to comply with
Section 167 of Act 288, unless the proprietor waives compliance with Section
167.



   (b)   The City Council shall examine the final plat at a meeting
within twenty days after submission of the plat, or thereafter, if such time
requirement is waived by the proprietor, and the Council shall either approve
or disapprove the plat.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1228.03  IMPROVEMENTS; MONUMENTS.



   (a)   Before final approval of a plat, all required improvements
shall be completed, or Security shall be given as provided in Section 1228.04.



   (b)   Monuments shall be set in accordance with Act 288 and the
rules of the State Department of Treasury.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1228.04  SECURITY FOR COMPLETION.



   (a)   In lieu of completion of some or all required improvements,
the Council may give final plat approval conditioned upon the proprietor
providing a financial guaranty for performance as provided in this section.



   (b)   Security shall be in an amount equal to the total estimated
cost for completion of the improvement, including reasonable contingencies. 
Security shall not be required for an improvement for which security has been
furnished to another governmental agency.



   (c)   Security shall remain in force for a time to be specified by
the City Council.



   (d)   Security shall be in the form of an irrevocable bank letter of
credit issued by a bank, in a form satisfactory to the City, or in the form
of cash escrow or a certified check.  A performance bond in form
satisfactory to the City from a surety company authorized to do business in
the State of Michigan and acceptable to the City, may be substituted in lieu
of such security only if the applicant can satisfy the City that an
irrevocable letter of credit,  cash escrow or certified check cannot
reasonably be made available.



   (e)   The proprietor may request periodic reductions in the amount
of security as public improvements are completed.  City staff may approve
such reductions, to an amount estimated to be equal to the remaining cost of
improvements, plus a reasonable contingency.



(5)   (Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1228.05  CERTIFICATIONS OF APPROVAL.



   The final plat shall include proper certificates for the City Clerk to
certify the approval of the plat by the City Council, and the acceptance on
behalf of the public of all dedications shown thereon by the governmental
body having jurisdiction over such dedication.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



Chapter 1230
Design Standards



EDITOR'S NOTE:  A document entitled Municipal Standards for the City of
Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan, the January, 1998, edition, which document
contains design and construction standards for subdivision and land
development, is on file with the City Clerk.  Copies may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk.



1230.01   Construction of streets and utilities.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L.A. § 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. § 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. §
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



   Division of parcels of land - see ADM. 210.20



   Improvements - see P. & Z. 1228.03, Ch. 1232



1230.01  CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND UTILITIES.



   Construction of streets and utilities shall be in accordance with the
City of Ionia Municipal Standards, the December, 2010, edition, copies of
which may be obtained, at cost, at City Hall.



(Ord. 389. Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 443. Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 484. Passed 2-1-11.)



Chapter 1232
Improvements



EDITOR'S NOTE:  A document entitled Municipal Standards for the City of
Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan, the January, 1998, edition, which document
contains design and construction standards for subdivision and land
development, is on file with the City Clerk.  Copies may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk.



1232.01   Application of standards.



1232.02   Lots.



1232.03   Street lighting.



1232.04   Street trees.



1232.05   Sidewalks.



1232.06   Natural features.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Approval of plats; street system - see M.C.L.A. § 125.43



   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations - see M.C.L.A. § 125.44



   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect - see M.C.L.A. §
125.45



   Certification of city plats - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



   Division of parcels of land - see ADM. 210.20



   Improvements - see P. & Z. 1228.03



   Construction of streets and utilities - see P. & Z. 1230.01



1232.01  APPLICATION OF STANDARDS.



   The standards set forth in this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions
in the City of Ionia.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1232.02  LOTS.



   (a)   All lots shall face upon, and have direct access to, a public
or private street.



   (b)   The side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles
or radial to the street upon which the lots face.



   (c)   All lots shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Code
for the zone in which the plat is located. 



   (d)   Corner lots for residential use shall have the minimum
required frontage on both streets adjacent to the lot.



   (e)   The depth of a lot shall not exceed four times the width. 
The depth of a lot shall be measured along a horizontal line located midway
between the side lot lines and connected to the front and rear lines, or the
two front lines of a through lot.  The width of the lot shall be measured
between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line at the minimum
required front setback line.



   (f)   Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width so as to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets or orientation to both streets.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1232.03  STREET LIGHTING.



   (a)   Street lights may be required to be provided in accordance
with the City of Ionia specifications.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1232.04  STREET TREES.



   Trees shall be required to be planted by the proprietor in the area
between the sidewalk and curb for each platted lot.  The Planning Commission
and Council may approve alternatives to this, such as requiring the tree to
be planted prior to occupancy of a house in order to ensure proper
maintenance of the tree.  All trees shall be deciduous with a minimum
caliper of two inches.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1232.05  SIDEWALKS.



   Sidewalks shall be installed for all lots prior to building or dwelling
occupancy in accordance with the City of Ionia specifications.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1232.06  NATURAL FEATURES.



   The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as
practical, by removing only those areas of vegetation or making those
alterations to the topography which are reasonably necessary to develop the
site in accordance with the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations.



(Ord. 389.  Passed 3-6-01.)



CHAPTER 1234
Signs



1234.01   Applicability.



1234.02   Purpose.



1234.03   Definitions.



1234.04   Prohibited signs.



1234.05   Signs not subject to chapter.



1234.06   Signs not needing a permit.



1234.07   General standards for permitted signs.



1234.08   Sign regulations applicable to all districts.



1234.09   Measurement of signs.



1234.10   Nonconforming signs.



1234.11   Portable, temporary, banner, flag, and similar signs.



1234.12   Signs in Residential Districts.



1234.13   Signs in the B-2, Community Business District.



1234.14   Signs for certain streets in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and Office
Districts.



1234.15   Signs in the B-1, B-3 and Office Districts.



1234.15A   Signs in the F-Fairgrounds District.



1234.16   Signs in the L-1, Light Industrial District.



1234.17   Signs in the East Main Preservation District.



1234.18   Administration.



1234.19   Substitution of non- commercial speech and commercial speech.



1234.20   Severability.



1234.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



   Sign permit fees - see ADM. 214.07(a)(8)



   Signs in mobile home parks - see P. & Z. 1268.06(k)



1234.01  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter applies to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations,
and corporations owning, occupying, or having control or management of any
premises located within the City.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09.)



1234.02  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is intended to regulate the size, number, location and
manner of display of signs in the City in a manner consistent with the
following purposes.



   (a)   To protect and further the health, safety and welfare of City
of Ionia residents, property owners and visitors.



   (b)   To prevent traffic hazards and pedestrian accidents caused by
signs which obstruct vision, distract or confuse drivers, or are improperly
secured or constructed.



   (c)   To conserve and enhance community character.



   (d)   To promote uniformity in the size, number or placement of
signs within districts.



   (e)   To promote the economic viability of commercial areas by
minimizing visual clutter and allowing for proper placement of signs to
safely direct motorists to their destination.



   (f)   To balance the public’s right to be informed and its desire
to avoid visual pollution and hazardous conditions with the rights of
businesses and other non-business uses to communicate.



   (g)   It is further recognized that special circumstances or events
may create a need for portable signage for a limited and reasonable period of
time.



   (h)   The purpose of this chapter does not include the regulation of
the content or any information included on the sign.



   (i)   The regulations and standards of this chapter are considered
the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve a substantial
government interest for public safety, aesthetics, and protection of property
values.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09.)



1234.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (a)   “Abandoned sign.” A sign which no longer identifies or
advertises a currently operating business, lessee, service, owner, product,
or activity.



   (b)   “Awning.” A retractable or fixed shelter constructed of
non-rigid materials on a supporting framework that projects from the exterior
wall of a building.  An awning is the same as a canopy.



   (c)   “Awning sign.” Letters, numerals or other drawings painted
on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning or canopy.



   (d)   “Balloon Sign.” See “inflatable sign.”



   (e)   “Banner Sign.” A portable sign of fabric, plastic, or
other non-rigid material without an enclosing structural framework attached
to or hung from a pole or rope or to a building or structure. Banner signs
also include flag signs, feather flags, and flutter flag signs.



   (f)   “Exempt sign.”  A sign for which a sign permit is not
required. 



   (g)   “Festoons.”  A string of ribbons, tinsel, flags, pennants
or pinwheels.



   (h)   “Flag sign.” A flag which contains the name, logo or other
symbol of a business, company, corporation or agency of a commercial nature.



   (i)   “Flashing sign.”  A sign which contains a rapidly
intermittent or changing light source.



   (j)   “Freestanding sign.” A sign not attached to a building or
wall which is supported by one or more poles or braces or which rests on the
ground or on a foundation resting on the ground.



   (k)   “Government sign.” A sign erected or required to be
erected by the City of Ionia, Ionia County, or the state or federal
government.



   (l)   “Ground sign.” A freestanding sign supported by a base
which rests directly on the ground.  The width of the base shall be at least
50 percent of the width of the sign in order to be a ground sign. 



   (m)   “Illegal sign.” A sign which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter and which has not received legal nonconforming
status.



   (n)   “Inflatable sign.” (“Balloon sign”).  Any three
dimensional object, including a tethered balloon, capable of being filled
with air or gas depicting a container, figure, product or product trademark,
whether or not such object contains a message or lettering.



   (o)   “Mansard.” A sloped roof or roof-like façade
architecturally comparable to a building wall.



   (p)   “Mansard sign.” A sign that is mounted, painted on, or
attached to a mansard.



   (q)   “Marquee.” A permanent structure constructed of rigid
materials that projects from the exterior wall of a building.



   (r)   “Marquee sign.” A sign affixed to the surface of a marquee.



   (s)   “Non-conforming sign.” A sign which was erected prior to
this chapter but which does not conform to this chapter.



   (t)   “Painted wall sign.” A sign which is applied with paint or
similar substance on the face of a wall or the roof of a building.



   (u)   “Pole sign.”A free standing sign which is supported by a
structure, poles, or braces which are less than 50 percent of the width of
the sign.



   (v)   “Pennant.” A flag or cloth that tapers to a point.



   (w)   “Portable sign.” A type of temporary sign that is not
permanent and not affixed to a building or structure any by its nature may be
or is intended to be easily moved from one location to another such as a
sidewalk sign and signs supported on a metal chassis and may include copy
that can be changed manually through the use of attachable characters.



   (x)   “Post sign.” A temporary sign constructed of unbendable
materials firmly attached to one or more wood, metal, plastic or other rigid
posts or supports placed into the ground without permanent footings.



   (y)   “Projecting sign.” A double-faced sign attached to a
building or wall that extends more than 12 inches but not more than 48 inches
from the face of the building or wall.



   (z)   “Reader board sign.” One of the following:



      (1)   “Manual.” A sign on which the letters or pictorials
are changed manually or;



      (2)   “Electronic reader board.” A sign with a fixed or
changing display or message composed of a series of lights that may be
changed through electronic means excluding video signs and flashing signs.



      (3)   “Multi-vision sign.” Any sign composed in whole or
in part of a series of vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are
capable of being rotated at intervals so that partial rotation of the group
of slats or cylinders produces a different image or images.



   (aa)   “Roof line.” The top of a roof or parapet wall, whichever
is higher, but excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor projections.



   (bb)   “Roof sign.” A sign which is attached to or is placed on
the roof of a building.



   (cc)   “Rotating sign.”  A sign in which the sign itself or any
portion of the sign moves in a revolving or similar manner.  Such motion
does not refer to methods of changeable copy.



   (dd)   “Sidewalk sign.” An A-frame sign which is portable and
designed to be placed on the sidewalk in front of the use it advertises. 
Also called a “sandwich board sign.”



   (ee)   “Sign.” A device, structure, fixture, figure or placard
which may or may not use graphics, symbols, emblems, numbers, lights and/or
written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising,
identifying, or directing attention to an establishment, product, service,
person, place, organization, institution, activity, or idea.



      (1)   “Permanent sign.” A sign installed on a support
structure, not intended to be moved or removed, but to remain for an
indefinitie period of time.



      (2)   “Temporary sign.” A sign installed for a limited
period of time, intended to be removed within a time period as specified
herein.



   (ff)   “Snipe sign.” A sign that is attached to a utility pole,
tree, fence, or to any object located or situated on public or private
property.



   (gg)   “Streamers.” A long, narrow strip of material used as a
decoration or symbol.



   (hh)   “Under canopy sign.” A sign suspended beneath a canopy,
ceiling, roof, or marquee.



   (ii)   “Wall sign.” A sign painted or attached directly to and
parallel to the exterior wall of a building extending no greater than 12
inches from the exterior face of a wall to which it is attached.



   (jj)   “Window sign.” A sign installed inside a window and
intended to be viewed from the outside.



   (kk)   “Vehicle sign.”A sign painted on, incorporated in, or
attached directly to any mode of transportation, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks, boats, trailers, semi-trailers or airplanes.



   (ll)   “Video sign.” A sign which displays moving images as on a
television.



   (mm)   “Wire frame sing.” A temporary sign made of corrugated
plastic, vinyl, cardboard, poster board or similar material which is
supported by or attached to a metal frame.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 490.  Passed 6-7-11; Ord. 528.  Passed
1-3-17.)



1234.04  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   A sign not expressly permitted by this chapter is prohibited.  The
following types of signs are expressly prohibited except that the Sign Board
of Appeals may permit these signs if it is demonstrated that such sign by
virtue of its size, shape, location, movement, materials, creativity in
design, temporary nature or other factors relating to its composition will
not be a visual nuisance, obstruct vision, compromise public safety, distract
drivers or detract from the character of the area where it is proposed to be
located. If such signs are permitted they shall comply with the applicable
regulations of this section.



   (a)    Inflatable signs which have rapidly moving, waving or
flapping parts.



   (b)   Flashing signs.



   (c)   Abandoned signs.



   (d)   Rotating signs.



   (e)   Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government
signs or signals.



   (f)   Vehicle signs not used during the normal course of business
which are conspicuously parked or located so as to advertise, identify, or
bring attention to an establishment, product, person, service or activity.



   (g)   Sexually graphic signs.



   (h)   Snipe signs.



   (i)   Strobe lights, and lights of a similar nature.



   (j)   Video signs except for portable video signs.



   (k)   Signs with fluorescent or neon colored letters such as “hot
pink,” “lime green,” “day glow” and “bright orange” or similar
colors when placed on a contrasting background.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 490.  Passed 6-7-11; Ord. 528.  Passed
1-3-17.)



1234.05  SIGNS NOT SUBJECT TO CHAPTER.



   The following signs shall be exempted from the provisions of this
chapter.



   (a)   Government signs five square feet or less erected on
government property or in the public right-of-way.



   (b)   Any sign two square feet or less in size and no more than four
feet in height. No more than three signs shall be permitted on one parcel.



   (c)   Flags or insignia of any nation, state, city, township,
government, or government authorized agency. Such flags shall only be
displayed on a flag pole.



   (d)   Inflatable signs (balloons) which are 12 inches or less in
diameter.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.06  SIGNS NOT NEEDING A PERMIT.



   The following signs shall not require a permit but shall be subject to
all other applicable regulations of this chapter. 



   (a)   Government signs greater than five square feet erected on
governmental property or in the public right-of-way.



   (b)   Ordinary maintenance of signs such as painting and cleaning.



   (c)   Changing of sign message.



   (d)   Temporary signs up to and including 16 square feet.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.07  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED SIGNS.



   (a)   Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
consistent with the Michigan Building Code and International Property
Maintenance Code and maintained in good and safe structural condition at all
times.  All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved
including all metal parts and supports.



   (b)   Signs shall be constructed to withstand all wind and vibration
forces which normally can be expected to occur in the vicinity.



   (c)   Signs may be internally or externally illuminated.  For
externally lit signs, the lighting fixture shall be mounted on the top only
and the light fixture shielded so that light is directed downward so that no
direct rays interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent streets or
properties.



   (d)   Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs
not attached to a building.



   (e)   A sign shall not contain moving, flashing, blinking or
animated parts except reader board signs as regulated by Section 1234.08(a).



   (f)   Signs shall not be placed in, upon or over any public
right-of-way, private road easement, alley, or other place, except as may be
otherwise permitted by the City of Ionia or Michigan Department of
Transportation.



   (g)   A light pole or other similar supporting member shall not be
used for the placement of any sign unless specifically designed and approved
for such use.



   (h)   A sign shall not be erected in any place where it may, by
reason of its position, shape, color, or other characteristics, interfere
with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device, or constitute a nuisance per se.



   (i)   A wall sign shall not extend beyond the edge of the wall to
which it is affixed, and no wall sign shall extend above the lowest point of
the roof of a building. 



   (j)   A sign and its supporting mechanism shall not extend beyond
any lot lines of the property on which it is located except that in the B-2
Zone projecting signs may project over the public sidewalk. 



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 490.  Passed 6-7-11; Ord. 528.  Passed
1-3-17.)



1234.08  SIGN REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS.



   The following sign regulations are applicable to all zoning districts.



   (a)   Reader Boards. All wall and freestanding signs may include
reader boards subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   For signs which are 50 square feet or less in area the
reader board shall not consist of more than 75% of the allowable sign area.



      (2)   For signs which are more than 50 square feet in area the
reader board shall not consist of more than 50% of the allowable sign area.



      (3)   An electronic reader board shall not have any animated
or flashing text.



      (4)   The copy on an electronic reader board shall not change
faster than every four seconds.



      (5)   An electronic reader board may serve as a window sign
subject to the size limitations for window signs contained herein and the
requirements of Section 1234.08(a)(3) and (4) above.



   (b)   Any pole sign, awning signs, wall sign and projecting sign,
shall maintain a minimum clear space of eight feet from the bottom of the
sign to the ground.



   (c)   Vehicles which bear signs may be parked on site provided they
are located in such a manner that they do not function as signs as prohibited
by Section 1234.04(f) herein.



   (d)   Pedestrian and vehicle safety signs are permitted for each
parcel provided the size of each device does not exceed four square feet, and
three feet in height and each device is located at least five feet from any
lot line.



   (e)   Any permanent sign may remain until such sign is in disrepair
and is deemed not to comply with Section 1234.07 of this chapter.



   (f)   Abandoned Signs. Any sign which the Community Development
Director or designee determines to be abandoned shall be removed by the
property owner according to the following regulations:



      (1)   If the sign is a non–conforming sign as defined herein
the sign and any supporting structures shall be removed within 30 days of
notification by the Community Development Director.



      (2)   If the sign is conforming the sign but not the
supporting structures shall be removed within 90 days of such notification by
the Community Development Director.  If the abandoned sign is a wall sign
the facade to which the sign was attached shall be restored upon removal of
the sign to match the existing wall so there is no remaining evidence of the
removed sign.



         If the owner does not remove the sign, or if no owner can
be found, the City may remove the sign. If the sign is removed by the City
and the owner is known, the City shall have the right to recover from the
owner of the sign the full costs of removing and disposal of the sign.



   (g)   Removal of Signs; Notice. Except as required by the above
sections, any sign and appurtenant structure shall be removed by the owner
within 72 hours of receipt of notice from the Community Development Director
or designee stating that the sign is unsafe, not properly maintained, or
otherwise does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Such notice
shall also state that the sign will be removed unless the unsafe or improper
condition is corrected by the owner.



      Upon failure to remove or correct the unsafe or improper
condition within 72 hours of receipt of notice, the Community Development
Director or designee may take whatever action is necessary to have the sign
and appurtenant structure removed or to otherwise abate the unsafe or
improper condition. In addition, the Community Development Director  or
designee shall take whatever action is necessary to recover from the owner of
the sign the full costs of removing and disposing of the sign or abating the
unsafe or improper condition.



   (h)   Roof Signs.  Roof signs are permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3
and O zoning districts subject to the following restrictions:



      (1)   A roof sign shall not project above the roof line.



      (2)   Only one roof sign shall be permitted per building.



      (3)   The size of a roof sign shall not exceed ten percent of
the area of that portion of the roof to which it is attached, as measured
from eave to roof peak.



      (4)   Lighting for roof signs shall comply with Section
1234.07(c).



      (5)   a roof sign may consist of painting on the surface of a
roof or a sign that is composed of roofing materials or other materials
affixed parallel to the roof surface.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 480. Passed 11-2-10; Ord. 490.  Passed 6-
7-11; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.09  MEASUREMENT OF SIGNS.



   (a)   Unless otherwise specified within this chapter for a
particular type of sign, the area of a sign shall be measured as the area
within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric
figure which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem,
logo, or any other figure of similar character, together with any frame or
other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed,
excluding only the structure necessary to support the sign.



   (b)   The area of a freestanding or projecting sign that has two or
more faces shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces, except
if two such faces are placed back-to-back and are of equal size, and are no
more than two feet apart at any point the area of the two back-to-back faces
shall be counted as one face.  If the two back-to-back faces are of unequal
size, the larger of the two sign faces shall be counted as the one face.



   (c)   The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical
distance from the highest point of the sign to the grade of the adjacent
street or the average grade of the ground immediately beneath the sign,
whichever is less.



   (d)   See Appendix II at the end of this chapter for illustrations
of sign measurement.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09.)



1234.10  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (a)   Every permanent sign which does not conform to the height,
size, area or location requirements of this chapter as of the date of the
adoption of this chapter, is hereby deemed to be nonconforming.



   (b)   Nonconforming signs shall not be replaced, moved, altered,
expanded, enlarged, or extended; however, nonconforming signs may be
maintained and repaired so as to continue the useful life of the sign per
Section 1234.10(e)(3) below.



   (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, a nonconforming sign may be
diminished in size or dimension or the copy of the sign amended or changed
without jeopardizing the privilege of nonconforming use.



   (d)   A sign accessory to a nonconforming use may be erected in the
City in accordance with the sign regulations for the District in which the
property is located.



   (e)   Non-conforming signs shall not:



      (1)   Be replaced or changed to another non-conforming sign;



      (2)   Be repaired, (restored to a sound or good condition
after damage or decay) except if such repair brings the sign into conformance
with this chapter; or



      (3)   Be repaired if such repair involves any of the following:



         A.   Necessitates the replacement of both the sign frame
and sign panels;



         B.   Replacement of the signs primary support pole(s) or
other support structure;



      (4)   Continue to be used after the activity, business, or use
to which it related has been discontinued for 90 consecutive days or longer;



      (5)   Be permitted to continue if there is a change of use on
the premises; or



      (6)   Be enhanced with any new feature including the addition
of illumination.



   (f)   The City of Ionia may acquire by purchase, condemnation, or by
other means any non-conforming sign which it deems necessary to preserve the
health, safety, and welfare of the City’s residents.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09.)



1234.11  PORTABLE, TEMPORARY, BANNER, FLAG, AND SIMILAR SIGNS.



   (a)   Regulations for Both Portable and Temporary Signs.



      (1)   Signs shall be anchored in a safe and secure manner. The
anchoring of portable and temporary signs by tying or attaching weighted
objects (such as cinder blocks or tires) is prohibited.



      (2)   The sign shall be located a minimum of five feet from
the edge of any road or street right-of-way or public or private sidewalk
except for sidewalk signs as regulated herein.



      (3)   A sign shall not be displayed if it is torn, bent,
faded, not upright, unreadable or otherwise unsightly.



      (4)   Temporary and portable signs held by a person, shall be
located outside of the public right-of-way and shall not hamper the
visibility of a driver on or off the site.



   (b)   Portable signs are allowed in all zoning districts subject to
the following regulations.



      (1)   One portable sign shall be permitted on a lot for up to
30 days per quarter in a calendar year provided however that a portable sign
shall not be displayed for 30 consecutive days per quarter.



      (2)   Except for inflatable signs as defined herein a portable
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be back lit only and
not have any flashing, colored or glaring lights.



      (3)   Sidewalk signs are specifically regulated by Section
1234.13(d) and are exempt from the requirements of Section
1234.11(b)(1)herein.



   (c)   Regulations for Temporary Signs.



      (1)   A temporary sign may be installed concurrent with the
event and removed upon the end of the event. The Zoning Administrator shall
have the discretion to determine the beginning and end of the event.



      (2)   A temporary sign shall not be installed in a public or
private street right-of-way.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the discretion to
determine when a temporary sign is a permanent sign and subject to the rules
for permanent signs.



   (d)   Pennants, festoons and streamers are allowed in the RM, RM-1,
B-1, B-2, B-3, O, and L-I Districts and in Mixed Use, Commercial, and
Industrial-PUD zoning districts, provided they are properly maintained but
shall be removed if they become torn, faded, unreadable, or otherwise
unsightly at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. These may be
displayed in conjunction with other portable, temporary, and permanent signs.



   (e)   Banner, flag sign, feather and flutter flags not to exceed
four such signs per parcel are allowed in the RM, RM-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, O, and
L-I Districts, and in Mixed Use, Commercial, and Industrial-PUD zoning
districts, and may be displayed indefinitely provided they are properly
maintained but shall be removed if they become torn, faded, unreadable, or
otherwise unsightly at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.  Each
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in size and 14 feet in height. These may
be displayed in conjunction with other temporary, portable, and permanent
signs. If the flag sign shares the same pole as the United States flag, the
flag sign shall be the smaller of these two flags and shall be placed below
the United States flag.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.12  SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   The following signs are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, RM, RM-1, RT,
RHD, and the MHP Zoning Districts.



   (a)   Signs as permitted and regulated by Sections 1234.07 through
1234.11.



   (b)   The following signs are permitted as part of an application
for and approval of a Special Land Use permit according to the following
requirements:



      (1)   One ground sign per parcel not to exceed 32 square feet
in area. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed six feet above grade.
Ground signs shall setback a minimum of five feet from all lot lines.



      (2)   Wall signs as follows:



         A.   No more than two signs per street frontage to be
placed on that wall of the building which directly faces the street.



         B.   The size of a single wall sign or the cumulative
total of all wall signs attached to a wall shall not exceed 10 percent of the
area of the wall to which it is attached.



   (c)   Additional Signs.  One permanent ground sign not to exceed 32
square feet in area and six feet in height sign may be provided at the
entrance to a subdivision, condominium, site condominium, or mobile home
park.  Such sign shall require a permit and shall be located outside the
right of way.  The sign shall be constructed primarily with carved wood,
brick, stone wrought iron, terra cotta, glazed tile or similar decorative
material in order to reflect and enhance the character of the area.



   (d)   The square footage of a single sign or the total square
footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet. Temporary
sings up to and including 16 square feet shall not require a permit but shall
be subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.13  SIGNS IN THE B-2, COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT. 



   Each establishment in the B-2, Community Business District is permitted
to have the following signs as regulated herein.



   (a)   Wall Signs.



      (1)   Each establishment may place a sign or signs on each
wall of the establishment. The size of a single wall sign or the cumulative
total of all wall signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the wall
which contains the sign or signs.



      (2)   The maximum length of a sign shall be six feet less than
the width of the store front and the edge of the sign shall be at least three
feet from the edge of the store front.



      (3)   Wall signs shall not project more than 12 inches from
the building surface. 



      (4)   Such sign shall not obscure architectural features of
the building including, but not limited to windows, arches, sills, moldings,
cornices, and transoms.



      (5)   Such sign shall not extend above the lowest point of the
roof, nor beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.



      (6)   A wall sign shall not be placed above nor shall any part
of the sign extend above the bottom of the second story window of a
multi-story building.



   (b)   Projecting Signs.  Projecting signs shall be subject to the
following regulations:



      (1)   In addition to a wall sign or signs allowed by the above
section, one projecting sign shall be permitted for each entrance to a
separate establishment within a building.



      (2)   The maximum size of such sign shall not exceed 16 square
feet.



      (3)   The sign shall not project more than four feet from the
building and shall be pinned away from the wall by a minimum of six inches.



      (4)   The sign shall project from the wall at an angle of 90
degrees.



      (5)   The sign shall not extend vertically beyond the window
sill of the second story.



      (6)   The sign shall maintain a minimum clearance from the
ground of eight feet.



      (7)   The sign shall be mounted to the building by a single
mounting bracket (support chains shall be prohibited) and no support material
shall project below the sign.



      (8)   A projecting sign shall be at least five feet from any
adjoining building.



      (9)   Projecting signs shall not be internally lighted. 
External lighting is permitted but the source of illumination shall not cause
a glare.



   (c)   Awning and Marquee Signs.  Awning and marquee signs shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   The size of an awning sign or the cumulative total of
all awning signs on an awning shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the
awning.



      (2)   Such signs shall not project more than six feet into the
public right-of-way, nor be closer than three feet to any street curb line.



      (3)   The awning or marquee to which the sign is attached
shall maintain a minimum clearance from the ground of eight feet.



   (d)   Sidewalk Signs. 



      (1)   Signs shall be of A-frame construction with a minimum
base spread of two feet and a maximum height of four feet.  The maximum size
shall not be more than eight square feet per side.



      (2)   One sign is permitted per establishment.



      (3)   The sign shall be placed in front of the establishment
using the sign.



      (4)   A minimum of four feet of unobstructed sidewalk must
remain between the sign and the building.



      (5)   The sign shall not be placed in a way which obstructs
pedestrian circulation, interferes with the opening of doors of parked
vehicles or snow removal operations.



      (6)   Sidewalk signs shall not be illuminated by any means or
have any moving parts.



      (7)   Such signs shall be properly maintained and not allowed
to become unsightly.



      (8)   Such signs shall only be in place during hours of
operation of the establishment.



   (e)   Window Signs.



      (1)   Window signs are permitted but shall cover no more than
25 percent of the total area of the windows on the first floor. Window signs
above the first floor are prohibited.



      (2)   A window sign may consist of illuminated letters
including neon lights.



      (3)   Window signs shall not consist of any flashing, moving,
animated, or intermittent letters or lights.



      (4)   An electronic reader board may serve as a window sign
subject to the size limitations for window signs as contained herein and the
requirements of Section 1234.08(a)(3) and (4) herein.



   (f)   Ground Signs. Ground signs are permitted according to the
following requirements for all parcels in the B-2 Zone:



      (1)   One sign per parcel not to exceed 32 square feet in area.



      (2)   The height of a ground sign shall not exceed six feet
above grade.



      (3)   Ground signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from all lot lines.



   (g)   Portable, temporary, banner, flag sign, and similar signs as
regulated by Section 1234.11.  The square footage of a single sign or the
total square footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet.  Temporary signs up to and including 16 square feet shall not require
a permit but shall be subject to all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.



   (h)   Roof Signs subject to the following restrictions:



      (1)   A roof sign shall not project above the roof line.



      (2)   Only one roof sign shall be permitted per building.



      (3)   The size of a roof sign shall not exceed ten percent of
the area of that portion of the roof to which it is attached, as measured
from eave to roof peak.



      (4)   Lighting for roof signs shall comply with Section
1234.07(c).



      (5)   A roof sign may consist of painting on the surface of a
roof or a sign that is composed of roofing materials or other materials
affixed parallel to the roof surface.



(Ord. 464. Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.14  SIGNS FOR CERTAIN STREETS IN THE B-1, B-2, B-3, AND OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (a)   Applicability.  For parcels which are zoned B-1, B-2, B-3 and
Office and which have street frontage on M-66, M-21, Steele Street, and Adams
Street the following regulations shall apply.



   (b)   Wall Signs.



      (1)   Each establishment may place a sign or signs on each
wall of the establishment. The size of a single wall sign or the cumulative
total of all wall signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the wall
which contains the sign or signs.



      (2)   Such sign shall not extend above the lowest point of the
roof, nor beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.



      (3)   A wall sign shall not be placed above nor shall any part
of the sign extend above the bottom of the second story window of a
multi-story building.



   (c)   Freestanding Signs. One ground sign or pole sign per lot is
permitted subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   Pole Sign. A sign of 48 square feet shall be permitted
for each lot and shall also be subject to the following:



         A.   In addition to the above, for each foot that a sign
is set back from the front setback requirement required in Section
1234.14(c)(2)C. below, the size of a sign may be increased by one additional
foot.  In no case shall a sign exceed 80 square feet.



         B.   For those lots with more than one establishment,
the size of the pole sign may be increased by 50 percent of the size allowed
by Section 1234.14(c)(1)A. above up to a maximum size of 96 square feet.



         C.   The support structure or poles for a pole sign
shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front lot line and 15 feet
from the side lot line.



         D.   Pole signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height and
shall have a minimum height between the bottom of the sign and the ground of
eight feet. The support structure or structures for a pole sign shall not be
more than three feet wide or three feet in diameter per support structure.



         E.   The design plans for any pole sign which is 20 feet
or higher, shall be sealed by a professional engineer or architect to ensure
the structural integrity of such signs for the safety of the public.



       (2)   Ground Signs. One sign not to exceed 50 square feet
shall be permitted for each lot and shall also be subject to the following:



         A.   The height of a ground sign shall not exceed six
feet above ground.



         B.   Ground signs shall be set back a minimum of five
feet from the front lot line and 10 feet from the side lot lines.



   (d)   Sidewalk Signs.  As permitted by Section 1234.13 (d) herein.



   (e)   Portable, temporary, banner, flag sign, and similar signs as
regulated by Section 1234.11.  The square footage of a single sign or the
total square footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet.  Temporary signs up to and including 16 square feet shall not require
a permit but shall be subject to all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.



   (f)   Roof signs as regulated by Section 1234.13(h).



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.15  SIGNS IN THE B-1, B-3, AND OFFICE DISTRICT.



   For all parcels in the B-1, B-3 and Office Zoning Districts which are
not located on M-66, M-21, Steele Street, and Adams Street all requirements
of Section 1234.14 herein shall apply except that freestanding pole signs are
prohibited.



   (a)   Portable, temporary, banner, flag signs, and similar signs as
regulated by Section 1234.11. The square footage of a single sign or the
total square footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet.  Temporary signs up to and including 16 square feet shall not require
a permit but shall be subject to all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.



   (b)   Inflatable signs shall be permitted in the B-1 and B-3 Zoning
Districts.  The anchoring systems shall be subject to review and approval of
the Community Development Director prior to installation or display. 
Inflatable signs are permitted to be placed on the roof of a building but
only on buildings with a flat roof.  Inflatable signs shall have no rapidly
moving, waving or flapping parts.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.15A  SIGNS IN THE F-FAIRGROUNDS DISTRICT.



   (a)   Conformance.  Any existing signs located on property zoned
F-Fairgrounds District as of the date of this amendment are hereby determined
to be conforming.  Any signs erected after the effective date of this
amendment shall conform to the standards contained in this section. 



   (b)   Exemption and Applicability.  The installation of signs in
the F-Fairgrounds District during the period of the traditional, annual fair
sponsored by the Ionia Free Fair Association, and during the period 14 days
prior to the start of the fair, shall be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter.  All signs installed during this period shall be removed within a
reasonable period of time after the conclusion of the fair.



   The applicable requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all other
days not exempted in the time period noted in this Section.



   (c)   The following signs are permitted in the F-Fairgrounds
District as regulated herein.



      (1)   Signs as permitted and regulated by Sections 1234.07 to
1234.10.



      (2)   Walls signs.



         A.   A wall sign or signs may be placed on the wall of
each building located on property zoned F.  The size of a single wall sign
or the cumulative total of all wall signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the
area of the wall which contains the sign or signs.



         B.   Wall signs shall not project more than 12 inches
from the building surface.



         C.   Wall signs shall be permitted on the exterior of
the wall that surrounds the race track subject to the standards identified in
A. and B. above.



         D.   Wall signs placed on the interior of the wall that
surrounds the race track shall be exempt from Chapter 1234.



      (3)   Freestanding signs.  One ground sign and one pole sign
are permitted along the M-66 frontage of the property utilized for the
fairgrounds and zoned F subject to the following regulations:



         A.   Pole sign.  A sign of up to 48 square feet shall
be permitted and shall be subject to the following:



            1.   In addition to the above, for each foot that
a sign is set back from the front setback requirement contained in paragraph
(c)(3)A.2. below, the size of a sign may be increased by one additional
foot.  In no case shall a sign exceed 80 square feet.



            2.   The support structure or poles for a pole
sign shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front line and 15 feet
from the side lot line.



            3.   Pole signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height
and shall have a minimum height between the bottom of the sign and the ground
of eight feet.  The support structure or structures for a pole sign shall
not be more than three feet wide or three feet in diameter per support
structure.



            4.   The design plans for any pole sign which is
20 feet or higher shall be sealed by a professional engineer or architect to
ensure the structural integrity of such signs for the safety of the public.



         B.   Ground sign.  A sign of up to 50 square feet shall
be permitted and shall be subject to the following:



            1.   The height of the ground sign shall not
exceed six feet above ground.



            2.   Ground signs shall be set back a minimum of
five feet from the front lot line and ten feet from the side lot lines.



      (4)   Sidewalk signs.  As permitted by Section 1234.13(d)
herein.



      (5)   Portable, temporary, banner, flag sign, and similar
signs as regulated by Section 1234.11.



         A.   The square footage of a single sign or the total
square footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square feet.
Temporary signs up to and including 16 square feet shall not require a permit
but shall be subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter.



         B.   Inflatable signs shall be permitted according to
the requirements of Section 1234.15(b)



(Ord. 473. Passed 5-4-10; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.16  SIGNS IN THE L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



   (a)   Wall Signs.



      (1)   Each establishment may place a sign or signs on each
wall of the establishment. The size of a single wall sign or the cumulative
total of all wall signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the wall
which contains the sign or signs.



      (2)   Such sign shall not extend above the lowest point of the
roof, nor beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.



      (3)   A wall sign shall not be placed above nor shall any part
of the sign extend above the bottom of the second story window of a
multi-story building.



   (b)   Ground Signs. One sign not to exceed 50 square feet shall be
permitted for each lot and shall also be subject to the following:



      (1)   The height of a ground sign shall not exceed six feet
above ground.



      (2)   Ground signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from the front lot line and 10 feet from the side lot lines. 



   (c)   Additional Signs. One permanent ground sign not to exceed 32
square feet in area and six feet in height sign may be provided at the
entrance to an establishment. Such sign shall require a permit and shall be
located outside the right-of-way.



   (d)   Portable, temporary, banner, flag sign, and similar signs as
regulated by Section 1234.11. The square footage of a single sign or the
total square footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet.  Temporary signs up to and including 16 square feet shall not require
a permit but shall be subject to all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.17  SIGNS IN THE EAST MAIN PRESERVATION DISTRICT.



   (a)   Any use which requires a Special Land Use permit shall be
permitted one sign which shall not exceed 16 square feet in size or four feet
in height if placed on the ground or ten feet above the ground if attached to
the wall. Signs shall be setback a minimum of five feet from all lot lines or
attached to the street side of the building.



   (b)   A sign may be illuminated only by means of external, shielded
light fixtures or the sign may be internally illuminated. Blinking lights on
signs are prohibited. A light fixture for a sign shall be placed so as to
avoid any glare when viewed from off the site. The source of the light shall
not exceed a total of 150 watts and any such light source shall be enclosed
and directed so as to prevent the source of light from shining directly or
indirectly onto traffic or adjacent or nearby property.



   (c)   The square footage of a single sign or the total square
footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet.  Temporary
signs up to and including 16 square feet shall not require a permit but shall
be subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter.



   (d)   Sidewalk signs.  As permitted by Section 1234.13(d) herein.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09; Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.18  ADMINISTRATION.



   (a)   Sign Chapter Administration. This chapter shall be
administered by the Community Development Director of the City or his or her
agent.



   (b)   Sign Permits.



      (1)   Permit Required. Except as provided in Section 1234.06
of this chapter, no person shall erect, structurally alter or maintain, or
relocate any sign without first obtaining a permit as prescribed herein.



      (2)   Application. An application for a sign permit shall be
made to the Community Development Director or agent along with any applicable
fee as may be set by resolution of the City Council from time to time.  The
application, at a minimum, shall include the following:



         A.   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of
the applicant and the person, firm or corporation erecting the sign and the
owner of the property. 



         B.   Address or permanent parcel number of the property
where the sign will be located.



         C.   A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of
the building, structure, or lot upon which the sign is to be attached or
erected, and showing the proposed sign in relation to buildings and
structures along with setback from lot lines.



         D.   Plans and specifications of the proposed sign
including the method of construction and attachment to structures or ground
and if deemed necessary by the Community Development Director or agent,
calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind
pressure in any direction of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area.



         E.   Any required electrical permit shall be attached to
the application.



         F.   The zoning district in which the sign is to be
located.



         G.   In the discretion of the Community Development
Director or agent and when in the interest of the safety of the public, the
drawings, plans, and specifications required with the application shall bear
the certificate or seal of a registered architect or engineer as a condition
to the issuance of a permit.



   (c)   Sign Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City
shall serve as the Sign Board of Appeals.



      (1)   General Procedures. The Sign Board of Appeals shall
adopt such rules and regulations to govern its procedures as it may deem
necessary.  Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chair,
and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board
shall be open to the public. The presence of a majority of the members shall
constitute a quorum.



      (2)   Duties and Powers of Board. The Sign Board of Appeals
shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Community Development Director. The
Sign Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize a variance from the
terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter would result in practical difficulty. A variance
may be authorized for height, area, number, and size of structure, sign
setback or other dimensional limitation.



      (3)   Variances. The Sign Board of Appeals shall only grant a
variance from the provisions of this chapter when it finds based on the
evidence presented to it that all of the following standards have been met.



         A.   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships that will exist if the variance is not granted. The appellant must
demonstrate that the alleged practical difficulty or hardship, or both, are
exceptional and peculiar to the appellant's situation and result from
conditions which do not generally exist throughout the City.



         B.   The fact that other larger signs constructed under
prior sign chapters exist in the area shall not be sufficient reason to
declare practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship.



         C.     The practical difficulty or hardship is not
self-created.



         D.   The terms “practical difficulties” and
“hardships” shall relate to the use of a  particular parcel of land.
“Practical difficulty” or “hardship” shall not be deemed solely
economic, such as the cost of the sign, the size of the sign, or the fact
that the sign has already been constructed. The fact that the sign is only
available in a standardized size and/or material (example: franchised
business signs) shall not constitute a “practical difficulty” or
“hardship.”



         E.   The practical difficulty or hardship which is
alleged to result from a failure to grant the variance must include
substantially more than mere inconvenience or the mere inability to attain a
higher financial return.



         F.   It must be demonstrated by the appellant that
granting the variance will result in substantial justice being done, while
consideration is given to the impacts on the public health, safety and
welfare.



         G.   The granting of the variance shall not impose a
negative impact on the rights of others.



      (4)   Conditions of Approval.  In authorizing a variance the
Board may attach conditions reasonably necessary to the furtherance of the
intent and spirit of this chapter and the protection of the public interest.



      (5)   Time Limitations on Variances.  Any variance granted by
the Board shall automatically terminate after a period of 12 months from the
date granted unless the owner or their agent shall have taken substantial
steps, as determined by the Board, in implementing the variances granted by
the Board.  The sign owner or land owner, upon application filed prior to
the expiration of the variance, may request an extension of the variance for
an additional period of 12 months upon a showing of good cause why the
variance was not implemented.



      (6)   Variance Review Procedure.



         A.   An appeal or application for a variance or from any
ruling of the officer administering this chapter shall be made to the
Community Development Director or agent. The appellant shall furnish a site
drawing, photograph, and any other means of proof, to the Sign Board of
Appeals to demonstrate that a hardship or practical difficulty exists.  The
Community Development Director or agent shall transmit the application and
all other pertinent information to the Sign Board of Appeals.



         B.   Notice of Public Hearing.  The Sign Board of
Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal.
The Community Development Director or agent shall provide notice of the
hearing no less than 15 days before the hearing to all persons owning real
property within 300 feet of the premises in question.  Said notice may be
delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and
tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. The notice shall
also be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days
before the date of the hearing.



         C.   Public Hearing.  The Sign Board of Appeals shall
conduct a public hearing on such appeal at which hearing any party may appear
in person, or by agent or attorney, and all of said parties so affected shall
be given an opportunity to be heard.  The applicant or his or her
representative shall appear at this hearing to present or answer questions
regarding the appeal.



      (7)   Decisions of the Board. 



         A.   The Sign Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decisions
or determination as in its opinion ought to be made, and to that end shall
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may
issue or direct the issuance of a permit.



         B.   A majority of the members of the Sign Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Community Development Director or their agent or to
decide in favor of the application any matter upon which they are required to
pass under this chapter.  A copy of the Board’s decision shall be
furnished to the applicant and the Community Development Director or agent.



      (8)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Community Development Director or agent from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Sign Board of Appeals after the
notice of appeal is filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate,
a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property.  In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Board or by the circuit court on application, on notice to
the Community Development Director or agent from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-3-09.)



1234.19  SUBSTITUTION OF NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH AND COMMERCIAL SPEECH.



   Any non-commercial speech may be substituted for commercial speech on a
sign, and any commercial speech may be substituted for non-commercial speech
on a sign, subject to the regulations for signs contained herein.



(Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.20  SEVERABILITY.



   Sections of this Sign Code shall be deemed to be severable, and should
any section, paragraph or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity of
this Zoning Code as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1234.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Any act or failure to act done in violation of the provisions
of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se.



   (b)   A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction
and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 202.99(b) of the Municipal
Code of the City of Ionia.



(Ord. 464.  Passed 2-03-09.)




APPENDIX I
SIGN REGULATIONS TABLE




 


ZONING DISTRICT

 

SIGN TYPE

 

NUMBER PERMITTED

 

MAX. SIZE

 

MAX. HEIGHT

 

LOCATION

 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS





R-1, R-2, R- 3, RM, RM- 1, RT, RHD, MHP
 
Ground
 

1

 

32 sq. ft.

 
6 ft.
 
5 ft. from all lot lines
 
Only with approval of a special land use


Wall
 

2 per street frontage

 

10% of area of wall

 
 
 
 
 
Size is single wall sign or cumulative total of all wall signs


Ground sign at entrance to subdivision or condominium, site condominium or
mobile home park
 

1 per entrance

 

32 sq. ft.

 
6 ft.
 
Outside right-of- way
 
Design requirements of 1234.12(c)


Temporary and portable signs, as regulated by 1234.11 and 1234.12(d)
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


B-2
 
Wall
 

No limit

 

10% of area of wall

 
 
 
 
 
Specific regulations of 1234.13(a)


Projecting
 

1 per entrance to each establish ment

 

16 sq. ft.

 
 
 
5 ft. from any adjoining bldg. ground clearance of 8 ft.
 
Specific regulations of 1234.13(b)


Awning and marquee
 

No limit

 

10% of awning area

 
 
 
No more than 6 ft. into right-of- way; 3 ft. from curb; ground clearance of 8
ft.
 
Size is single awning sign or cumulative total of all awning signs


Sidewalk
 

1 per establish ment

 

8 sq. ft.

 
4 ft.
 
In front of establishment; 4 ft. of unobstructed sidewalk between sign and
bldg.
 
Specific regulations of 1234.13(d)


Window
 


 

25% of area of window

 
 
 
First floor only
 
Specific regulations of 1234.13(e)


Ground
 

1

 

32 sq. ft.

 
6 ft.
 
5 ft. from all lot lines
 
 


Roof
 

1 per building

 

10% of area of roof, eave to peak

 
 
 
 
 
Lighting and design per 1234.13(b)


Temporary and portable signs, as regulated by 1234.11 and 1234.13(g)
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


B-1, B-2, B- 3 and Office for parcels with frontage on M-66, M-21, Steele and
Adams Street
 
Wall
 

No limit

 

10% of area of wall

 
Shall  not extend above bottom of 2nd story window not above lowest roof
point
 
Shall not extend beyond ends of the wall
 
 


Freestanding
 

1 ground or pole sign

 


 
 
 
 
 
 


Pole
 

1

 

48 sq. ft., size may increase per Sec. 1234.14(1)A. and B.

 
25 ft. above grade with 8 ft. clearance from ground
 
Support structure min. 20 ft. from front lot line; 15 ft. from side.
 
Support structure not more than 3 ft. wide or in diameter; design sealed by
PE or AIA.


Ground
 

1

 

50 sq. ft.

 
6 ft. above grade
 
Min. 5 ft. from front lot line; 10 ft. from side.
 
 


Sidewalk
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
Same as B-2


Temporary and portable signs, as regulated by 1234.11 and 1234.14(e)
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


Roof
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
Same as B-2


B-1, B-3, and Office without frontage on M-66, M-21, Steele and Adams Streets
 
Same as 1234.14 except pole signs are prohibited
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


Temporary, portable, and inflatable signs, as regulated by 1234.11 and
1234.15(a) and (b)
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


F- Fairgrounds
 
Wall
 

No limit

 

Max. 50% of area of wall

 
 
 
Shall not project more than 12 inches
 
See Sec. 1234.15A(c) for race track signs


Freestanding
 

1 ground and 1 pole sign along M- 66 frontage

 


 
 
 
 
 
 


Pole
 


 

48 sq. ft.; size may increase per sec. 1234.15A(c)(3)A.1. and 2.

 
25 ft. above grade with 8 ft. clearance from ground
 
Support structure min. 20 ft. from front lot line, 15 ft. from side
 
Support structure not more than 3 ft. wide or in diameter, design sealed by
PE or AIA.


Ground
 


 

50 sq. ft.

 
6 ft. above grade
 
Min. 5 ft. from front lot line; 10 ft. from side
 
 


Sidewalk
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
Same as B-2


Temporary, portable, and inflatable signs, as regulated by 1234.11 and
1234.15A(c)(5)
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


L-I Light Industrial
 
Wall
 

No limit

 

10% of area of wall

 
Shall not extend above bottom of 2nd story window nor above lowest roof point
 
Shall not extend beyond ends of the wall
 
 


Ground
 


 

50 sq. ft.

 
6 ft. above grade
 
Min. 5 ft. from front lot line; 10 ft. from side
 
 


Additional sign
 

1 ground sign

 

32 sq. ft.

 
6 ft.
 
Outside ROW, at entrance
 
Permit required


Temporary, and portable signs, as regulated by 1234.11 and 1234.16(d)
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


East Main Preservation
 
Sign permitted for an approved special land use
 

1

 

16 sq. ft.

 
4 ft. if ground sign; 10 ft. above ground if wall sign
 
5 ft. from all lot lines; or attached to street side of building
 
Illumination per 1234.17(b)


Temporary signs as regulated by 1234.11 and 1234.17(c)
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 


Sidewalk signs
 


 


 
 
 
 
 
Same as B-2




 



(Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)




APPENDIX II
MEASUREMENT OF SIGNS








 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







(Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



TITLE SIX – Zoning



   Chap. 1240.  General Provisions and Definitions.



   Chap. 1242.  Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.



   Chap. 1244.  Board of Zoning Appeals.



   Chap. 1246.  Districts Generally and Zoning Map.



   Chap. 1248.  R-1, R-2 and R-3 One-Family Residential Districts.



   Chap. 1250.  RT Two-Family Residential District.



   Chap. 1252.  RM Multiple Family Residential District.



   Chap. 1254.  RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts.



   Chap. 1255.  Office District.



   Chap. 1256.  B-1 Neighborhood Business District.



   Chap. 1258.  B-2 Community Business District.



   Chap. 1260.  B-3 General Business District.



   Chap. 1261.  F-Fairgrounds District.



   Chap. 1262.  I-1 Light Industrial District.



   Chap. 1264.  Flood Plain Overlay District.



   Chap. 1266.  PUD Planned Unit Development District.



   Chap. 1267.  Ionia Springs Planned Unit Development District.



   Chap. 1268.  MHP Mobile Home Park District.



   Chap. 1269.  East Main Preservation District.



   Chap. 1270.  Open Space Neighborhoods.



   Chap. 1271.  Resurrection Life Church Planned Unit Development (PUD)
District.



   Chap. 1272.  Site Condominiums.



   Chap. 1274.  Special Land Uses.



   Chap. 1276.  Site Plan Review.



   Chap. 1278.  Nonconforming Lots, Structures, and Uses.



   Chap. 1280.  Wireless Communication Towers and Equipment.



   Chap. 1282.  Off-Street Parking and Loading.



   Chap. 1284.  Signs and Advertising Devices. (Repealed)



   Chap. 1286.  Miscellaneous Regulations.



   Chap. 1287.  Wind Energy Systems.



   Chap. 1288.  Solar Energy Systems.



   Chap. 1289.   Medical Marihuana Facilities.



      Appx. I   -   Schedule of Regulations



      Appx. II   -   Zoning Map and Zoning Map Changes



      Appx. III   -   Basement and Story



      Appx. IV   -   Building Height



      Appx. V   -   Building Line



      Appx. VI   -   Floor Area



      Appx. VII   -   Interior, Through and Corner Lots



      Appx. VIII   -   Basic Structural Terms



      Appx. IX   -   Yards



      Appx. X   -   Parking Layouts (Repealed)



      Appx. XI   -   Distance Spacing for Multiple Dwellings



CHAPTER 1240
General Provisions and Definitions



1240.01   Short title.



1240.02   Conflicts of laws.



1240.03   Compliance required.



1240.04   Zoning of annexed areas.



1240.05   Zoning of vacated areas.



1240.06   District requirements.



1240.07   Amendments.



1240.08   Interpretation.



1240.09   Vested rights.



1240.10   Rules of construction.



1240.11   Definitions.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



   Fees - see ADM. 214.06



   Compliance with Zoning Code required for licensing - see B.R. & T.
802.11



   Compliance of junk dealers with Zoning Code - see B.R. & T. 832.04



1240.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This Title Six of Part Twelve of these Codified Ordinance shall be
known and may be cited as the City of Ionia Zoning Ordinance. 



(1975 Code § 5.1)



1240.02  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.



   Whenever any provision of this Zoning Code imposes more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provisions of
this Zoning Code shall govern.  Whenever the provisions of any other law or
ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by
this Zoning Code, the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 



(1975 Code § 5.111)



1240.03  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made
or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in
conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Code. 



(1975 Code § 5.112)



1240.04  ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.



   Whenever any area is annexed to the City of Ionia one of the following
conditions will apply:



   (a)   Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified
as being in whichever district of this Zoning Code most closely conforms to
the zoning that existed prior to annexation, such classification to be
recommended by the Planning Commission to the City Council, and the Council
shall approve the same by resolution.



   (b)   Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically
classified as an R-1 District until a Zoning Map for said area has been
adopted by the City Council. The Planning Commission shall recommend the
appropriate zoning districts for such area within three months after the
matter is referred to it by the City Council, or within one year after the
annexation is completed.



(1975 Code §5.23)



1240.05  ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.



   Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the City of Ionia
shall be vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof
shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property
to which it attaches. 



(1975 Code § 5.24)



1240.06  DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.



   All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the
provisions of Chapters 1278 through 1286 of this Zoning Code. 



(1975 Code § 5.25)



1240.07  AMENDMENTS.



   The City Council may from time to time, on recommendation from the
Planning Commission or on petition, amend, supplement, rezone or change the
district boundaries or the regulations herein, or subsequently established
herein, pursuant to authority and procedure established by the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006.



   In instances that involve the rezoning of a property (or properties) or
the changing of the district boundaries, regardless if by petition or
initiation by the City, the public hearing shall comply with the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 as amended and the other provisions of
this section with regard to public notification.



   (a)   Responsibility for Public Notice.  The City Clerk, or his or
her designee, shall be responsible for preparing the content of the public
notice, having it published  and mailed or delivered as provided in this
section.



   (b)   Notice Requirements.  Notice of a public hearing for an
administrative review, variance, exceptions and special approvals shall be
given not less than fifteen days before the date of the public hearing.  The
notice shall be given as follows:



      (1)   Newspaper notice.  The notice shall be published in a
newspaper that circulates in the City.



      (2)   Mail and personal notice.  The notice shall be sent by
first class mail or personal delivery to:



         A.   The owner of property for which approval is being
considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner of the property.



         B.   Sent by first class mail or personal delivery to
all persons to whom property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of
the property subject of the request and to the occupants of all structures
within 300 feet of the property, regardless of whether the property or
occupant is located within the municipal boundaries of the City.  If the
name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making
notifications.  In the case of a single structure containing more than four
dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given
to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the
notice at a primary entrance to the structure.



         C.   All neighborhood organizations, public utility
companies, airports, railroads, and other persons, which have requested to
receive notice pursuant to this section.



   (c)   Record of Mailing.  The City Clerk, or his or her designee,
shall prepare an affidavit of mailing which shall include those to whom the
notice was mailed and the date of mailing.



   (d)   Content of Notice.  The public notice shall:



      (1)   Describe the nature of the request.



      (2)   Indicate the property that is the subject of the
request.  The notice shall include a listing of all existing street
addresses within the subject property.  Street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently exist for the property. 
If there are no street addresses, other means of identified may be used, such
as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross streets,
or including a map showing the location of the property. 



      (3)   Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing.



      (4)   Include a statement describing when and where written
comments will be received concerning the request and a statement that the
public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.



   (e)   Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.  Any neighborhood
organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may
register with the City Clerk to receive written notice of any public hearing
held pursuant to Part Twelve, Planning and Zoning, of the City Code.



   (f)   Each proposed amendment or supplement to Title Six - Zoning of
the Codified Ordinances of Ionia shall be referred to the Planning Commission
for its consideration and a subsequent recommendation to the City Council
following a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended.



   After receiving such recommendation, the City Council shall consider
the proposed amendment.  The City Council may hold a public hearing if it
considers such additional hearing necessary.  Upon request of any property
owner by certified mail directed to the City Clerk, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing.  Notice of the additional public hearing shall be
made in accordance with the requirements of Section 1240.07.



   The City Council may, but need not, refer any proposed amendment back
to the Planning Commission for consideration and comment within the time
period specified by the City Council if the City Council desires to revise
the amendment proposed by the Planning Commission.  Following this the City
Council shall vote on the adoption of the amendment to Title Six - Zoning,
with or without revisions proposed by the Planning Commission.  The City
Council, however, may revise the amendment as proposed by the Planning
Commission and then proceed to vote on the adoption of the amendment.



(1975 Code § 5.198)  (Ord. 443.  Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 469. Passed 10-6-09.)



1240.08  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.  It
is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance, or with
any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall
be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or
premises, provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction than is required by other provisions of these Codified Ordinances
or by the rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. 



(1975 Code § 5.199)



1240.09  VESTED RIGHTS.



   Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise
to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use,
district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein, and
the same are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public
health, safety, and welfare. 



(1975 Code § 5.200)



1240.10  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter:



   (a)   The particular shall control the general.



   (b)   In cases of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this Zoning Code and any caption or illustration, the text shall
control.



   (c)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. 
The word "may" is permissive.



   (d)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (e)   A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.



   (f)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for",
"intended for", "maintained for" and or "occupied for ".



   (g)   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.



   (h)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction "and", "or" or "either...or", the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   "And" indicates that all the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.



      (2)   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination.



      (3)   "Either. . . or" indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.



   (i)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.



(1975 Code § 5.5)



1240.11  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this Zoning Code, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings given to them herein:



   (1)   Accessory Use and Accessory:  An "accessory use" is a use
which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and
(except in the case of accessory off-street parking space or loading) located
on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related.



   When "accessory" is used in the text, it shall have the same meaning as
accessory use.  An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the
following:



      A.   Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers.



      B.   Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a
residence, or their guests.



      C.   Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool
room, or similar accessory building or other structure.



      D.   A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the
occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has
no exterior signs or displays.



      E.   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in
connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded
in the applicable district regulations.



      F.   Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses
or related activities unless such storage is excluded in the applicable
district regulations.



      G.   Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed,
subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in
which the zoning lot is located.



      H.   Uses clearly incidental to a main use, such as, but not
limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the
site of the commercial or industrial complex.



      I.   Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street
loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.



      J.   Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the
district in which the zoning lot is located.



    (2)   Adult day care home: A private dwelling in which persons 18
years or older are provided supervision, personal care and protection for
periods of less than 24 hours a day, operated by a person who permanently
resides as a members of the dwelling.



   (3)   Adult foster care family home: A private residence with the
approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster
care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The
adult foster care family home licensee shall be a member of the household,
and an occupant of the residence.



(Ord. 08-2002-09. Passed 10-1-02.)



   (4)   Alley:  Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means
of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic
circulation.



   (5)   Alterations:  Any change, addition, or modification in
construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a
building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the
consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or
"reconstructed".



   (6)   Apartment:  A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family
building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or
a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.



   (7)   Auto Repair Station:  A place where, along with the sale of
engine fuels, the following services may be carried out: general repair,
engine rebuilding, rebuilding or re-conditioning of motor vehicles; collision
service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair; overall
painting and undercoating of automobiles.



   (8)   Basement:  That portion of a building which is partly or
wholly below grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the
average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the
average grade to the ceiling.  A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
(See Appendix III following the text of this Zoning Code.)



   (9)   Bed and Breakfast: A use subordinate to the principal use of a
dwelling unit as a single-family unit and a use in which transient guests are
provided a sleeping room and breakfast in return for payment for no  more
than 30 consecutive days.



(Ord. 08-2002-09. Passed 10-1-02.)



   (10)   Block:  The property abutting one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) or
between the nearest such street and a railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided
acreage, lake, river or live stream, or between any of the foregoing and any
other barrier to the continuity of development, or the corporate boundary
lines of the Municipality.



   (11)   Building:  Any structure, either temporary or permanent,
having a room supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.



   (12)   Building Height:  The vertical distance measured from the
established grade to the highest point of the roof structure for flat roofs;
to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.  Where a building is located in
sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of
the grade at the building wall.  (See Appendix IV following the text of this
Zoning Code.)



   (13)   Building Line:  A line formed by the face of the building. 
For the purpose of this Zoning Code, a minimum building line is the same as a
front setback line.  (See Appendix V following the text of this Zoning Code.)



(1975 Code §5.6)



   (14)   Child Care Center: A facility in which one or more children
are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours per day on a
regular basis. Child care centers do not include family or group day care
homes, or schools. Child care and supervision provided as an accessory use,
while parents are engaged or involved in the principal use of the property,
such as nursery operated during church services or public meetings, or by a
fitness center or similar operation, shall be considered accessory to such
principal use and shall not be considered to be a child care center.



   (15)   Child Day Care Homes:



      A.   Family day care: A private residence in which less than
seven minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than
24 hours per day, operated by a person who permanently resides as a member of
the household, which is registered with the State Department of Family
Independence.



      B.   Group day care: A private residence in which more than
six but less than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for
periods of less than 24 hours per day, operated by a person who permanently
resides as a member of the household, which is regulated by the State
Department of Social Services.



   (16)   Church, Mosque, Synagogue: A building the primary use of
which is regular assembly of persons for religious worship or services,
together with accessory uses and which qualifies for tax exempt status under
Section 501(C)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.



(Ord. 08-2002-09. Passed 10-1-02.)



   (16a)   Church, Mosque, Synagogue Related Accessory Uses: Accessory
related uses for a church, mosque or synagogue for the purposes of this
Zoning Code include the following:



      A.   A child care facility established within such use
provided that it is licensed as required by State of Michigan law.



      B.   A fellowship hall and/or kitchen for the purpose of
hosting fundraisers, funeral meals, wedding receptions and related activities.



      C.   A food pantry for the purposes of distributing food to
members of the community to consume off-site.



      D.   A pre-school or vacation bible school to provide
educational opportunities for young people who may or may not be members of
the church.



(Ord. 461.  Passed 10-7-08.)



   (17)   Clinic:  An establishment where human patients who are not
lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of
physicians, dentists or similar professionals.



   (18)   Club:  An organization of persons for special purposes or
for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the
like, but not operated for profit. 



(1975 Code § 5.7)



   (19)   Condominium:  For the purpose of condominium units or
condominium developments, the words and phrases defined in Sections 3 to 10
of Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1975, entitled the Condominium Act, as
amended by Act 538 of the Public Acts of 1982, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in those sections, which are hereby adopted and
made a part hereof and incorporated herein by reference. 



   (20)   Condominium Residential Dwelling Unit:  For the purpose of
this Zoning Code, a condominium residential dwelling unit shall be known as
an individual ownership of a one-family dwelling within a multi-unit
residential housing structure. 



(Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88.)



   (21)   Convalescent or Nursing Home:  A structure with sleeping
rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals and
nursing and medical care.



   (22)   Development:  The construction of a new building or other
structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another
zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use.



   (23)   District:  A portion of the incorporated area of the
Municipality within which certain regulations and requirements or various
combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.



   (24)   Drive-in:  A business establishment so developed that its
retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or
parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor
vehicle rather than within a building or structure.



   (25)   Dwelling, Multiple-family:  A building, or a portion
thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other.



   (26)   Dwelling, One-family:  A building designed exclusively for
and occupied by one family.



   (27)   Dwelling, Two-family:  A building designed exclusively for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other.



   (28)   Dwelling Unit:  A building or portion thereof, designed for
occupancy by one family for residential purposes, having cooking facilities,
and a gross floor area of not less than 500 square feet. 



(1975 Code § 5.7)



   (28a)   Enclosed Locked Facility:  A closet, room, or other
comparable, stationary, and fully enclosed area equipped with secured locks
or other functioning security devices that permit access only by a primary
caregiver or qualifying patient. Marihuana plants grown outdoors are
considered to be in an enclosed, locked facility if they are not visible to
the unaided eye from an adjacent property when viewed by an individual at
ground level or from a permanent structure and are grown within a stationary
structure that is enclosed on all sides, except for the base, by chain-link
fencing, wooden slats, or a similar material that prevents access by the
general public and that is anchored, attached, or affixed to the ground;
located on land that is owned, leased, or rented by either the qualifying
patient or a person designated through the Departmental of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs registration process as the primary caregiver for the
qualifying patient or qualifying patients for whom the marihuana plants are
grown; and equipped with functioning locks or other security devices that
restrict access to only the qualifying patient or the primary caregiver who
owns, leases, or rents the property on which the structure is located.
Enclosed, locked facility includes a motor vehicle if both of the following
conditions are met:



      A.   The vehicle is being used temporarily to transport living
marihuana plants from one location to another with the intent to permanently
retain those plants at the second location.



      B.   An individual is not inside the vehicle unless he or she
is either the qualifying patient to whom the living marihuana plants belong
or the individual designated through the departmental registration process as
the primary caregiver for the qualifying patient.



(Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10; Ord. 515. Passed 10-7-14.)



   (29)   Erected:  Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed or
moved upon.  Any physical operations on premises which are required for
construction, excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a
part of erection.



   (30)   Essential Services:  The erection, construction, alteration
or maintenance by public utilities or Municipal departments of underground,
surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or
distribution systems, or collection, communication, supply or disposal
systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and similar equipment in connection therewith, but not including buildings
which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities
or Municipal departments for the general health, safety, or welfare.



   (31)   Excavation:  Any breaking of ground, except common household
gardening and ground care.



   (32)   Family:  One or two persons or parents, with their direct
lineal descendants and adopted children (and including the domestic employees
thereof), together with not more than two persons not so related, living
together in the whole or part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping
unit.  Every additional group of two or less persons living in such
housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of
this Zoning Code.



   (33)   Farm:  The carrying on of any agricultural activity or the
raising of livestock or small animals as a source of income.



   (34)   Floor Area, Residential:  For the purpose of computing the
minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the
horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls
separating two buildings.  The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas
of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed
and unenclosed porches.  (See Appendix VI following the text of this Zoning
Code.)



   (35)   Floor Area, Usable (for the purposes of computing parking): 
That area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or
services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers.  Such floor
area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or
processing of merchandise or for utilities or sanitary facilities, and
hallways, shall be excluded from this computation of "usable floor area". 
The sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building,
measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls, shall be the method
of measurement.  (See Appendix VI following the text of this Zoning Code.) 



(1975 Code § 5.8)



   (36)   Foster Care Facility: An establishment that provides
supervision, assistance, protection or personal care, in addition to room and
board, to persons. A foster care facility is other than a home for the aged
or nursing home, licensed under Article 17 of the Public Health code, Act No.
368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (M.C.L.A. 333.20101 et seq., MSA
14.15 (20101) et seq.), or a mental hospital for mental patients licensed
under Sections 134-150 of Act No. 258 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974
(M.C.L.A. 330.1135 et seq., MSA 14.800(135) et seq.).



(Ord. 08-2002-09. Passed 10-1-02.)



   (37)   Garage, Private:  An accessory building or portion of a main
building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles,
boats, and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building
to which it is accessory.



   (38)   Garage, Service:  Any premises used for the storage or care
of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for
operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.



   (39)   Gasoline Service Station:  A place for the dispensing, sale,
or offering for sale of motor fuels, directly to users of motor vehicles,
together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles,
but not including major automobile repair.



   (40)   Grade:  The ground elevation established for the purpose of
regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings.  The building
grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building
if the finished grade is level.  If the ground is not entirely level, the
grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each
face of the dwelling.



   (41)   Group Home: A facility that provides foster care to seven or
more persons.



   (42)   Homes for the Elderly, Retired, or Those Requiring Assisted
Care: A facility for persons 55 years or older or for those requiring
extended care, including convalescent or nursing homes, but not including a
hospital, which either provides or offers a level of care to its residents
required to be licensed by the State or contains individual resident rooms or
dwelling units with or without separate cooking facilities.



(Ord. 08-2002-09. Passed 10-1-02.)



   (42a)   Home Occupation: An occupation or business that is conducted
in or on property containing a dwelling unit in a manner that is clearly
secondary and accessory to the principal residential use of the property as
regulation by Section 1286.10 herein.



(Ord. 483.  Passed 2-1-11.)



   (43)   Hotel:  A building or part of a building, with a common
entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used
primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following
services are offered:



      A.   Maid service



      B.   Furnishing of linen



      C.   Telephone, secretarial, or desk service



      D.   Bellboy service



   A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet
halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms.



   (44)   Junk Yard:  An open area where waste, used or secondhand
materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other
metal, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles.  A "Junk Yard" includes
automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than 200 square feet
for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses
established entirely within enclosed buildings. 



(1975 Code § 5.9)



   (45)   Kennel, Commercial:  Any lot or premises on which three or
more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily
boarded.  Kennel shall also include any lot or premises where household pets
are bred or sold.



   (46)   Loading Space:  An off-street space on the same lot with a
building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.



   (47)   Lot:  A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied,
by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or
utilized for principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. 
A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records.



   (48)   Lot Area:  The total horizontal area within the lot lines of
the lot.



   (49)   Lot, Corner:  A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent
sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees.  A lot
abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for
the purpose of this Zoning Code if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet
and tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the
curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less
than 135 degrees.  (See Appendix VII following the text of this Zoning Code.)



   (50)   Lot Coverage:  The part or percent of the lot occupied by a
building, including accessory buildings.



   (51)   Lot Depth:  The horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.



   (52)   Lot, Interior:  Any lot other than a corner lot.  (See
Appendix VII following the text of this Zoning Code.)



   (53)   Lot Lines:  The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:



      1.   Front Lot Line:  In the case of an interior lot, that
line separating said lot from the street.  In the case of a corner lot, or
double frontage lot, it is that line separating said lot from either street.



      2.   Rear Lot Line:  That lot line opposite the front lot
line.  In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be
an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet
long, lying farthest from the front line and wholly within the lot.



      3.   Side Lot Line:  Any lot line other than the front lot
line or rear lot line.  A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a
side street lot line.  A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or
lots is an interior side lot line.



   (54)   Lot of Record:  A parcel of land, the dimensions of which
are shown on a document or map on file with the County Register of Deeds or
in common use by Municipal or County officials, and which actually exists as
so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from
that of the remainder thereof.



   (55)   Lot, Through:  Any interior lot having frontage on two more
or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot.  In case of a
row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to a street
shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as
required.  (See Appendix VII following the text of this Zoning Code.)



   (56)   Lot Width:  The horizontal distance between the side lot
line, measured at the two points where the building line, or setback line,
intersects the side lot lines. 



(1975 Code § 5.10)



   (57)   Lot, Zoning:  A single tract of land, located within a
single block, which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is
designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or
built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control.



   A zoning lot shall satisfy this Zoning Code with respect to area, size,
dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot
is located.  A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record
as filed with the County Register of Deeds, but may include one or more lots
of record.



   (58)   Main Building:  A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot upon which it is situated.



   (59)   Main Use:  The principal use to which the premises are
devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.



   (60)   Major Thorofare:  An arterial street which is intended to
serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate Municipal area and
the region beyond, and which is designated as a major thorofare, parkway,
freeway, expressway or an equivalent term on the Major Thorofare Plan to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the Major Thorofare
Plan.



   (61)   Master Plan:  The comprehensive plan, including graphic and
written proposals, indicating the general location for streets, parks,
schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the Municipality,
and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or
parts thereof.  Such plan may or may not be adopted by the Planning
Commission and/or the legislative body.



   (61a)   Medical Use of Marihuana:  The acquisition, possession,
cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or
transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia related to the administration of
marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's
debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the condition.



(Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10; Ord. 515. Passed 10-7-14.)



   (62)   Mobile Home (Trailer Coach):  Any vehicle designed, used, or
so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets or highways and duly licensable as such, and constructed in such a
manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for
one or more persons.



   (63)   Mobile Home Park (Trailer Court):  Any plot of ground upon
which two or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located.



   (64)   Motel:  A series of attached, semi-detached or detached
rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space.  Units shall
provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation,
and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle.



   (65)   Municipality:  The City of Ionia,  Michigan.



   (66)   Non-Conforming Building:  A building or portion thereof
lawfully existing on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or amendments
thereto, that does not conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code in the
district in which it is located.



   (67)   Non-Conforming Use:  A use which lawfully occupied a
building or land on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or amendments
thereto, that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located.



   (68)   Nuisance Factors:  An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or
obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a
continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity
or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human
being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people
or things, such as:



      A.   noise



      B.   dust



      C.   smoke



      D.   odor



      E.   glare



      F.   fumes



      G.   flashes



      H.   vibration



      I.   shock waves



      J.   heat



      K.   electronic or automatic radiation



      L.   objectional effluent



      M.   noise of congregation of people, particularly at night



      N.   passenger traffic



      O.   invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic.



(1975 Code § 5.11)



   (69)   Nursery, Plant Materials:  A space, building or structure,
or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants
offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for
gardening or landscaping.  The definition of nursery within the meaning of
this Zoning Code does not include any space, building or structure used for
the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.



   (70)   Off-Street Parking Lot:  A facility providing vehicular
parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as
to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three
vehicles.



   (71)   Open Front Store:  A business establishment so developed
that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure,
not requiring the patron to enter the structure.  The term "Open Front
Store" shall not include automobile repair stations or automobile service
stations.



   (72)   Parking Space:  An area of definite length and width,
exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and fully
accessible for the storage of parking of permitted vehicles.



   (72a)   Person:  An individual, partnership, corporation
association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, governmental unit, and any
other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting
such group or unit.



(Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10.)



   (72b)   Primary Caregiver:  A person who is at least 21 years old
and who has agreed to assist with a qualifying patient's medical use of
marihuana and who has not been convicted of any felony within the past ten
years and has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs or a
felony that is an assaultive crime as defined in section 9a of chapter x of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, M.C.L.A. 770.9a.



(Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10; Ord. 515. Passed 10-7-14.)



   (73)   Public Utility:  A person, firm, or corporation, Municipal
department, board or commission, duly authorized to furnish and furnishing,
under Federal, State or Municipal regulations, to the public:  gas, steam,
electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or
water.



   (73a)   Qualifying Patient:  A person who has been diagnosed by a
physician as having a debilitating medical condition and has been registered
pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, M.C.L.A. 333.26421 et seq.



(Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10.)



   (74)   Room:  For the purpose of determining lot area requirements
and density in a multiple-family district, a room is a living room, dining
room or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area.  A room shall not
include the area in a kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions,
corridors, hallways, and storage.  Plans presented showing 1, 2 and
3-bedroom units, and including a "den", "library" or other extra room, shall
count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density.



   (75)   Setback:  The distance required to obtain front, side or
rear yard open space provisions of this Zoning Code.



   (76)   Sign:  The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices,
designs, or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to
show an individual, firm, profession, or business, and which are visible to
the general public.



   (77)   Sign, Accessory:  A sign which is accessory to the principal
use of the premises.



   (78)   Sign, Non-Accessory:  A sign which is not accessory to the
principal use of the premises.



   (79)   Story:  That part of a building, except a mezzanine,
included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor,
or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above.  A story thus
defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50%, by cubic content,
is below the height level of the adjoining ground.



   (80)   Story, Half:  An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof
having an area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet,
six inches.  For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the usable floor area is
only that area having at least four feet clear height between floor and
ceiling.



   (81)   Street:  A public dedicated right-of-way, other than an
alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.



   (82)   Structure:  Any thing constructed or erected, the use of
which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
location on the ground.  (See Appendix VIII following the text of this
Zoning Code.)



(1975 Code § 5.12)



   (83)   Temporary Use or Building:  A use or building permitted by
the Board of Zoning Appeals to exist during periods of construction of the
main building or use, or for special events.



   (84)   Use:  The principal purpose for which land or a building is
arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be
occupied.



   (85)   Yards:  The open spaces on the same lot with a main building
occupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided in this Zoning Code, and as defined herein:



      A.   Front Yard:  An open space extending the full width of
the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the
front lot line and the nearest point of the main building.



      B.   Rear Yard:  An open space extending the full width of
the lot the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the
rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building.  In the case of a
corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage.



      C.   Side Yard:  An open space between a main building and
the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width
of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot
line to the nearest point of the main building.  (See Appendix IX following
the text of this Zoning Code.)



   (86)   Zoning Exceptions and Variances:



      A.   Exception:  Exception is a use permitted only after
review of an application by the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Planning
Commission, other than the administrative official (Community Development
Director), such review being necessary because the provisions of this Zoning
Code covering conditions, precedent or subsequent, are not precise enough to
all applications without interpretation, and such review is required by this
Zoning Code.



      B.   Variance:  A modification of the literal provisions of
this Zoning Code granted when strict enforcement of this Zoning Code would
cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property
on which the variance is granted.



      The crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique
circumstances applying to the property.  A variance is not justified unless
both elements are present in the case.



      C.   The "Exception" differs from the "Variance" in several
respects.  An exception does not require "undue hardship" in order to be
allowable.  The exceptions that are found in this Zoning Code appear as
"special approval" by the Planning Commission, the legislative body, or the
Board of Zoning Appeals.  These land uses could not be conveniently
allocated to one zone or another, or the effects of such uses could not be
definitely foreseen as of a given time.  The general characteristics of
these uses include one or more of the following:



         1.   They require large areas



         2.   They are infrequent



         3.   They sometimes create an unusual amount of traffic



         4.   They are sometimes obnoxious or hazardous



         5.   They are required for public safety and convenience.



(1975 Code § 5.13)  (Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19)



Chapter 1242
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty



1242.01   Responsibility of Planning Commission.



1242.02   Approval of uses by Planning Commission.



1242.03   General authority of Community Development Director and deputies.



1242.04   Duties of Community Development Director.



1242.05   Applications for building permits; plans required.



1242.06   Issuance of permits.



1242.07   Certificates of Occupancy.



1242.08   Final inspection.



1242.09   Fees.



1242.10   Nuisance per se.



1242.11   Violations.



1242.12   Rights and remedies are cumulative.



1242.13   Severability.



1242.14   Effective date.



1242.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Fees - see ADM. 214.06



   Compliance with Zoning Code required for licensing - see B.R. & T.
802.11



   Compliance of junk dealers with Zoning Code - see B.R. & T. 832.04



   Compliance required - see P. & Z. 1240.03



   Amendments - see P. & Z. 1240.07



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



1242.01  RESPONSIBILITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The City Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Commission
specified in Section 4 of Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, and shall
perform the zoning duties of said Commission as provided in the statute in
connection with the amendment of this chapter.



(1975 Code §5.191)



1242.02  APPROVAL OF USES BY PLANNING COMMISSION.



   In cases where the City Planning Commission is empowered to approve
certain uses of premises under the provisions of this Zoning Code, the
applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be
reasonably required by said Commission for the proper consideration of the
matter.



   The Planning Commission shall investigate the circumstances of each
such case and shall notify such parties, who may in its opinion be affected
thereby, of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative
thereto as required under its rules of procedure.



   The Planning Commission may impose such conditions or limitations in
granting approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the spirit
and purpose of this Zoning Code.



   Any approval given by the Planning Commission, under which premises are
not used or work is not started within six months, or when such use or work
has been abandoned for a period of six months, shall lapse and cease to be in
effect. 



(1975 Code § 5.195)



1242.03  GENERAL AUTHORITY OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR AND DEPUTIES.



The provisions of this Zoning Code shall be administered and enforced by the
Community Development Director or by such deputies of his or her department
as the Director may delegate to enforce the provisions of this Zoning Code.



1242.04  DUTIES OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   The Community Development Director shall have the power to grant zoning
compliance and occupancy permits and to make inspections of buildings or
premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this
Zoning Code.  The Director shall not approve any plans or issue any permits
or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he or
she has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform to this
Zoning Code.



   The Director shall record all nonconforming uses existing on the
effective date of this Zoning Code for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of Chapter 1278.



   Under no circumstances is the Director permitted to make changes to
this Zoning Code, nor to vary the terms of this Zoning Code in carrying out
his or her duties as Director.



   The Director shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed
by this Zoning Code are complied with by the applicant despite violations of
contracts, such as covenants or private agreements, which may occur upon the
granting of said permit.



1242.05  APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS; PLANS REQUIRED.



   (a)   The Community Development Director shall require that all
applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications, including a site plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing
the following:



   (b)   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot.



   (c)   The shape, size and location of all buildings or other
structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other
structure already on the lot.



   (d)   The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such
structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling
units the building is intended to accommodate.



   (e)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as
may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Zoning Code
are being observed.



1242.06  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit:



   (a)   Permits Not to be Issued.  No building permit shall be issued
for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part
thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all
provisions of this Zoning Code.



   (b)   Permits for New Use of Land.  No land heretofore vacant shall
hereafter be used, or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use
of a different class or type, unless a certificate of occupancy is first
obtained for the new or different use.



   (c)   Permits for New Use of Buildings.  No building or structure,
or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different
class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new
or different use.



   (d)   Permits Required.  No building or structure, or part thereof,
shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building
permit shall have been first issued for such work.  The terms "altered" and
"repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of
construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means
of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the City of
Ionia Building and Housing Code, or this Zoning Code, except for minor
repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 



(1975 Code § 5.174)



1242.07  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   (a)   No land, building or part thereof shall be occupied by or for
any use unless and until a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued
for such use.  The following shall apply in the issuance of any Certificate.



   (b)   Certificates Not to be Issued.  No Certificate of Occupancy
shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use
of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this
Zoning Code.



   (c)   Certificates Required.  No building, structure or part
thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered, shall be occupied or used or
the same caused to be done, unless and until a Certificate of Occupancy shall
have been issued for such building or structure.



   (d)   Certificates Including Zoning.  Certificates of Occupancy as
required by the City Building Code for new buildings or structures, or parts
thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or
structures, shall also constitute Certificates of Occupancy as required by
this Zoning Code.



   (e)   Certificates for Existing Buildings.  Certificates of
Occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts
thereof, or existing uses of land, if, after inspection, it is found that
such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in
conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Code.



   (f)   Record of Certificate.  A record of all certificates issued
shall be kept on file in the office of the Community Development Director,
and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary
or tenancy interest in the property involved.



   (g)   Certificates for Dwelling Accessory Buildings.  Buildings or
structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate Certificates of
Occupancy, but may be included in the Certificate of Occupancy for the
dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as
such dwellings.



   (h)   Application for Certificates.  Application for Certificates
of Occupancy shall be made in writing to the Community Development Director
on forms furnished by the Department, and such Certificates shall be issued
within five days after receipt of such application if it is found that the
building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land, is in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



   If such Certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall
be notified of such refusal, and the cause thereof, within the aforesaid
five-day period.



1242.08  FINAL INSPECTION.



   The holder of every building permit for construction, erection,
alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure or part thereof,
shall notify the Community Development Director immediately upon the
completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection.



1242.09  FEES.



   Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or
copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this Zoning Code
may be collected by the Community Development Director in advance of
issuance.  The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the
City Council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting
from enforcement of this Zoning Code.



1242.10  NUISANCE PER SE.



   Any building or structure which is erected, altered, or converted, or
any use of premises or land which is begun or changed, in violation of any of
the provisions of this Zoning Code, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance per se and may be abated by order of any court of competent
jurisdiction. 



(1975 Code § 5.206)



1242.11  VIOLATIONS.



   The owner of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, where
any condition in violation of this Zoning Code shall exist or shall be
created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation,
shall be guilty of a separate offense and on conviction thereof shall be
liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 



(1975 Code § 5.207)



1242.12  RIGHTS AND REMEDIES ARE CUMULATIVE.



   The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition
to any other remedies provided by law. 



(1975 Code § 5.209)



1242.13  SEVERABILITY.



   Sections of this Zoning Code shall be deemed to be severable, and
should any section, paragraph or provision hereof be declared by the courts
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity
of this Zoning Code as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 



(1975 Code § 5.210)



1242.14  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   Public hearing having been held thereon, Ordinance 204 was passed by
the City Council of the City of Ionia, Michigan, on the 4th day of February,
A.D. 1971, and ordered to take effect May 14, 1971. 



(1975 Code § 5.211)



1242.99  PENALTY.



   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Zoning Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed
ninety days for each offense, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court. 



(1975 Code § 5.205)



   (b)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or when a violation occurs or continues. 



(1975 Code § 5.208)



CHAPTER 1244
Board of Zoning Appeals



1244.01   Creation; composition and membership; terms of office; officers;
removal; compensation; vacancies; quorum.



1244.02   Meetings.



1244.03   Appeals.



1244.04   Fees.



1244.05   Jurisdiction.



1244.06   Orders.



1244.07   Public notice requirements.



1244.08   Effective period of Board orders.



1244.09   Appeal of Board of Zoning Appeals Decision.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A.  § 125.583a



   Fees - see ADM. 214.06



   Compliance with Zoning Code required for licensing - see B.R. & T.
802.11



   Compliance of junk dealers with Zoning Code - see B.R. & T. 832.04



   Interpretation - see P. & Z. 1240.08



   Rules of construction - see P. & Z. 1240.10



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



1244.01  CREATION; COMPOSITION AND MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE; OFFICERS;
REMOVAL; COMPENSATION; VACANCIES; QUORUM.



   (a)   Creation.  There is hereby established a Board of Zoning
Appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided
in Section 601 Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, and in such a way that the objection of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.



   (b)   Composition and Membership.  The Board shall consist of five
members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.  One
member shall be a member of the Planning Commission and one member shall be a
member of the City Council.  The remaining three members shall be selected
from the electors of the City.  The members selected shall be representative
of the population distribution of the various interests present in the City.



   (c)   Terms of Office.  The terms of office for members shall be
for three years, except for the members serving because of their membership
on the Planning Commission or the City Council, whose terms shall be limited
to the time they are members of those bodies.



   (d)   Officers.  At its first meeting of each calendar year, the
Board shall elect its own Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary.  The
Board member who is also a member of the City Council shall not be permitted
to serve as Chairperson.



   (e)   Removal.  A member of the Board may be removed by the City
Council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written
charges and after a public hearing.  A member shall disqualify himself or
herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest.  Failure
of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member
has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office.



   (f)   Compensation.  Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for reasonable expenses
actually incurred in the discharge of duties if funds are appropriated for
such purpose.



   (g)   Vacancies.  A successor shall be appointed not more than one
month after the term of the preceding member has expired.  Vacancies for
unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term.



   (h)   Quorum.  The Board shall not conduct business unless a
majority of the members of the Board are present.  Three members shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business.



   (i)   Planning Commission/City Council Representative - Voting.  A
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a member of the Planning
Commission or the City Council shall not participate in the public hearing or
vote on any matter that the member may have previously voted on as a member
of the Planning Commission or the City Council.  The member may consider and
vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property.



(Ord. 311.  Passed 11-13-86; Ord. 445.  Passed 2-6-07; Ord. 469. Passed
10-6-09.)



1244.02  MEETINGS.



   All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at such times as such Board may determine.  All
hearings conducted by the said Board shall be open to the public.  The City
Clerk, or his or her representatives, shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings
and other official action.  The Board shall have the power to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths and compel testimony
and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to
the matters before it. 



(1975 Code § 5.182)  (Ord. 445.  Passed 2-6-07.)



1244.03  APPEALS.



   An appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person,
firm or corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected
by a decision of the Community Development Director.  Such appeal shall be
taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Zoning Appeals
by general rule, by filing with the Director and with the Board a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.  The Director shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Director certifies to the
Board, after notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason
of acts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not
be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a
court of record.



   The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a
decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay.  Any person may appear
and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney.



(1975 Code § 5.183)



1244.04  FEES.



   The City Council may from time to time prescribe and amend by
resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for
appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals.  At the time the notice for appeal
is filed, said fee shall be paid to the City of Ionia, a municipal
corporation, and submitted to the City Treasurer or said City Treasurer's
office to the credit of the General Revenue Fund of the City of Ionia.



(Ord. 311.  Passed 11-13-86.)



1244.05  JURISDICTION.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change
the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in
the terms of this Zoning Code, but does have power to act on those matters
where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation,
exception or special approval permit, and to authorize a variance, as defined
in this section and the laws of the State of Michigan.  Said powers include:



   (a)   Administrative Review.  To hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement,
permit, decision or refusal made by the Community Development Director or any
other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of
this Zoning Code.



   (b)   Variances.  To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the
strict application of the provisions of this Zoning Code where, by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of
property at the time of enactment of this Zoning Code, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations
enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or
exceptional undue hardship upon, the owner of such property, provided that
such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Zoning
Code.  In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto such conditions
regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed uses as
it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this Zoning Code. 
In granting a variance, the Board shall state the grounds upon which it
justifies the granting of the variance.



   (c)   Exceptions and Special Approvals.  To hear and decide in
accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code, requests for exceptions,
for interpretations of the Zoning Map, and for decisions on special approval
situations on which this Zoning Code specifically authorizes the Board to
pass.  Any exception or special approval shall be subject to such conditions
as the Board may require to preserve and promote the character of the zone
district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this Zoning Code,
including the following:



      (1)   Interpret the provisions of this Zoning Code in such a
way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the
Zoning Map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this
Zoning Code, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the
street layout as shown on the Map aforesaid.



      (2)   Permit the erection and use of a building or use of
premises for public utility purposes, upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission.



      (3)   Permit the modification of the automobile parking space
or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such
modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such
requirements.



      (4)   Permit such modification of the height and area
regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot
which is of such shape, or so located with relation to surrounding
development or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be
appropriately improved without such modification.



      (5)   Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to
exceed one year in undeveloped sections of the City, and for periods not to
exceed six months in developed sections.



      (6)   Permit, upon proper application, the following character
of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed
twelve months, with the granting of a twelve-month extension being
permissible:  uses which do not require the erection of a structure or any
capital improvement of a structural nature.



      The Board of Zoning Appeals, in granting permits for the above
temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions:



         A.   The granting of the temporary use shall in no way
constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district, nor on the
property wherein the temporary use is permitted.



         B.   The granting of the temporary use shall be in
writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development
permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said
temporary permit.



         C.   All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking,
lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting public health,
safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the City of Ionia, shall be made at the discretion of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



         D.   In classifying uses as not requiring capital
improvement, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine that they are either
demountable structures related to the permitted use of the land; recreation
developments, such as, but not limited to, golf-driving ranges and outdoor
archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating
systems or sanitary connections.



         E.   The use shall be in harmony with the general
character of the district.



         F.   No temporary use permit shall be granted without
first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a
public hearing to be held as further provided for in this Zoning Code. 
Further, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall seek the review and recommendation
of the Planning Commission prior to the taking of any action.



      (7)   Permit modification of wall requirements only when such
modification will not adversely affect or be detrimental to surrounding or
adjacent development.



      (8)   In consideration of all appeals and all proposed
variations to this Zoning Code, the Board shall, before making any variations
from this Zoning Code in a specific case, first determine that the proposed
variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent
property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or
increase danger of fire or endanger public safety, unreasonably diminish or
impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any
other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of
the inhabitants of the City of Ionia.  The concurring vote of four members
of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision,
or determination of the Community Development Director, or to decide in favor
of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this Zoning Code
to render a decision.  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give
or grant to the Board the power of authority to alter or change this Zoning
Code or the Zoning Map, such power and authority being reserved to the Mayor
and the City Council of the City of Ionia, in the manner provided by law.



1244.06  ORDERS.



   In exercising the above powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision
or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the
powers of the Community Development Director from whom the appeal is taken. 



(1975 Code § 5.186)



1244.07  PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make no recommendation except in a
specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the Board.  The public
hearing shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 as
amended and the other provisions of this section with regard to public
notification.



   (a)   Responsibility for Public Notice.  The City Clerk, or his or
her designee, shall be responsible for preparing the content of the public
notice, having it published  and mailed or delivered as provided in this
section.



   (b)   Notice Requirements.  Notice of a public hearing for an
administrative review, variance, exceptions and special approvals shall be
given not less than fifteen days before the date of the public hearing.  The
notice shall be given as follows:



      (1)   Newspaper notice.  The notice shall be published in a
newspaper that circulates in the City.



      (2)   Mail and personal notice.  The notice shall be sent by
first class mail or personal delivery to:



         A.   The owner of property for which approval is being
considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner of the property.



         B.   Except for rezoning requests that are proposed for
eleven (11) or more adjacent parcels, the notice shall be sent to all persons
to whom property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary
of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or
occupant is located within the municipal boundaries of the City.  If the
name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making
notification.  In the case of a single structure containing more than four
(4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may
be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to
post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.  In structures
containing four (4) or fewer dwelling units, only one (1)  occupant of each
unit must be given notice of the public hearing.



         C.   All neighborhood organizations, public utility
companies, airports, railroads, and other persons, which have requested to
receive notice pursuant to this section.



   (c)   Record of Mailing.  The City Clerk, or his or her designee,
shall prepare an affidavit of mailing which shall include those to whom the
notice was mailed and the date of mailing.



   (d)   Content of Notice.  The public notice shall:



      (1)   Describe the nature of the request.



      (2)   Indicate the property that is the subject of the
request.  The notice shall include a listing of all existing street
addresses within the subject property.  Street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently exist for the property. 
If there are no street addresses, other means of identified may be used, such
as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross streets,
or including a map showing the location of the property. 



      (3)   Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing.



      (4)   Include a statement describing when and where written
comments will be received concerning the request and a statement that the
public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.



   (e)   Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.  Any neighborhood
organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may
register with the City Clerk to receive written notice of any public hearing
held pursuant to Part Twelve, Planning and Zoning, of the City Code.



   (f)   For a request seeking an interpretation of Title Six - Zoning
of the Codified Ordinances of Ionia or an appeal of an administrative
decision, a notice of a public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City and shall be send to the person seeking
the interpretation or making the appeal not less than fifteen (15) days
before the public hearing.



In addition to the newspaper notice required above, if the request for an
interpretation or appeal of an administrative decision involves a specific
parcel of property, written notice stating the nature of the interpretation
request and notice of the public hearing on the interpretation request shall
also be sent by first-class mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom
real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of
the property in question and to the occupants of all structures within three
hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question. 



(1975 Code § 5.187)  (Ord. 443.  Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 469. Passed 10-6-09.)



1244.08  EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF BOARD ORDERS.



   No order of the Board of Zoning Appeals permitting the erection of a
building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building
permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and
such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in
accordance with terms of such permit.



   No order of the Board permitting a use of a building or premises shall
be valid for a period longer than one year unless such use is established
within such period, provided, however, that where such use permitted is
dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall
continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or
alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is
started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such
permit. 



(1975 Code § 5.188)



1244.09  APPEAL OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS DECISION.



   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Board may appeal the decision
to the Circuit Court for Ionia County.  The Circuit Court shall review the
record and decision to ensure that the decision meets the requirements of
Section 606 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006.  An appeal
of the decision of the Board must be filed in Circuit Court within thirty
(30) days after the Board issues its decision in writing signed by the
Chairperson or within twenty-one (21) days after the Board approves the
minutes of the decision.  The records of the Board shall be made available
for the Circuit Court's review.



(Ord. 445.  Passed 2-6-07; Ord. 469. Passed 10-6-09.)



Chapter 1246
Districts Generally and Zoning Map



1246.01   Districts established.



1246.02   District boundaries.



1246.03   District boundaries interpreted.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A.  § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



   Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district - see P. &
Z. 1286.02



1246.01  DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, the City of Ionia is hereby
divided into the following districts:



Residential Districts



   R-1   One-Family Residential District



   R-2   One-Family Residential District



   R-3   One-Family Residential District



   F-1   Funeral Home and One-Family Residential District



   RT   Two-Family Residential District



   RM   Multiple-Family Residential District



   RM-1   Multiple-Family Residential District



   RM-2   Multiple-Family Residential District



Nonresidential Districts



   B-1   Neighborhood Business District



   B-2   Community Business District



   B-3   General Business District



   I-1   Light Industrial District



(1975 Code § 5.20; Ord. 276.  Passed 3-4-80; Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88.)



1246.02  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the
Zoning Map which accompanies the original Zoning Ordinance of the City, and
which follows the text of this Zoning Code, as Appendix II, which Map, with
all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, shall be as
much a part of this Zoning Code as if fully described herein.  The Official
Zoning Map shall be on file in the City Clerk's office.  The Planning
Commission may maintain a Map or Maps of a larger scale for reference
purposes.



(1975 Code § 5.21)



1246.03  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES INTERPRETED.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:



   (a)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines of streets, highway, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such
center lines.



   (b)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



   (c)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits
shall be construed as following City limits.



   (d)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be the midway between the main tracks.



   (e)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be
construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore
line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines.



   (f)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in subsections (a) through (e) hereof shall be so construed. 
Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by the scale of the Map.



   (g)   Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by subsections (a) through (f) hereof, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 



(1975 Code § 5.22)



CHAPTER 1248
R-1, R-2 and R-3 One-Family Residential Districts



1248.01   Intent, R-1 - R-3 zones.



1248.02   Principal uses permitted, R1 - R3 zones.



1248.03   Special land uses.



1248.04   Area and bulk requirements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1248.01  INTENT, R1 - R3 ZONES.



   (a)   The R-1 through R-3 One-Family Residential Districts are
designed to be the most protective of the Residential Districts.  The intent
is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family
dwellings, along with residentially related facilities which serve the
residents of the District.



   (b)   The One-Family Residential District is designed to permit the
existence of funeral homes, one-family residential dwellings, and related
accessory uses.



(Ord. 276.  Passed 3-4-80; Ord. 08-2002-01. Passed 9-3-02.)



1248.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED, R1 - R3 ZONES.



   (a)   In a One-Family Residential District, no building or land
shall be used, and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of
the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.



      (1)   One-family dwellings.



      (2)   Agriculture on parcels of land separately owned outside
the boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area
of not less than five acres, all subject to the health and sanitation
provisions of the City of Ionia.



      (3)   Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways
and recreational and cultural facilities.



      (4)   Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of
the adoption of this Zoning Code.



      (5)   Public, parochial, charter and other private elementary
schools.



      (6)   Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section
1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses,
provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or
storage activities.



(1975 Code § 5.32)



      (7)   Open space neighborhoods developed as a plat or site
condominium, as regulated by Chapter 1270.



      (8)   Child and adult day care homes with no more than six
minor children or adults.



      (9)   State licensed adult foster care family homes with no
more than six adults. Such facilities shall be at least 1,500 feet apart as
measured  between property lines.



(Ord. 08-2002-01. Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10.)



   (b)   In the Funeral Home and One-Family Residential District, no
building or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected, except for
one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in
this Zoning Code:



      (1)   One-family dwellings



      (2)   Funeral homes



      (3)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any
of the above permitted uses.



(Ord. 276.  Passed 3-4-80.)



1248.03  SPECIAL LAND USES.



   The following uses may be permitted as special land uses in the
one-family residential districts subject to the procedures and standards of
Chapter 1274 of these Codified Ordinances.



   (a)   Church, mosque, synagogue and church, mosque and synagogue
related accessory uses.



   (b)   Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or secondary
schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit.  The
proposed site shall have direct access only to an existing or planned major
thorofare.



   (c)   Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage
yard) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building
within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity.



   (d)   Private non-commercial recreational areas; institutional or
community recreation centers; non-profit swimming pool club, all subject to
the following conditions:



      (1)   The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein
which would attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the
immediate neighborhood, shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thorofare as designated on the Major Thorofare Plan, and the site shall
be so planned as to provide all access directly to said major thorofare.



      (2)   Front, side, and rear yards shall be at least eighty
feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass.  All such
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition.  There shall be no
parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance
drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting Residential
Districts.



      (3)   Off-street parking shall be provided so as to
accommodate not less than one half of the member families and/or individual
members.  The Planning Commission may modify the off-street parking
requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that
the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will
therefore be pedestrian.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit or
zoning compliance permit, by-laws of the organization shall be provided in
order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street
parking requirements.  In those cases wherein the proposed use or
organization does not have by-laws or formal membership, the off-street
parking requirement shall be determined by the Planning Commission on the
basis of usage.



      (4)   Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this
Zoning Code, said pool area shall be provided with a protective fence, six
feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate.



   (e)   Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit,
subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The site shall contain at least six acres for each hole
and be so planned as to provide all access directly onto or from a major
thorofare as designated on the Major Thorofare Plan.



      (2)   The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a
relationship between the major thorofare and any proposed service roads,
entrances, driveways, and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and
vehicular traffic safety.



      (3)   Development features, including the principal and
accessory buildings and structures and uses, shall be so located and related
as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent
property.  This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall
be not less than 200 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned
lands, provided that where topographic conditions are such that buildings
would be screened from view, the Planning Commission may modify this
requirement.



   (f)   Private pools as an accessory use within the rear yard only,
provided they meet the following requirements:



      (1)   There shall be a distance of not less than ten feet
between the adjoining property line and the outside of the pool wall.



      (2)   There shall be a distance of not less than four feet
between the outside pool wall and any building located on the same lot.



      (3)   No swimming pool shall be located less than thirty-five
feet from any front lot line.



      (4)   No swimming pool shall be located less than ten feet
from any side street or alley right-of-way, or the distance required for a
side yard by this Zoning Code, whichever is greater.



      (5)   No swimming pool shall be located in an easement.



      (6)   For the protection of the general public, all yards
containing swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less
than four feet in height.  The gates shall be of a self-closing and latching
type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily available for
children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the
pool is not in use.  However, if the entire premises of the residence are
enclosed, then this provision may be waived by the Community Development
Director upon inspection and approval.



   (g)   Housing for the elderly, retired or assisted care facilities
and nursing homes provided the following minimum requirements are met:



      (1)   A building of greater than the maximum height permitted
in Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, may be allowed, provided that front,
side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by a
distance equal to the total height of the structure.



      (2)   The site shall be so located as to have direct access to
a major thorofare or secondary (collector) street.  All access to the site
shall be directly onto a marginal access service drive, or upon said major or
secondary street with the approval of the Planning Commission.



      (3)   The maximum density of housing for the elderly, retired
or assisted care facilities or nursing home shall not exceed 15 units per
acre. For purposes of this section, a unit shall include a room in a nursing
or assisted living facility or a dwelling unit with or without kitchen
facilities designed for occupancy but not more than two persons.



      (4)   Uses permitted shall include, but need not be limited to:



         A.   Group dining facilities;



         B.   Recreational facilities;



         C.   Commercial or retail uses for use by residents or
their guests, child or adult day care facility;



         D.   Limited medical or therapy facilities for residents.



      (5)   Where such use abuts an existing residential land use or
a residential zoning district, a landscape buffer zone shall be provided as
specified in Section 1286.03.



      (6)   The facility shall be connected to public water and
sanitary sewer facilities.



      (7)   The facility shall be located and operated so as to
provide its residents with safe and convenient services such as
transportation, shopping, recreation and medical services.



   (h)   Bed and breakfast as regulated in Section 1274.08.



   (i)   Child and adult day care homes that provide care to more than
six but not more than 12 minor children.



   (j)   Neighborhood service store, provided its meets the following
requirements:



      (1)   For the purposes of this subsection, a neighborhood
store is a retail business which supplies commodities on premises, such as,
but not limited to, groceries, dairy products, magazines or newspapers and
other household "basics" primarily to the residents of the neighborhoods in
proximity to the business.  Sometimes referred to as a "convenience store".



      (2)   The use is only permitted in the R-1 One-Family
Residential District.



      (3)   The use is only permitted on a corner lot with a minimum
of 9,750 square feet and with both streets that the use fronts on being major
streets as defined by the City's 2006 Act 51 Street System Map.  The street
and street sections that are designated as "Major" are as follows:



         A.   Adams Street between West Main and Jackson Streets;



         B.   Cleveland Street between Main Street and Cleveland
St. Bridge;



         C.   Cyrus Street;



         D.   Depot Street;



         E.   Hackett Street between Harter and State Streets;



         F.   Harter Street between Hackett and High Streets;



         G.   High Street between M-66 and Harter Street;



         H.   Hudson Street between Main and Adams Streets;



         I.   Jackson Street between M-21 and Webb Street;



         J.   Jefferson Street between Main and Fargo Streets;



         K.   Kidd Street;



         L.   Library Street;



         M.   Main Street;



         N.   Mill Street between Main and Webber Streets;



         O.   Morse Street between Washington and Allen Streets;



         P.   Rice Street;



         Q.   Summit Street between Union and Rich Streets;



         R.   State Street between M-21 and Hackett Street;



         S.   Steele Street;



         T.   Union Street between M-21 and Washington Street;



         U.   Washington Street between M-66 and Morse Street; and



         V.   Yeomans Street.



         The layout of the site shall comply with the clearance
requirements specified in Section 1286.06.



      (4)   Setbacks:



         A.   Existing structure.  When an existing structure is
converted to this use the setbacks of the existing structure are acceptable
to permit the structure to be converted to this use with the structure not
needing to comply with the setbacks contained in this section for a new
structure.



         B.   New structure.  When a new structure is
constructed to accommodate this use, the front yard setback shall be a
minimum of fifteen feet, the side yard a minimum of six feet and the rear
yard a minimum of fifteen feet.  For the purposes of this section, a corner
lot contains two front yards (portions of the lot abutting the streets) one
side yard and one rear yard.



      (5)   The use must be located on the first floor of the
structure, must be a minimum of 1,000 square feet and a maximum of 2,000
square feet of usable floor space and may only be combined with a residential
use.



      (6)   The use shall not utilize a drive-thru window or any
method of drive-thru service.



      (7)   All retail activity must be conducted within the
structure and vending machines/ice machines are not permitted outside the
structure.



      (8)   Hours of operation shall be limited to the following:



         A.   Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday - 5:30 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.;



         B.   Friday and Saturday - 5:30 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.;



         C.   Sunday - 5:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.



      (9)   The use shall not be within 1,000 feet of another like
or similar use.



      (10)   Off-street parking for shall be provided with a minimum
of one off-street parking space per 250 square feet of usable floor area and
a maximum of one off-street parking space per 150 square feet of usable floor
area. Parking shall not be permitted in the rear yard of the site.  If the
neighborhood store use is combined with a residential use, the residential
parking requirements are independent and in addition to the requirements for
parking for the neighborhood store use.



      (11)   The exterior of the structure that the use is located
must have a residential appearance and be maintained in such manner.  This
includes siding, roof pitch, and window styles typically used in the
construction of a residence.



      (12)   The site shall be landscaped as specified in Section
1286.03.



      (13)   Accessory structures shall not be permitted on the site.



      (14)   The use shall be advertised only by a sign affixed to
the building which may not exceed thirty-two square feet in size.  The sign
shall not be interior illuminated, flashing, moving, animated or intermittent.



      (15)   Exterior lighting shall be as specified in Section
1286.04.



   (k)   Foster care group home for seven or more.



   (l)   Child care center which may also be called a pre-school.



(1975 Code § 5.33; Ord. 08-2002-01. Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 450. Passed 5-1-07;
Ord. 461.  Passed 10-7-08; Ord. 504.  Passed 7-2-13.)



1248.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height
and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lots permitted by land use, the
maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements.



   (b)   All buildings hereafter constructed or enlarged in the
One-Family Residential District shall comply with the requirements of
Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, applicable to property located in the
R-1 One-Family Residential District.  A funeral home shall be treated as a
residential use for purposes of Appendix I. 



(Ord. 276.  Passed 3-4-80; Ord. 08-2002-01. Passed 9-3-02.)



CHAPTER 1250
RT Two-Family Residential District



1250.01   Intent.



1250.02   Principal uses permitted.



1250.03   Special land uses.



1250.04   Conversion of one-family structures. (Repealed)



1250.05   Area and bulk requirements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1250.01  INTENT.



   The RT Two-Family Residential District is intended to afford a
transition of land use in existing housing areas by permitted new
construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent
residential and commercial, office, thorofare or other uses which would
affect residential character.  This District allows the construction of new
two-family residences where slightly greater densities are permitted.  This
District also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the City
where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to
two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these
structures and encourage expenditures for repairs and modernization.



(1975 Code § 5.41)



1250.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In a Two-Family Residential District no building or land shall be used,
and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.



   (a)   (1)   All uses permitted and as regulated in Section
1248.02.  The standards of the "Schedule of Regulations" applicable to the
R-1 One-Family Residential District shall apply as minimum standards when
one-family dwellings are erected.



   (b)   (EDITOR'S NOTE: Division (b) was repealed by Ordinance
08-2002-03, passed September  3, 2002.)



   (c)   Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section
1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to the above permitted uses,
provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or
storage activities.



(Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10.)



1250.03  SPECIAL LAND  USES.



   All special land uses permitted by Section 1248.03, in addition
two-family dwellings, may be permitted as a special land use by the Planning
Commission subject to the general and specific requirements of Chapter 1274.



(Ord. 312.  Passed 2-7-87; Ord. 08-2002-03. Passed 9-3-02Ord. 504.  Passed
7-2-13.)



1250.04  CONVERSION OF ONE-FAMILY STRUCTURES. (REPEALED)



   (EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 1250.04 was repealed by Ordinance 02-2002-03,
passed September 3, 2002.)



1250.05  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots permitted by land use, the maximum
density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements.



(1975 Code § 5.44)



CHAPTER 1252
RM Multiple-Family Residential District



1252.01   Intent.



1252.02   Principal uses permitted.



1252.03   Required conditions.



1252.04   Building permit requirements.



1252.05   Certificate of Occupancy requirements.



1252.06   Area and bulk requirements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1252.01  INTENT.



   The RM Multiple-Family Residential District, as herein established, is
intended to provide sites for limited multiple residence dwellings of a
particular type which are designed to serve as a specialized zone of land use
transition between thorofares, nonresidenital districts, higher density
Residential Districts and lower density One or Two-Family Residential
Districts.  The RM District is further intended to provide for a limited
type of low density multiple family housing within an otherwise lower density
community of single-family detached dwellings. 



(Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88.)



1252.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In the RM Multiple-Family Residential District no building or land
shall be used, and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of
the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.



   (a)   Two-family dwellings, subject to the development standards of
Section 1274.09.



   (b)   Multiple-family residential uses as herein specified and
regulated.



   (c)   Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section
1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to the above permitted uses,
provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or
storage activities.



(Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88; Ord. 08-2002-03. Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 481. Passed
12-7-10.)



1252.03  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   The following conditions shall apply to all multiple-family residential
uses permitted in the RM District.



   (a)   All dwelling units shall be presented and occupied as
condominium dwelling units and shall be subject to all the applicable
requirements of Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended.



   (b)   No more than four multiple-dwelling units shall be provided in
one building.



   (c)   All dwelling units shall be provided with one completely
enclosed garage attached to the dwelling unit with direct access to the
dwelling unit, or with covered parking structures located within the
designated off-street parking areas of the use.



   (d)   All off-street parking shall be located at least twenty feet
from any dwelling unit with exposed living areas and eight feet from all
other walls of a dwelling unit. For the purpose of this requirement, exposed
living areas shall mean any dwelling unit with openings, i.e., windows,
doors, walls, etc., facing off-street parking areas.



   (e)   One common (community) service building may be provided as
part of a development plan which may consist of a dining room, kitchen,
recreational room and a lounge.  A workshop may also be permitted, provided
that all such areas are solely for use by the residents of the development,
their relatives and a resident's friends.  Adequate off-street parking shall
be provided for the community building over and above that required for a
multiple dwelling unit.



   (f)   The construction of all dwelling units and any related
accessory buildings or structures located on the grounds contained within the
area set forth in the master deed shall comply with all applicable codes and
ordinances of the City of Ionia and the State of Michigan governing
condominium housing.



   (g)   A site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements set
forth in this Zoning Code for site plans shall be fully prepared for review
by the Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission, in reviewing the site
plan, shall find:



      (1)   All site plan review requirements of this Zoning Code
are met.



      (2)   Building exterior facade wall drawings, drawn to a scale
of one-eighth or one-fourth inch equals one foot, detailing the appearance of
the building(s) and identifying the types of exterior building wall materials
to be used.



      (3)   Detailed building floor plans showing the layout of all
buildings and including critical dimensions.  Floor plans shall be prepared
at a scale of one-eighth or one-fourth inch equals one foot.



      (4)   A landscape planting plan showing the location, size and
type of plantings proposed for the site.



      (5)   That a proper relationship exists between local streets
and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage
pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic safety.



      (6)   All the development features, including the principal
building or buildings and any accessory building or buildings, or uses, open
spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas, are so located
and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent
property, such as, but not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto
local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking
or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located as to
interface with police or fire equipment access.



(Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88.)



1252.04  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   No building permit required pursuant to the City of Ionia ordinances,
both present and future, shall be issued by the Community Development
Director unless the following requirements are met.



   (a)   An engineer's meets and bounds survey utilizing grid
coordinates shall be furnished of the particular condominium segment for
which a building permit is requested along with a copy of the master deed
covering said segment.



   (b)   The proposed condominium project must comply with all
provisions of the City of Ionia ordinances and all other applicable statutes
governing condominium units or developments. 



(Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88.)



1252.05  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS.



   No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any condominium unit
until the following provisions are complied with:



   (a)   The Community Development Director has determined that
substantial completion has been made of the building in which the condominium
unit is located.



   (b)   The Community Development Director has received confirmation
from the City Engineer and those having authority over public or private
utilities that the water mains, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, roads or
streets, gas, electricity and other utilities serving the building in which
the unit is located have been constructed in compliance with the City of
Ionia ordinances and regulations or State statutes.  This subsection shall
not be construed as requiring the dedication of such streets or roads to the
City of Ionia. 



(Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88.)



1252.06  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots permitted by land use, maximum density
permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 



(Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88.)



CHAPTER 1254
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District



1254.01   Intent.



1254.02   Principal uses permitted.



1254.03   Required conditions.



1254.04   Special land uses.



1254.05   Area and bulk requirements.



1254.06   Continuous foundation walls.



1254.07   Direction of dwellings relative to streets.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1254.01  INTENT.



   The RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide
sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will
generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts
and lower density single-family districts.  The Multiple-Family District is
further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in
an otherwise low density single-family community.



(1975 Code § 5.51) (Ord. 08-2002-04. Passed 9-3-02.)



1254.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In a Multiple-Family Residential District no building or land shall be
used, and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Zoning Code:



   (a)   All uses permitted and as regulated in the R-T Two-Family
Residential District, except one-family residential dwellings.



   (b)   Multiple-family dwellings.



   (c)   Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section
1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to the above permitted uses,
provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or
storage activities.



(1975 Code § 5.52)  (Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10.)



1254.03  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   In the case of multiple dwelling developments, all site plans shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and approval prior to
issuance of a building permit.



   Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that:



   (a)   The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between
local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas to
encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and



   (b)   All the development features, including the principal building
or buildings and any accessory building, or uses, open spaces, and any
service roads, driveways and parking areas, are so located and related to
minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such
as, but not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto local residential
streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas,
or building groupings and circulation routes located as to interfere with
police or fire equipment access.



(1975 Code § 5.53)



1254.04  SPECIAL LAND USES.



   The following uses may be permitted as a special land use by the
Planning Commission subject to the general and specific requirements of
Chapter 1274.



   (a)   Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers (not
including dormitories), provided that for each child so cared for there is
provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area. 
Such play space shall have a total minimum area of at least 5,000 square
feet, and shall be fenced or screened from any adjoining residential land
with planting.



   (b)   General hospitals, with no maximum height restrictions, when
the following conditions are met:



      (1)   All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites
consisting of at least ten acres in area.



      (2)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
All access to the off-street parking area for guests, employees, staff, as
well as any other users of the facilities, shall be directly from a major
thoroughfare.



      (3)   The minimum distance of any main or accessory building
from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for front, rear
and side yards for all two-story structures.  For every story above two, the
minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least twenty feet.



   (c)   Any use which is subsidiary to the principal use, is under
separate ownership or control or is operated in conjunction with a general
hospital, including, but not limited to, restaurants or coffee shops, gift,
flower, book or notions shops, pharmacy or equipment rental areas, etc.,
shall be wholly within the main building, shall not have direct access to the
exterior of the building, and shall not erect or maintain any sign or
advertising device on the exterior of the building or surrounding area.



   (d)   Housing for the elderly, retired or assisted living facilities
and nursing homes subject to the regulations of Section 1248.03(g).



   (e)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of
the above permitted uses.



(1975 Code § 5.54) (Ord. 08-2002-04. Passed 9-3-02.)



1254.05  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots permitted by land use, maximum density
permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 



(1975 Code § 5.55)



1254.06  CONTINUOUS FOUNDATION WALLS.



   In all residential construction there shall be a continuous foundation
wall around the outside perimeter of the structure which shall be constructed
of either solid concrete, laid blocks or an approved treated wood system and
which shall comply in every respect with the Building and Housing Code of the
City. 



(Ord. 373.  Passed 5-23-96.)



1254.07  DIRECTION OF DWELLINGS RELATIVE TO STREETS.



   All residential dwellings shall face the street.  The front door
and/or the front porch landing shall face the street for which the dwelling
is addressed.



(Ord. 373.  Passed 5-23-96.)



CHAPTER 1255
Office District



1255.01   Intent.



1255.02   Principal uses permitted.



1255.03   Special uses.



1255.04   Area and bulk requirements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1255.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to provide for a variety of office
uses of a business and professional nature as well as activities compatible
with these uses. The regulations contained in this chapter are designed to
encourage a harmonious relationship between the office district and abutting
land uses and provide a transition between arterial streets and residential
uses.



(Ord. 08-2002-05. Passed 9-3-02.)



1255.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In the Office District, no building or land shall be used, and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this Zoning Code:



   (a)   Office establishments that perform business and professional
services, such as government, insurance, real estate, legal, financial,
architectural, planning and other similar services.



   (b)   Medical, dental and mental health clinics and offices.



   (c)   Offices of professional and non-profit service organizations
and clubs.



   (d)   Mortuaries and funeral homes, not including crematories.



   (e)   Banks, credit unions and similar financial establishments, not
including drive-through windows.



   (f)   Research, development, and testing laboratories and offices
without manufacturing.



   (g)   Radio and television studios.



   (h)   Museums, libraries, art galleries and similar cultural
facilities, either public or private.



   (i)   Studios or schools for instruction, such as dance, music or
art.



   (j)   Child day care centers and nursery schools.



   (k)   Schools for vocational training.



   (l)   Church, mosque or synagogue and church, mosque or synagogue
related accessory uses.



   (m)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in conformity with
Section 1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to any of the above uses as
regulated by Section 1286.01.



(Ord. 08-2002-05. Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 461.  Passed 10-7-08; Ord. 481. Passed
12-7-10.)



1255.03  SPECIAL USES.



   The following uses may be permitted as special land uses in the office
district subject to the procedures and standards of Chapter 1274 of these
Codified Ordinances.



   (a)   Banks, credit unions, and similar financial establishments
with drive-through or drive-up windows.



   (b)   Gathering halls, lodges, or clubs of fraternal organizations.



   (c)   Hospitals.



(Ord. 08-2002-05. Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 461.  Passed 10-7-08.)



1255.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots by permitted land use, and providing
minimum yard setback requirements.



(1975 Code § 5.75) (Ord. 08-2002-05. Passed 9-3-02.)



CHAPTER 1256
B-1 Neighborhood Business District



1256.01   Intent.



1256.02   Principal uses permitted.



1256.03   Required conditions.



1256.04   Special land uses.



1256.05   Area and bulk requirements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Licensing in general - see B.R. & T. Ch. 802



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1256.01  INTENT.



   The B-1 Neighborhood Business District, as herein established, is
intended to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of
persons residing in adjacent residential areas. 



(1975 Code § 5.61)



1256.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In a Neighborhood Business District, no building or land shall be used,
and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:



   (a)   Generally recognized retail businesses which supply
commodities on the premises, such as, but not limited to, groceries, meats,
dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and
notions or hardware.



   (b)   Personal service establishments which perform services on the
premises, such as, but not limited to, repair shops (watches, radio,
television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops,
photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry cleaners.



   (c)   Dry cleaning establishments, or pick-up stations, dealing
directly with the consumer.  Central dry cleaning plants serving more than
one retail outlet shall be prohibited.



   (d)   Business establishments which perform services on the
premises, such as, but not limited to, banks, loan companies, insurance
offices, and real estate offices.



   (e)   Professional services, including the following:  offices of
doctors, dentists, osteopaths, and similar or allied professions.



   (f)   Facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, rest
and convalescent homes.



   (g)   Post office and similar governmental office buildings serving
persons living in the adjacent residential area.



   (h)   Other uses similar to the above uses.



   (i)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in conformity with
Section 1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to the uses allowed in this
district.



(1975 Code § 5.62)



   (j)   Dwelling units may be permitted within a building subject to
the following conditions:



      (1)   The dwelling unit shall be located on the second or
third floor of the building.



      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 600 square
feet of floor area.



      (3)   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
dwelling. The space shall be either on the same site as the dwelling unit or
within 300 feet of the building containing the dwelling as measured by a
straight line. Proof of parking shall be provided to the Community
Development Director before a building permit is  issued.



      (4)   A building permit shall be obtained to establish a
dwelling unit in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
section and with the Building Code, Fire Code and District Health Department.
The entire building containing the dwelling unit shall also be brought into
compliance with the Building Code and Fire Code before an occupancy permit is
issued.



   (k)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in conformity with
Section 1240.11(1) that are customarily incidental to the uses allowed in
this district. A barber pole shall be permitted as an accessory structure.



(Ord. 08-2002-06. Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10; Ord. 528.  Passed
1- 3-17.)



1256.03  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   (a)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with customers.  All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where they are produced.



   (b)   All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street
parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.



(1975 Code § 5.63)



1256.04  SPECIAL LAND USES.



   The following uses may be permitted as a special land use by the
Planning Commission, subject to the general and specific requirements of
Chapter 1274.



   (a)   Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil, and
minor automotive accessories only and where no repair work is done, other
than incidental service, but not including steam cleaning or undercoating,
vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine or drive train
rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering, auto glass work, storage of
inoperable vehicles, and such other activities whose external effects could
adversely extend beyond the property line.



      (1)   The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not
be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in
the streets immediately adjacent thereto.  Entrances shall be no less than
twenty-five feet from a street intersection (measured from the road
right-of-way) or from adjacent Residential Districts and shall not exceed two
access points for each service station site.



      (2)   The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, and so
arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required
to wait.



      (3)   All permitted repairs and services shall be conducted
within a building except for the sale of products and performance of services
not involving a prolonged wait by consumers.



      (4)   All tires, batteries and accessories, except for motor
oils, shall be stored within the principal building.



      (5)   All areas between the street curbs and street
right-of-way lines (except for accessways and sidewalks) shall be suitably
landscaped with trees, shrubs or grass and shall be neatly maintained in a
healthy growing condition.



      (6)   At least ten percent of the total site area shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs or grass and shall be neatly maintained in a
healthy growing condition.



   (b)   Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone
exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, gas
regulator stations with service yards, but without storage yards; water and
sewage pumping stations.



   (c)   Housing for the elderly, retired or assisted care facilities
and nursing homes subject to the standards of Section 1248.03(g).



   (d)   Child care center which may also be called a pre-school.



(1975 Code § 5.64) (Ord. 08-2002-08. Passed 9-3-02.)



1256.05  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots by permitted land use, and providing
minimum yard setback requirements.



(1975 Code § 5.65)



CHAPTER 1258
B-2 Community Business District



1258.01   Intent.



1258.02   Principal uses permitted.



1258.03   Required conditions.



1258.04   Special land uses.



1258.05   Area and bulk requirements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Licensing in general - see B.R. & T. Ch. 802



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1258.01  INTENT.



   The B-2 Community Business District is intended to cater to the needs
of a larger consumer population than is served by the Neighborhood Business
Districts and is generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster
of establishments served by a common parking area and generating large
volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, along with apartment
type-dwelling units on the second and third floor levels of the structures
within said District.



(Ord. 345. Passed 6-4-91.)



1258.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In a Community Business District, no building or land shall be used,
and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (a)   Any use permitted in the B-1 District as principal uses
permitted, subject to the regulations applicable in the following section of
this chapter.



   (b)   All retail business, service establishments or processing uses
as follows:



      (1)   Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale
of merchandise in an enclosed building.



      (2)   Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or a
workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker,
painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance
repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that
require a retail adjunct.



      (3)   Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.



      (4)   Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage,
except those having the character of a drive-in.



      (5)   Hotels and motels.



      (6)   Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar
places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings.



      (7)   Business schools and colleges or private schools
operated for profit.



      (8)   Other uses similar to the above uses.



      (9)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to
the above permitted uses. 



(1975 Code § 5.72)



   (c)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in conformity with
Section 1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to the uses allowed in this
district. A barber pole shall be permitted as an accessory structure.



   (d)   Residential apartment unit(s) on the second and third floor
levels when one of the following off-street parking conditions is met:



      (1)   Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one
per apartment unit when on-site parking is provided or when off-street
parking is provided within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve;
or



      (2)   Utilization of common remote off-street parking within
the B-2 Community Business District at a ratio of one off-street parking
space per apartment unit, subject, however, to the review and approval of a
committee appointed by the City Council or by the approval of a majority of
the City Council.



(Ord. 345.  Passed 6-4-91; Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10; Ord. 528.  Passed
1-3-17.)



1258.03  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   (a)   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers.  All goods provided on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.



   (b)   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street
parking, loading and those open air uses indicated as being subject to
special conditions in Section 1258.04, shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings.



(1975 Code § 5.73)



1258.04  SPECIAL LAND USES.



   The following uses may be permitted as a special land use by the
Planning Commission subject to the general and specific requirements of
Chapter 1274:



   (a)   Open air business uses when developed in planned relationship
with the B-2 District as follows:



      (1)   Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site,
and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies,
provided that such uses shall be located at the exterior end of the building
mass located in a B-2 District.



      (2)   Recreational space providing children's amusement park
and other similar recreation when part of a planned development, provided
that such use is located at the exterior end of the building mass located in
a B-2 District, but not at the intersection of two major thorofares. Such
recreation space shall be fenced on all sides with a four-foot chain
link-type fence.



   (b)   Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor
tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial
recreation, when located at least 100 feet from any front, rear or side yard
of any residential lot in an adjacent Residential District.



   (c)   Automobile service centers, when developed as part of a larger
planned shopping center designed so as to integrate the automobile service
center within the site plan and architecture of the total shopping center,
and provided that a building permit shall not be issued separately for the
construction of any automobile service center within the B-2 District.



   (d)   Housing for the elderly, retired or assisted care facilities
and nursing homes subject to the standards of Section 1248.03(g).



   (e)   Child care center which may also be called a pre-school.



(1975 Code § 5.74) (Ord. 08-2002-08. Passed 9-3-02.)



1258.05  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots by permitted land use, and providing
minimum yard setback requirements.



(1975 Code § 5.75)



CHAPTER 1260
B-3 General Business District



1260.01   Intent.



1260.02   Principal uses permitted.



1260.03   Special land uses.



1260.04   Area and bulk requirements.



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Licensing in general - see B.R. & T. Ch. 802



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1260.01  INTENT.



   The B-3 General Business District is intended to provide sites for more
diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the
pedestrian  movement in the Neighborhood Business District or the Community
Business District.



(1975 Code § 5.81)



1260.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In a General Business District, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.



   (a)   Any retail business or service establishment permitted in B-1
and B-2 Districts as principal uses permitted and uses permitted subject to
special conditions.



   (b)   Auto laundries (car wash) when completely enclosed in a
building.



   (c)   Bus passenger stations.



   (d)   New and used care salesroom, showroom, or office.



   (e)   Church, mosque or synagogue and church, mosque or synagogue
related accessory uses.



   (f)   Other uses similar to the above uses.



   (g)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in conformity with
Section 1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to the uses allowed in this
district. A barber pole shall be permitted as an accessory structure.



(1975 Code § 5.82) (Ord. 461.  Passed 10-7-08; Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10;
Ord. 528.  Passed 1-3-17.)



1260.03  SPECIAL LAND USES.



   The following uses may be permitted subject as a special land use by
the Planning Commission subject to the general and specific requirements of
Chapter 1274.



   (a)   Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of new or second-hand
automobiles, house trailers, or rental of trailers and/or automobiles, all
subject to the following:



      (1)   The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent,
durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose
of all surface water accumulated within the area.



      (2)   Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty
feet from the intersection of any two streets.



      (3)   No major repair or major refinishing shall be done
except within a fully enclosed building.



      (4)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent Residential
Districts.



      (5)   Inoperable vehicles shall be stored within a fully
enclosed building.



   (b)   Business in the character of a drive-in or open front store,
subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   A setback of at least sixty feet from the planned
right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained.



      (2)   Access points shall be located at least sixty feet from
the intersection of any two streets.



      (3)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent Residential
Districts.



      (4)   A six-foot high completely obscuring wall shall be
provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for R, B-1 or B-2
Districts. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the
ground. Said wall shall further meet the requirements of Chapters 1278
through 1286.



      (5)   The front twenty feet shall be suitably landscaped with
trees, shrubs or grass, neatly maintained in a healthy and growing condition.



   (c)   Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided that all activities
are conducted within a totally enclosed main building and provided, further,
that all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from abutting Residential
Districts on the same side of the street.



   (d)   Plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials
not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and
garden supplies, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The storage and/or display of any materials and/or
products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure.



      (2)   All loading and parking shall be provided off-street.



      (3)   The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose,
unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on
adjacent use.



(1975 Code § 5.83) (Ord. 08-2002-08. Passed 9-3-02.)



   (e)   Lumber yards, provided they comply with the following
conditions:



      (1)   Primary access shall be provided on a major street or
highway.



      (2)   The maximum size allowed when considering total land
size shall not exceed 2.25 acres of total land.



      (3)   Not more than thirty percent of the salable goods shall
be stored in the open air.



(Ord. 321. Passed 4-5-88.)



1260.04  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots by permitted land use, and providing
minimum yard setback.



(1975 Code § 5.84)



CHAPTER 1261
F-Fairgrounds District



1261.01   Intent.



1261.02   Principal uses permitted.



1261.03   Existing buildings and uses.



1261.04   Required conditions.



1261.05   District regulations.



1261.06   Signs.



1261.01  INTENT.



   This district is intended to permit the historical Ionia Free Fair,
held annually in the City of Ionia, to operate as a principal use within its
own zoning district.  Due to the availability and usability of the buildings
and fairgrounds outside of the annual fair week and the historical use of
this property, this district may also be utilized for outdoor gatherings,
shows, displays, sporting or music events and similar outdoor activities as
secondary uses, subject to the provisions of this chapter and all ordinances
of the City of Ionia.



(Ord. 473.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1261.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In the Fairgrounds District, no building or land shall be used, and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (a)   The Ionia Free Fair and associated uses include:



      (1)   Amusement rides and games.



      (2)   Animal shows, sales and boarding.



      (3)   Sale of food and souvenirs.



      (4)   Temporary quarters for fair employees and workers.



      (5)   Concerts, shows, vehicle racing and contests, sports
activities and other similar events associated with on-going fair activities.



      (6)   Fireworks in accordance with State of Michigan law.



      (7)   Fair offices.



      (8)   Other activities and uses normally occurring with the
fair.



      (9)   Camping associated with the annual fair.



      (10)   Community gardens.



      (11)   Boat docks and launch.



      (12)   Uses similar to those listed above as approved in
advance by the Community Development Director.



   (b)   Shows, demonstrations, indoor and outdoor gatherings for
weddings, graduation and family gatherings, displays, music and sporting
events, flea markets, craft shows, entertainment events, religious services,
and similar uses, either inside or outside of buildings, which occur outside
of the annual fair time period, when determined similar by the Community
Development Director.



   (c)   Renting of fairgrounds buildings and grounds for the storage
of vehicles and equipment.



   (d)   Seasonal/daily use of the fairgrounds property and equipment
outside of organized events or gatherings described in subsection (b) above
including hiking, playgrounds, boat launch and docks, recreational activities
and events including go-cart race track, batting cages, skateboarding,
frisbee golf, ball games of any type and similar uses.



   (e)   Camping for recreational vehicles and tents not associated
with fair activities.



   (f)   Training exercises for emergency services agencies, fire and
police personnel.



   (g)   Agriculture subject to the City's health and sanitation
provisions.



(Ord. 473.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1261.03  EXISTING BUILDINGS AND USES.



   All existing uses occurring within the Fairgrounds District and all
buildings, signs, and structures existing as of the effective date of this
amendment creating the Fairgrounds District are hereby considered to be
conforming.  However, any expansion of uses or of existing buildings, signs
or structures shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and the
requirements of the Ionia Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 473.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1261.04  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   (a)   Buildings within this district which are erected after the
adoption of this chapter and in which the public will be allowed to enter
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 1276 herein (Site Plan Review) and Chapter 1264
(Flood Plain Overlay Zone) before a building permit is issued.



   (b)   Accessory buildings within this district which are erected
after the adoption of this chapter and expansions of existing accessory
buildings in which the public will not be allowed to enter shall be reviewed
by the Community Development Director in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 1276 herein (Site Plan Review) and Chapter 1264 (Flood Plain Overlay
Zone) before a building permit is issued.



   (c)   Off-street parking for the Fairgrounds District shall be
exempt from the paving and setback requirements of Chapter 1282, however,
dust from such parking areas shall be controlled through watering and other
appropriate measures to prevent it from blowing off-site.



(Ord. 473.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1261.05  DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



   Buildings and structures shall not be enlarged or erected in the
Fairgrounds District unless the following requirements are met and maintained:



   (a)   Minimum lot area and width:  None required;



   (b)   Minimum setbacks for buildings and structures:  100 feet but
for along the M-66 side of the property, no building or structure shall be
constructed closer than the east wall of the Merchant's Building; and



   (c)   Maximum building height:  35 feet.



(Ord. 473.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1261.06  SIGNS.



   Signs shall be permitted in this district in accordance with Chapter
1234.



(Ord. 473.  Passed 5-4-10.)



CHAPTER 1262
I-1 Light Industrial District



1262.01   Intent.



1262.02   Principal uses permitted.



1262.03   Special land uses.



1262.04   Required conditions.



1262.05   Area and bulk requirements.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Industrial pretreatment of sewage - see S.U. & P.S. Ch. 1042



   Industrial cost recovery system - see S.U. & P.S. 1044.09



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1262.01  INTENT.



   The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended so as to primarily
accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose
external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the District and in
no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The
I-1 District is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses,
processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or
semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is further
intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be
used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted.



   The general goals of this District include, among others, the following
specific purposes:



   (a)   To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet
the needs of the City's expected future economy for all types of
manufacturing and related uses.



   (b)   To protect abutting Residential Districts by separating them
from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial
areas for new residential development.



   (c)   To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger
of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards,
and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable
influences.



   (d)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a
well constructed plan. To protect the character and established pattern of
adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and
buildings and other structures, and to protect the City's tax revenue. 



(1975 Code § 5.91)



1262.02  PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.



   In a Light Industrial District, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:



   (a)   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research,
design, and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a
completely enclosed building .



   (b)   Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding,
or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or
equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding, or processing shall be
totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R-1 through R-3, R-T, RM,
B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts, and on any front yard abutting a public
thoroughfare except as may be otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.  In
I-1 Districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the Planning
Commission on the basis of usage.  Such a wall shall not be less than four
feet, six inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to
be eight feet in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of
Chapters 1278 through 1286.  A chain-link fence, with intense evergreen
shrub planting, may be considered an obscuring wall.  The height shall be
determined in the same manner as the wall height is above set forth.



      (1)   Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking
facilities.



      (2)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or
treatment of such products as, but not limited to: bakery goods, candy,
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery,
tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.



      (3)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment
of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semi-precious metals or
stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, and yarns.



      (4)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other
similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns
fired only by electricity or gas.



      (5)   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and
metal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products.



      (6)   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances,
electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs.



      (7)   Laboratories - experimental, film, or testing.



      (8)   Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs,
light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment,
cornices, eaves and the like.



      (9)   Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that
such plants shall not deal directly with a consumer at retail.



      (10)   All public utilities, including buildings, necessary
structures, storage yards and other related uses.



   (c)   Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service
buildings and yards, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings,
electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations.
Water supply and sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tank holders. Railroad
transfer and storage tracks. Railroad rights-of-way. Freight terminals.



   (d)   Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel,
stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such
is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those
sides abutting all Residential or Business Districts, and on any yard
abutting a public thoroughfare. In any I-1 District, the extent of such fence
or wall may be determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of usage.
Such fence or wall shall not be less than five feet in height, and may,
depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. A chain-link
type fence, with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of said fence, shall be
considered to be an obscuring fence.



   (e)   Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs,
sewage treatment.



   (f)   Commercial kennel.



   (g)   Greenhouses.



   (h)   Trade or industrial schools.



   (i)   Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to
the above uses.



   (j)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in conformity with
Section 1240.11(1) that are customarily incident to any of the above
permitted uses.



(1975 Code § 5.92) (Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10.)



1262.03  SPECIAL LAND USES.



   The following uses may be permitted as a special land use by the
Planning Commission subject to the general and specific requirements of
Chapter 1274.



   (a)   Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when
completely enclosed.



   (b)   Lumber and planning mills when completely enclosed and when
located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form
the exterior boundary of the I-1 District.



   (c)   Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate
measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or
nuisances.



   (d)   Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of
either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not
limited to, lumber yards, building materials, outlets and garage sales,
upholsterer, cabinet market, outdoor boat or house trailer, automobile, or
agricultural implement sales).



   (e)   Other uses of a similar character to the above uses.



(1975 Code § 5.93) (Ord. 08-2002-08. Passed 9-3-02.)



1262.04  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   Any use established in the I-1 District after the effective date of
Ordinance 204 (5-19-71) shall be operated so as to comply with the
performance standards set forth in this Zoning Code.



(1975 Code § 5.94)



1262.05  AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   See Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings, the minimum size of lots by permitted land use and providing
minimum yard setback requirements.



(1975 Code § 5.95)



Chapter 1264
Flood Plain Overlay District



1264.01   Purpose.



1264.02   Definitions.



1264.03   Applicable requirements and district boundaries.




1264.04   Agency designated.




1264.05   Code appendix enforced.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs and advertising devices - see P. & Z. Ch. 1284



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1264.01  PURPOSE.



   (a)   It is the purpose of this chapter for the City of Ionia to
participate in the National Flood Insurance Program and comply with all
applicable statutory and regulatory requirements for the purposes of
significantly reducing hazards to persons, property damage and public
expenditures due to flooding of the Grand River, and to provide for the
availability of flood insurance and Federal funds or loans.



   (b)   This District is an overlay district and is intended to
supplement the regulations of any underlying zone.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 517.  Passed 11-8-14.)



1264.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   (a)   Base Flood  means the flood having a one percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   (b)   Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   (c)   Flood Hazard Area means land which, on the basis of available
floodplain information, is subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.



   (d)   Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards have been designated as Zone
A.



   (e)   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of the
community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.



   (f)   Flood Insurance Study is the official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration.  The report contains flood profiles and,
the water surface elevation of the base flood and may include a Flood
Boundary - Floodway Map.



   (g)   Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of flood).



   (h)   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas which must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood.



   (i)   Regulatory Flood Datum (RFD) means the 100-year floodplain
contour line synonymous with base flood elevation.



   (j)   Structure means a walled and roofed building that is
principally above ground, a gas or liquid storage facility, or a mobile home.



   (k)   Substantial Improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either:  (1) before the improvement or repair
is started; or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.  For the purposes of this definition,
“substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.  The term does not, however, include either: 
(1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 517.  Passed 11-8-14.)



1264.03  APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (a)   The requirements of this chapter are in addition to and shall
supplement those imposed on the same lands by any underlying zoning
provisions of this Zoning Code or other ordinances of the City of Ionia. 
These regulations supersede all conflicting regulations of the underlying
zoning districts to the extent of any such conflict.




   (b)   Designation of Regulate Flood Prone Hazard Areas.  The
boundaries of the Flood Plain Overlay Zone shall include all those areas in
the City designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood
insurance study (FIS) entitled "Ionia County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)"
and dated January 16, 2015 and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMS) panel
number(s) 26067C; 0068D; 0176D; 0177D; 0178D; 0179D; 0181D; and 0182D; dated
January 16, 2015 which are adopted by reference for the purposes of
administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part
of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content
of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential
Code.




(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 517.  Passed 11-8-14.)



1264.04  AGENCY DESIGNATED.




   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in
accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, the Building Official for the County of Ionia is hereby designed as
the enforcing agenda of discharge the responsibility of the City of Ionia
under Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended.





(Ord. 517.  Passed 11-8-14.)




1264.05  CODE APPENDIX ENFORCED.




   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in
accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the
enforcing agency within the City of Ionia.




(Ord. 517.  Passed 11-8-14.)



Chapter 1266
PUD Planned Unit Development District



1266.01   Intent.



1266.02   PUD authorization.



1266.03   Qualifying conditions.



1266.04   Development requirements.



1266.05   Application and processing procedures.



1266.06   Amendments to approved PUD.



1266.07   Performance guarantees.



1266.08   Time limitations on development.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs and advertising devices - see P. & Z. Ch. 1284



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1266.01  INTENT.



   (a)   This chapter provides enabling authority and standards for the
submission, review, and approval of applications for planned unit
developments.  It is the intent of this chapter to authorize the
consideration and use of planned unit development regulations for the
following purposes:



      (1)   To encourage the use of land in accordance with its
character and adaptability.



      (2)   To promote the conservation of natural features and
resources.



      (3)   To encourage innovation in land use planning and
development.



      (4)   To promote the enhancement of housing, employment,
shopping, traffic circulation and recreational opportunities for the people
of the City of Ionia.



      (5)   To promote and ensure greater compatibility of design
and use between neighboring properties.



      (6)   To provide for the regulation of legal land uses not
otherwise authorized within this Zoning Code.



      (7)   To encourage the availability of open space, as a part
of the development of residential lands, and to promote the development of
passive and recreational land uses.



   (b)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended as a device
for ignoring other provisions of this Zoning Code or the planning upon which
it has been based.  To that end, provisions of this chapter are intended to
result in land use development substantially consistent with the underlying
zoning, with modifications and departures from generally applicable
requirements made in accordance with standards provided in this chapter to
ensure appropriate, fair, and consistent decision making.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1266.02  PUD AUTHORIZATION.



   A planned unit development may be approved for any size parcel in any
location within the City of Ionia by the City Council. Any land use
authorized in this Zoning Code may be included in a planned unit development,
as a principal or accessory use, as well as any other legal land use not
otherwise authorized in this Zoning Code, subject to adequate public health,
safety and welfare mechanisms being designed into the development, and the
following provisions.



(Ord. 390. Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 482. Passed 1-4-11.)



1266.03  QUALIFYING CONDITIONS.



   Public water and sewer service shall be available to serve the site.



(Ord. 390. Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 482. Passed 1-4-11.)



1266.04  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   Density.  The density for residential uses shall not exceed
the density recommended by the City of Ionia Master Plan for the area in
which the PUD is to be located.  In each case, the maximum density for
residential uses shall be determined by the City Council after review by the
Planning Commission based on the standards contained in Section 1266.05(i).



   (b)   Dwelling Unit Computation.  The density permitted by the City
Council shall be multiplied by the net development area of the site in order
to determine the maximum number of dwelling units permitted for the site. 
The net development area is determined by subtracting the following from the
gross or total site area:



      (1)   The area within existing road rights-of-way.



      (2)   One-half of the land within the 100-year floodplain.



      (3)   One-half of areas permanently inundated by water.



   (c)   Open Space.  Each PUD shall contain open space areas equal to
a minimum of ten percent of the gross acreage devoted to residential uses in
a PUD.  The applicant shall provide documentation which demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the City Council that such open space areas are preserved and
maintained.



For the benefit of the residents of the PUD, the Planning Commission may also
require recreational amenities or facilities such as basketball and tennis
courts, play structures, bike paths, ball fields and other similar
recreational amenities.



   (d)   Mixed Uses.  Residential and non-residential uses may be
permitted within the same PUD district upon demonstration to the City Council
that such uses meet the intent of this chapter.  It shall also be
demonstrated that the non-residential uses will not negatively impact the
residential uses and that the non-residential uses will be separated and
buffered from residential uses in a manner consistent with good land planning
principles.



The permitted density for residential uses in a mixed use development shall
be determined by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission.



   (e)   Applicable Regulations.  The City Council, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may modify the lot size, lot
width, setbacks, structure height, signs, parking, landscaping, general
provisions and other applicable regulations of this Zoning Code.  Such
waiver or modification shall be based on the application of site planning
criteria to achieve integration of the project with the characteristics of
the project area.  In making these determinations, the criteria considered
shall include the following:



      (1)   Number and type of dwelling units.



      (1)   Proximity to adjacent existing and future land uses. 
The extent to which the PUD is buffered from adjacent and nearby existing
land uses, by landscaping or other means.



      (2)   Preservation of existing vegetation or other natural
features on site.



      (3)   Topography on the site.



      (4)   Provision of public or community water and sanitary
sewer.



      (5)   Appropriateness of the lots as building sites.



      (6)   Overall design of the project relative to its
compatibility with nearby existing or proposed land uses.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1266.05  APPLICATION AND PROCESSING PROCEDURES.



   (a)   Preapplication Conference.  Before submitting an application
for a PUD, an applicant may meet with the Planning Commission to submit the
information regarding a proposed PUD and to confer with the Planning
Commission about the proposed application and the PUD.



   (b)   Application for PUD Approval.  An application for PUD
rezoning shall be in accordance with the application procedures for rezoning
as required by Section 1240.07.



   (c)   Preliminary Development Plan.



      (1)   An applicant for PUD rezoning shall submit a site plan
in accordance with the requirements for site plan review as set forth in
Chapter 1276.



      (2)   If required by the Planning Commission, the preliminary
or final development plan shall include an environmental impact assessment. 
Such assessment shall describe the effect and impact, whether adverse or
otherwise, that the proposed PUD will or may have upon or with respect to the
following matters:



         A.   The lands involved and the adjacent and nearby
lands; streams, rivers, wetlands, and the quality and volume of surface and
groundwater; wildlife and trees, and other significant vegetation; the
effect, if any, on surrounding property values.



         B.   Population in the immediate area and the City;
local school systems; traffic congestion.



         C.   Additional cost to governmental units and school
districts, police and fire protection; storm water drainage; water supply and
sewage disposal.



         D.   Noise, vibration, dust and dirt, litter, smoke,
odor, light, and glare.



         E.   General appearance and character of the area;
historic structures and places; archeological site and artifacts.



         F.   Such other matters as the Planning Commission may
request to be included.  If requested by the Planning Commission, the
environmental impact assessment shall include statements or comments from
public agencies or officials concerning those aspects of the proposed land
use within their respective responsibilities and jurisdictions.



   (d)   Review of Preliminary Development Plan.  The Planning
Commission shall review the preliminary development plan and make
recommendations to the applicant regarding the PUD.  A copy of the Planning
Commission’s recommendations as contained in the minutes of the Planning
Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council.



   (e)   Final Development Plan.



      (1)   After receiving the recommendations of the Planning
Commission on the preliminary development plan, the applicant for PUD
rezoning shall submit a final development plan to the Community Development
Director in accordance with the requirements for final site plan review as
contained in Chapter 1276.  Copies of the plan shall be forwarded to the
Planning Commission.



      (2)   The final development plan shall contain all of the
information required for final site plan review, unless the same is waived by
the Planning Commission as not being reasonably necessary for the
consideration of the PUD, plus the following:



         A.   All of the drawings, narrative, studies,
assessments, and other information, and materials comprising the preliminary
development plan, including all of the recommendations of the Planning
Commission thereon, or if the applicant has not incorporated all of such
recommendations, the final development plan shall indicate such fact and
shall state the basis or grounds upon which such recommendation has not been
included.



         B.   Projected time for completion of the entire PUD;
proposed phasing, if any, of the PUD, and the projected time for completion
of each phase.



         C.   Any other information reasonably required by the
Planning Commission in connection with its review of the PUD and
consideration of the rezoning of the lands in accordance with the PUD plan.



   (f)   Public Hearing on Final Development Plan.  The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the final development plan and the
application for rezoning in accordance with the plan. The public hearing
shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 as amended
and the other provisions of this section with regard to public notification.



      (1)   Responsibility for public notice.  The City Clerk, or
his or her designee, shall be responsible for preparing the content of the
public notice, having it published  and mailed or delivered as provided in
this section.



      (2)   Notice requirements.  Notice of a public hearing on the
final development plan and the application for rezoning in accordance with
the plan shall be given not less than fifteen days before the date of the
public hearing.  The notice shall be given as follows:



         A.   Newspaper notice.  The notice shall be published
in a newspaper that circulates in the City.



         B.   Mail and personal notice.  The notice shall be
sent by first class mail or personal delivery to:



            1.   The owner of property for which approval is
being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner of the
property.



            2.   Except for rezoning requests that are
proposed for eleven (11) or more adjacent parcels, the notice shall be sent
to all persons to whom property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet
of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether
the property or occupant is located within the municipal boundaries of the
City.  If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be
used in making notification.  In the case of a single structure containing
more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or
leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations,
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be
requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.  In
structures containing four (4) or fewer dwelling units, only one (1) occupant
of each unit must be given notice of the public hearing.



            3.   All neighborhood organizations, public
utility companies, airports, railroads, and other persons, which have
requested to receive notice pursuant to this section.



      (3)   Record of mailing.  The City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall prepare an affidavit of mailing which shall include those to
whom the notice was mailed and the date of mailing.



      (4)   Content of notice.  The public notice shall:



         A.   Describe the nature of the request.



         B.   Indicate the property that is the subject of the
request.  The notice shall include a listing of all existing street
addresses within the subject property.  Street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently exist for the property. 
If there are no street addresses, other means of identified may be used, such
as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross streets,
or including a map showing the location of the property. 



         C.   Indicate the date, time and place of the public
hearing.



         D.   Include a statement describing when and where
written comments will be received concerning the request and a statement that
the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.



      (5)   Registration to receive notice by mail.  Any
neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other
person may register with the City Clerk to receive written notice of any
public hearing held pursuant to Part Twelve, Planning and Zoning, of the City
Code.



   (g)   Consideration of Final Development Plan by Planning
Commission.  After a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
recommendations concerning the final development plan and the modifications
in the final development plan, to the City Council.  The recommendations of
the Planning Commission shall then be transmitted to the City Council.



   (h)   Standards for Approval.  In making a recommendation to
approve a PUD, the Planning Commission must find that the proposed PUD meets
the following standards:



      (1)   Granting the PUD rezoning will result in a recognizable
and substantial benefit to ultimate users of the project and to the
community, and the benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be
achieved.



      (2)   The PUD will not result in a significant increase in the
need for public services and facilities, will not place a significant burden
upon surrounding lands or the natural environment, unless the resulting
adverse effects are adequately provided for or mitigated by features of the
PUD as approved, and will not result in the creation of significant traffic
congestion on City streets or create unsafe or hazardous situations for
drivers, bicyclists or pedestrians.



      (3)   The PUD will be compatible with the Master Plan of the
City and consistent with the intent and purposes of this chapter.



      (4)   The PUD will not result in significant adverse effects
upon nearby or adjacent lands, and will not significantly change the
essential character of the surrounding area.



      (5)   A PUD shall be designed and laid out so as to provide
for the preservation of natural resources and natural features wherever
reasonably possible.



   (i)   Final Consideration of PUD by City Council.  The City Council
shall review the final development plan and the recommendations submitted by
the Planning Commission.  The City Council shall determine whether the final
development plan complies with the standards, conditions, and requirements of
this Zoning Code and, in addition, shall determine whether the proposed
project promotes the intent and purpose of this Zoning Code; insures that the
proposed project will be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural
environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by
the proposed project; and insures that the proposed project will be
consistent with the public health, safety and welfare needs of the City. 
Upon a determination that a proposed project meets such standards,
conditions, and requirements, the City Council may approve the final
development plan and grant the rezoning request.



   (j)   Conditions of Approval.  The City Council may impose
reasonable conditions upon its approval.  Such conditions may include
conditions necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected
by a proposed project will be capable of accommodating increased service and
facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural
environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure
compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a
socially and economically desirable manner.  Conditions imposed shall meet
all of the following requirements.



      (1)   They shall be designed to protect natural resources, the
health, safety and welfare and the social and economic well being of those
who will use the proposed project under consideration, residents, and
landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed project, and the community as
a whole.



      (2)   They shall be related to the valid exercise of the
police power, and the purposes which are affected by the proposed project.



      (3)   They shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose
of this Zoning Code, be related to the standards established in this Zoning
Code for the proposed PUD under consideration, and be necessary to insure
compliance with those standards.



   The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a PUD shall be
recorded in the record of the approval action, and shall remain unchanged
except upon the mutual consent of the City Council and the property owner. 
The City Council shall maintain a record of conditions which are changed.



   (k)   Effects of Rezoning.  The granting of a planned unit
development rezoning application shall require an amendment of this Zoning
Code and the Zoning Map.  An approval granted under this chapter, including
all aspects of the final plan and conditions imposed, shall constitute part
of this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 443. Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 469. Passed
10-6-09.)



1266.06  AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PUD.



   (a)   Mutual Consent of Council and Applicant Required.  An
approved final PUD development plan and any conditions imposed upon final PUD
approval shall not be changed except upon the mutual consent of the City
Council and the applicant except as otherwise noted below.



   (b)   Minor Amendments.  A minor change may be approved by the
Community Development Director in conjunction with the Chair of the Planning
Commission who shall notify the Planning Commission of the minor change and
that such change does not substantially change the basic design or alter the
conditions for the plan by the Commission.



   The following items shall be considered as minor changes:



      (1)   Reduction of the size of any building and/or sign.



      (2)   Movement of buildings and/or signs by no more than ten
feet.



      (3)   Replacements of plantings approved in the site plan
landscape plan with similar types of landscaping.



      (4)   Changes of building materials to a higher quality.



      (5)   Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character
of the use.



      (6)   Internal rearrangement of a parking lot which does not
affect the number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design.




      (7)   Changes required or requested by the City for safety
reasons.



      (8)   Changes which will preserve the natural features of the
site without changing the basic site layout.



      (9)   Other similar changes of a minor nature proposed to be
made to the configuration, design, layout or topography of the site plan
which are deemed by the Community Development Director to be not material or
significant in relation to the entire site and which the Community
Development Director determines would not have any significant adverse effect
on adjacent or nearby lands or the public health, safety and welfare.



   The Community Development Director may refer any decision regarding any
proposed change to an approved site plan to the Planning Commission for
review and approval (regardless of whether the change may qualify as a minor
change).  In making a determination as to whether a change is a minor
change, or whether or not to refer a change to the Planning Commission for
approval, the Community Development Director may consult with the Chairperson
of the Planning Commission.



   (c)   Resubmission.  Should the Community Development Director
determine that the requested modification to the approved site plan is not
minor, resubmission to the Planning Commission for an amendment shall be
required and conducted in the same manner as an original application.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1266.07  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.



   The City Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, or
in its own discretion, may require reasonable performance guarantees or
assurances deemed satisfactory in the circumstances and authorized by law. 
The amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the City
Council based on a recommendation from the Planning Commission.  Such
arrangements shall have such sureties or guarantors as are satisfactory to
the City Council and shall be conditioned upon faithful compliance with all
of the provisions  and requirements of the PUD and construction and
placement of all of the improvements therein.  In its discretion, the City
Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may rebate or refund
a proportionate share of the amount specified in a performance bond, letter
of credit, or other written assurance, based upon the percent or other
portion of improvements completed, as verified by the Planning Commission or
appropriate City official.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1266.08  TIME LIMITATIONS ON DEVELOPMENT.



   Each PUD shall be under construction within one year after the date of
approval of the final development plan and adoption of a Zoning Code
amendment by the City Council.  If this requirement is not met, the Planning
Commission may, in its discretion, grant an extension not exceeding one year,
provided that the PUD applicant submits reasonable evidence to the effect
that unforeseen difficulties or special circumstances have been encountered,
causing delay in commencement of the PUD.  If the PUD has not been commenced
within the above-stated period of time, or within any authorized extension
thereof, any building permits issued for the PUD or any part thereof shall be
of no further effect, at the conclusion of said periods of time, and the
Planning Commission and City Council may then, in their discretion, initiate
proceedings for the rezoning of the lands to some other zoning district.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



CHAPTER 1267
Ionia Springs Planned Unit Development District



1267.01   Planned Unit Development District.



1267.02   Conditions on the Planned Unit Development.



1267.03   Findings by City Council.



1267.04   Compliance with other applicable city ordinances.



1267.05   Enforcement.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Municipal Standards - see ADM. Ch. 204



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1267.01  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   Part Twelve — Planning and Zoning Code of the Codified Ordinances of
the City of Ionia is hereby amended, so as to rezone the following described
lands to the Planned Unit Development District, in accordance with the Final
Development Plan of the Ionia Springs Planned Unit Development, subject to
all of the terms and conditions of this chapter:



   (a)   Property formerly owned by William and Mary Reisbig,
consisting of 157.80 acres and located on Jefferson Road on north side of the
City, is hereby rezoned from the R-1 (One- Family Residential) District to
PUD (Planned Unit Development) District. The property is legally described
as: Part of the N 1/2 of Section 18, T7N-R6W, and part of the SE 1/4 of
Section 7, T7N-R6W, Ionia Township, Ionia County, Michigan, described as:
beginning at a point on the East line of Section 18, N 00° 00' 56" E 804.38
feet from the E 1/4 corner of Section 18; thence N 89° 51' 12" W 1935.09
feet; thence N 14° 29' 53" E 301.74 feet to the point of curvature of a
curve to the left; thence NW along the curve an arc distance of 356.72 feet,
said curve having a radius of 200.00 feet, a central angle of 102° 11' 31",
and a long chord and bearing of N 38° 51' 15" W 311.28 feet; thence N 89°
57' 00" W 3005.34 feet along the South line of the N 85 acres of the NW 1/4
of Section 18; thence; thence N 00° 08' 24" E 309.81 feet; thence S 89° 46'
07" E 2404.78 feet (recorded as 2405.13 feet) along the North line of the S
20 acres of the N 85 acres of the NW 1/4 of Section 18; thence N 00° 01' 40"
E 1017.45 feet along the NS 1/4 line of Section 18 to the S 1/4 corner of
Section 7; thence N 00° 07' 49" E 662.21 feet along the NS 1/4 line of
Section 7; thence S 89° 53' 50" E 2651.60 feet along the North line of the S
1/2 of the S 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of Section 7; thence S 00° 08' 13" E 663.80
feet along the East line of Section 7 to the SE corner of Section 7; thence S
00° 00' 56" W 1325.00 feet along the East line of Section 18; thence N 89°
59' 04" W 300.00 feet; thence S 00° 00' 56" W 450.00 feet; thence S 89° 59'
04" E 300.00 feet; thence S 00° 00' 56" W 78.31 feet along the East line of
Section 18 to the point of beginning.



   (b)   Property currently owned by the City in the Orchard View
Industrial Park and commonly known as 520 Apple Tree Drive (Lot 7 of the
Orchard View Industrial Park) is hereby rezoned from the I-I (Light
Industrial) District to PUD (Planned Unit Development) District.



(Ord. 434.  Passed 4-21-06.)



1267.02  CONDITIONS ON THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   The rezoning of the lands described in Section 1267.01 to the Planned
Unit Development District, in accordance with the Final Development Plan of
the Ionia Springs Planned Unit Development ("the development"), is expressly
subject to all of the following terms and conditions:



   (a)   Development Plan Compliance and Review of Phases.



      (1)   A.   The Ionia Springs Planned Unit Development as
submitted by the Ionia Springs Development Company, L.L.C. ( "the applicant"
) shall comply in all respects with the final development plans (the "plan")
which consists of a site plan with a last revision date of March 7, 2006
except where the plan has been changed, revised or modified by this
chapter.  In such cases, the provisions of this chapter shall control.



         B.   The City, Ionia Township and Ionia Springs
Development Company, L.L.C. have entered into a development agreement ("the
agreement") regarding the development of the lands described in this
chapter.  In cases where there is a conflict between the chapter or the
plan, the agreement shall control.



      (2)   Approval of the plan shall constitute approval only of
the overall design and road and utility layout for this property and not
approval of any individual building or group of buildings or approval of any
site condominium or any phase of the plan. Each phase of the development as
illustrated on the plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
review under the site plan review requirements or site condominium
requirements of the Zoning Code as appropriate to the phase being requested
for approval.



      (3)   Site condominium portion. In its review of each phase of
the site condominium portion of the development the Planning Commission may
recommend and the City Council may approve minor modifications to that phase
of the plan provided the modifications do not result in a significant change
to the plan and the modifications still meet the PUD approval standards as
contained in the City Zoning Code. Changes which are not considered to be
minor by the Planning Commission shall be reviewed in the same manner as the
original application.



      (4)   Site plan review. In its review of those portions of the
development which require site plan review by the Planning Commission, the
Commission may approve minor modifications to that phase of the plan provided
the modifications do not result in a significant change to the plan and the
modifications still meet the PUD approval standards as contained in the City
Zoning Code. Changes which are not considered to be minor by the Planning
Commission shall be reviewed in the same manner as the original application.



      (5)   Definition of a minor change in a phase. Uses or changes
which may be considered as minor include moving of buildings, reducing the
number or changing the type of some but not all of the dwelling units in a
phase, relocating a walking trail or a utility line, a minor adjustment in
the location of a street or similar changes of a minor nature proposed to be
made to the configuration, design, layout or topography of the site plan
which are deemed by the Planning Commission to be not material or significant
in relation to the entire development and which the Planning Commission
determines would not have any significant adverse effect on adjacent or
nearby lands or the public health, safety and welfare.



      (6)   Amendments to an approved phase. A minor change to an
approved phase of the development may be approved by the Zoning Administrator
in accordance with Section 1266.06 of the City Zoning Code.



   (b)   Phasing of the Development.



      (1)   The development shall be constructed in phases as
illustrated on the plan; however the applicant may combine phases or alter
the phasing subject to the approval of the City Council following a
recommendation of the Planning Commission. Such alteration may be permitted
if it is determined that such alteration to the phasing plan is necessary to
accommodate market conditions or more efficient provision of City utilities
or if it is determined that such alteration will not be material or
significant in relation to the entire development and which would not have
any significant adverse effect on adjacent or nearby lands or the public
health, safety and welfare.



      (2)   The developer shall take all reasonable actions
necessary to facilitate the construction of a public street that connects to
Jefferson Street as earliest in the development process as possible.



   (c)   Land Uses.



      (1)   The development shall be constructed in 12 phases as
shown on the plan and used for a maximum total of 521 dwelling units to be
constructed as follows: 427 shall be single-family detached dwellings to be
developed as a site condominium in accordance with the applicable regulations
of the City Zoning Code; 50 multi- level condominium units and; 44 ranch
condominium units. All condominiums shall be developed in accordance with the
Michigan Condominium Act.



      (2)   The applicant may be permitted to vary the number of
phases following a recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by
the City Council.



      (3)   The future use of Lot 7 of the Orchard View Industrial
Park shall be limited to commercial, office or industrial uses which shall be
subject to the specific approval of the City Council following a
recommendation of the Planning Commission. Such uses shall be subject to the
site plan review requirements of the Zoning Code and the site development
requirements for the proposed use which would normally be imposed by the
Zoning Code. The City Council, however, following a recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may modify the site development requirements in
accordance with Section 1266.04(e) of the Zoning Code.



      (4)   Current use of the property for agricultural purposes
shall be allowed to continue subject to the determination of the applicant.



      (5)   Accessory buildings and uses in the development shall
comply with the requirements for accessory buildings and uses for the R-1,
Residential Zoning District as contained in the City Zoning Code.



   (d)   Lot Area.  The minimum area for each site condominium lot
shall not be less than 7200 square feet with a minimum width of 60 feet as
measured at the minimum required front setback line between the side lot
lines.



   (e)   Dwelling Unit Setbacks and Height.



      (1)   Each single-family detached dwelling shall comply with
the following minimum setbacks:



         A.   Front: 25 feet;



         B.   Rear: 25 feet; and



         C.   Minimum side yard: 6 feet (each side).



      (2)   For the attached dwellings the following minimum
setbacks shall apply:



         A.   Front: 24 feet from the edge of the street;



         B.   Rear: 25 feet; and



         C.   Minimum distance between buildings: 18 feet.



      (3)   No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet as
determined by the City Zoning Code.



   (f)   Dwelling Unit Size.  All dwellings shall comply with the
minimum floor area requirements of the City Zoning Code for the type of
dwelling unit proposed.



   (g)   Sanitary Sewer and Water Supply.  Each dwelling unit in the
development shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer systems in
accordance with all applicable City ordinances.



   (h)   Streets and Streetlights.



      (1)   All streets in the PUD shall be public with a minimum
width of 27 feet and constructed to the City Municipal Standards, Chapter 204
of this Code of Ordinances.



      (2)   The names of streets in the development shall be subject
to approval of the City Council.



      (3)   The base course of asphalt for the streets in each phase
shall be installed and approved by the City before an occupancy permit for
any dwelling to be served by the street is issued. The final course of
asphalt shall be installed within one year of the installation of the base
course.



      (4)   Streetlights shall be provided as required by the
development agreement between the City and the applicant. Such lights shall
be installed upon installation of the base course of asphalt for that portion
of the street abutting the streetlight.



   (i)   Sidewalks.



      (1)   All sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and
constructed to the specifications of the City Municipal Standards, Chapter
204 of this Code of Ordinances. Sidewalks in front of the individual site
condominium lots (i.e. across the entire width of the lot) shall be
constructed by the owner of the lot prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit. If weather conditions do not allow this, the occupancy permit may be
issued upon the posting of a security acceptable to the City and the sidewalk
shall be constructed within six months of occupancy.



      (2)   If the sidewalk on an individual lot is located outside
the public street right-of-way, an easement shall be granted to the City to
allow for use of the sidewalk by the public.



      (3)   All sidewalks which abut the public street and which are
not located on or abutting the individual site condominium lots as
illustrated on the plan, including those areas along the street abutting the
open space and the condominiums, shall be constructed by the applicant in
conjunction with the construction of the public street.



      (4)   Walkways located within the open space areas illustrated
on the plan shall be constructed by the applicant during construction of that
phase of the PUD. Occupancy permits shall not be issued for that phase unless
the walkway in the open space is completed in accordance with the plan.
Walkways in the open space areas may be constructed with asphalt or concrete
and be a minimum of eight feet wide. The applicant shall provide a cross
section drawing of these walkways to the Planning Commission to demonstrate
proper construction standards.



      (5)   The applicant shall provide for the maintenance of all
sidewalks and walkways located outside the public street right-of-way.



   (j)   Tree Plantings and Landscaping.



      (1)   Trees shall be planted within the public right-of-way as
illustrated on the plan by the lot owner in conjunction with the installation
of the sidewalk abutting the lot. The applicant shall provide a list of tree
plantings for approval by the City during the review of each phase.



      (2)   Other landscaping as shown on the plan shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Planning Commission during the review of
each phase.



      (3)   Landscaping along Jefferson Street as shown on the plan
shall be planted following the improvements to Jefferson Street as required
by the development agreement between the City and the applicant. No
structures including fences shall be located with the 20 foot wide buffer
area along Jefferson Street as shown on the plan.



   (k)   Dedicated Open Space.



      (1)   The development shall include open space as shown on the
plan. Such areas shall be clearly delineated on the plan as dedicated open
space and maintained as open space in perpetuity and no dwellings shall be
constructed within this dedicated open space.



      (2)   No improvements, buildings or structures, except as
otherwise shown on the plan or which may be authorized by the Ionia Springs
Homeowners Association or similar entity in compliance with applicable City
regulations shall be constructed upon the dedicated open space areas.



      (3)   Documentation to establish and maintain the dedicated
open space areas shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney and
such document shall be recorded with the Ionia County Register of Deeds. The
homeowners association shall always maintain ownership of the dedicated open
space and be responsible for its maintenance. Any change to the dedicated
open space shall only be allowed with the mutual consent of the applicant or
the homeowners association as the case may be, and the City Council.



      (4)   The applicant shall provide a recorded copy of the
dedicated open space document to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of any
building permits for the development.



      (5)   The large dedicated open space area located in the
center of the development shall be constructed in conjunction with Phase 1.
All other dedicated open space areas shall be provided in conjunction with
each phase as shown on the plan.



   (l)   Storm Water Management.  A storm water management plan shall
be provided to ensure that storm water runoff does not have an adverse effect
on adjacent or nearby properties. This plan shall be subject to approval of
the City Engineer and the Ionia County Drain Commissioner before any
earthmoving shall occur on the property. The phasing of the construction of
the storm water management facilities shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.



   (m)   Construction Plans.  Complete construction plans for all site
improvements including but not limited to site grading, storm water drainage,
and streets shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval before any
construction commences on site.



   (n)   Signs.  Signs at the entrances to the development which state
the name of the development shall be permitted in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Code for a Residential Zoning District.



   (o)   Time Limitation on the Development.  In accordance with
Section 1266.08 of the Zoning Code construction of the Ionia Springs PUD
shall commence within one year of the approval by the City Council of the
plan and Zoning Code creating the Ionia Springs PUD District. All other
provisions of Section 1266.08 shall also apply to the development.



(Ord. 434.  Passed 4-21-06.)



1267.03  FINDINGS BY THE CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council hereby determines that the plan, as modified by this
chapter, complies with the approval standards for a planned unit development
as contained in the City Zoning Code and promotes its intent and purposes.
The City Council also hereby acknowledges that the applicant has been
informed that nearby existing land uses may generate noise which may be
audible to the future residents of the development.



(Ord. 434.  Passed 4-21-06.)



1267.04  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE CITY ORDINANCES.



   Except as expressly otherwise exempted by this Zoning Code amendment or
the approved final development plan of the development, all uses activities,
buildings and structures for the development shall comply with all applicable
requirements and standards of the City Zoning Code, as amended, as well as
any and all other City ordinances.



(Ord. 434.  Passed 4-21-06.)



1267.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   (a)   (1)   The City may enforce the provisions of this chapter
and applicable provisions of the City Zoning Code, Building Code and other
ordinances, laws and regulations to the extent and in any manner provided by
law. Any violation of this chapter amendment or the approved final
development plan of the Ionia Springs Planned Unit Development shall
constitute a violation of the City Zoning Code, as amended.



      (2)   In the event that the applicant shall fail to carry out
any provision or requirement of this chapter or other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation, in addition to any other legal remedies, the City
may through its Zoning Administrator or other City agency issue and post a
stop work order at the site of any improper or non-complying part of the
development, directing that all further construction of such part of the
development be ceased forthwith, pending the compliance with any applicable
provisions of this chapter or of City ordinances, regulations or State laws.



   (b)   Upon the correction of any matters as to which the stop work
order was issued, the City shall promptly rescind and remove the stop work
order, whereupon the applicant may again proceed with construction or other
permissible activity as to the development.



(Ord. 434.  Passed 4-21-06.)



CHAPTER 1268
MHP Mobile Home Park



EDITOR'S NOTE: This chapter is reserved for future legislation.



CHAPTER 1269
East Main Preservation District



1269.01   Intent.



1269.02   Principal permitted uses.



1269.03   Special land uses.



1269.04   District regulations.



1269.05   Design standards.



1269.06   Review standards.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Licensing in general - see B.R. & T. Ch. 802



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1269.01  INTENT.



   (a)   The East Main Preservation District is recommended by the City
of Ionia Master Plan to be established along both sides of East Main Street
between Library Street and Jackson Street.



   (b)   This area contains many large houses of historic and
architectural distinction which contribute greatly to the character and
identity of the City.  The historical and architectural viability of such
houses can be threatened by high maintenance costs or conversion to
multi-family or non-residential uses if proper review standards are not
provided.



   (c)   The intent of this district then is to allow for such houses
to be used for a variety of purposes which are deemed to be compatible with
the area in order to encourage their continued maintenance and appearance as
residential structures thereby preserving the historic and architectural
character of East Main Street.



(Ord. 04-2002-01. Passed 4-9-02.)



1269.02  PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.



   Single family dwellings and an accessory use in conformity with Section
1240.11(1)K. are permitted in the East Main Preservation District. A barber
pole shall be permitted as an accessory structure.



(Ord. 04-2002-01. Passed 4-9-02; Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10; Ord. 528.  Passed
1-3-17.)



1269.03  SPECIAL LAND USES.



   (a)   The following uses may be permitted as special land uses in
the East Main Preservation District subject to the procedures and standards
of Chapter 1274 of these Codified Ordinances.



   (b)   As part of the application requirements, a scaled
architectural drawing of the proposed building shall be submitted.



      (1)   Two-family dwellings.



      (2)   Any person service establishment which performs services
on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not
limited to, repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.) tailor
shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior decorators, photographers and
similar uses which meet the intent of this chapter.



      (3)   Restaurants, cafes and similar eating/drinking
establishments without drive-up or drive-through facilities.



      (4)   Retail sales of products.



      (5)   Offices and office buildings of an executive,
administrative or professional nature.



      (6)   Medical and dental offices.



      (7)   Banks, without drive-in facilities.



      (8)   Public and semi-public buildings such as, but not
restricted to:



         A.   Church, mosque or synagogue and church, mosque or
synagogue related accessory uses;



         B.   Municipal offices;



         C.   Libraries;



         D.   Museums; and



         E.   Schools.



      (9)   Dance, music and art studios.



      (10)   A building may be used for both residential and
non-residential uses subject to the following conditions:



         A.   The dwelling unit shall be completely separated
from the non-residential use by walls and doors or be located on a separate
floor.



         B.   Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 600
square feet of floor area.



         C.   Off-street parking for the residential use shall be
provided as required by Section 1282.01.



         D.   A building permit shall be obtained to establish
the separate dwelling unit in order to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this section and with the Building Code. The entire building
containing the dwelling unit shall also be brought into compliance with the
Building Maintenance Code and Fire Code before an occupancy permit is issued.



      (11)   Bed and breakfast establishments.



      (12)   Other similar uses which the Planning Commission
determines to be compatible with the above uses and which would satisfy the
intent of this district.



(Ord. 04-2002-01. Passed 4-9-02; Ord. 461.  Passed 10-7-08.)



1269.04  DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



   (a)   Minimum Lot Area.  8,000 square feet.



   (b)   Minimum Lot Width.  65 feet.



   (c)   Minimum Required Front Setback. The minimum required front
setback shall be the average front  setback for an existing building
abutting each side of the proposed building. If the proposed building is on a
corner lot, then the minimum front setback shall be the average of the two
buildings closest to the proposed building fronting on the same street.



   (d)   Minimum Required Rear Setback. 25 feet.



   (e)   Minimum Required Side Setback. 10 feet on one side and six
feet on the other.



   (f)   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to decrease
the above required setbacks by no more than five feet if it can be
demonstrated that such decrease is necessary for the viable operation of the
proposed use and that the reduced setback will not have a significant
negative impact on adjacent residents or properties.



   (g)   Accessory buildings shall comply with the regulations for
accessory buildings for the R-1 zone as set forth in Section 1248.02.



   (h)   For non-residential use of a residential structure the parking
requirements of Section 1282.01 may be modified by the Planning Commission in
order to achieve the intent of the East Main Preservation District. A minimum
of four parking spaces, however, shall be provided on site. If such spaces
are located in the rear yard they shall be screened by a solid fence at least
six feet in height or by sufficient landscaping to provide a year round
screen.



(Ord. 04-2002-01. Passed 4-9-02.)



1269.05  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The construction of a new building or the alteration of an existing
building that is to be used for non-residential use as permitted by this
chapter shall comply with the following standards:



   (a)   The building shall have roofs compatible with nearby buildings.



   (b)   The exterior walls shall be brick, wood, aluminum or vinyl
siding that is similar in appearance to adjacent dwellings.



   (c)   A walkway shall be provided from the existing or proposed
sidewalk to the front building entrance.



   (d)   Landscaping or fences may be required along those lot lines
which abut residential uses to provide a measure of visual and sound privacy
for adjoining residents. The Planning Commission in its discretion shall
determine whether landscaping or fencing would best accomplish this
objective. Fencing shall comply with the requirements of Section 1286.07.



   (e)   Dumpsters shall not be located within the front yard and shall
be screened by a six feet high solid fence and located so as to be visually
unobtrusive.



   (f)   (1)   A non-residential use shall be permitted one sign
which shall not exceed 16 square feet in size or four feet in height if
placed on the ground or ten feet above the ground if attached to the wall.
Signs shall be setback a minimum of five feet from all lot lines or attached
to the street side of the building.



      (2)   A sign may be illuminated only by means of external,
shielded light fixtures or the sign may be internally illuminated. Blinking
lights on signs are prohibited. A light fixture for a sign shall be placed so
as to avoid any glare when viewed from off the site. The source of the light
shall not exceed a total of 150 watts and any such light source shall be
enclosed and directed so as to prevent the source of light from shining
directly or indirectly onto traffic or adjacent or nearby property.



   (g)   Exterior lights, except those with an incandescent bulb of 150
watts or less, shall have a cut-off type fixture and not be higher than 12
feet above grade. No light source shall exceed 200 watts. The Planning
Commission shall have the authority to modify the above lighting standards to
ensure that any proposed lighting will not create a hazard or nuisance from
glare or light spilling on adjacent property.



(Ord. 04-2002-01. Passed 4-9-02.)



1269.06  REVIEW STANDARDS.



   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing as required by
Section 1274.03 and make a decision on the special land use. To approve a
special land use under this section, the Planning Commission shall find that
the request meets the standards of Section 1274.03 and the following
standards:



   (a)   The proposed accessory building meets the standards of Section
1249.05, Design Standards.



   (b)   The size, location, appearance and architectural style of the
proposed building will be compatible with the existing building
characteristics of the immediate neighborhood.



(Ord. 04-2002-01. Passed 4-9-02.)



CHAPTER 1270
Open Space Neighborhoods



1270.01   Intent.



1270.02   Authorization.



1270.03   Development requirements.



1270.04   Provisions for open space.



1270.05   Design standards for Open Space Neighborhoods.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. §  117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. §  125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Open space areas in mobile home parks - see P. & Z. 1268.06(d)



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z. Ch. 1282



   Signs - see P. & Z. Ch. 1234



   Provisions applicable to all districts - see P. & Z. 1286



1270.01  INTENT.



   The intent of this chapter is to require dedicated open space within
any new residential plat or site condominium development, while allowing the
developer to achieve a greater number of lots than would be otherwise
possible under conventional plat or site condominium development.  Further,
this chapter seeks to promote principals of design which accomplish the
following:



   (a)   Identify and preserve natural features and environmentally
sensitive areas.



   (b)   Provide for recreational areas within new neighborhoods that
are usable, centrally located and accessible to all residents of the
neighborhood.



   (c)   Provide for neighborhood design which has a definable center
and an edge, and which provides pedestrian links throughout the development.



   (d)   Integrate any valuable cultural features on the site with the
new residential development.



   (e)   Provide a road design that provides connection throughout the
development, rather than utilizing numerous cul-de-sacs, and that provides
traffic calming devices such as shorter street segments, ninety degree turns,
and traffic circles.



   (f)   Allow for vehicular and pedestrian connections with existing
or future developments in the vicinity of the new residential development.



   (g)   Promote the objectives of the City of Ionia Master Plan.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1270.02  AUTHORIZATION.



   An Open Space Neighborhood shall be a use permitted by right within the
R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts, when developed according to the
regulations set forth in the City of Ionia Subdivision Regulations or Site
Condominium Regulations, and the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1270.03  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   The following regulations, shall apply to an Open Space Neighborhood:



   (a)   The site shall be developed subject to the regulations of the
City of Ionia Subdivision Regulations or subject to the City of Ionia Site
Condominium Regulations.



   (b)   Public water and sewer shall be available to serve the site.



   (c)   Density computations shall be as follows:



      (1)   The total number of dwelling units permitted within an
OSN shall be determined by multiplying the net acreage of the site by the
density permitted within the zoning district in which the OSN is located. 
In determining net acreage, the following shall be deducted from the total
size of the parcel:



         A.   One-half of those areas within the 100-year flood
plain.



         B.   One-half of wetland areas or those areas
permanently inundated by water, including lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers



         C.   One-half of those areas with existing slopes of
twenty percent or more.



      (2)   Maximum densities for OSN developments are as follows:



         A.   R-1 District - a maximum of 5.44 units per acre



         B.   R-2 District - a maximum of 3.63 units per acre



         C.   R-3 District - a maximum of 2.64 units per acre.



      (3)   Additional dwelling units above what is permitted by
paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) hereof may be permitted within the OSN at the
discretion of the Planning Commission and the City Council if the development
provides additional amenities or dedicates additional open space which would
result in a significant recognizable benefit to the City or the residents of
the OSN.  Items which could be added to the OSN to allow it to be eligible
for additional dwellings include: 



         A.   Playgrounds with play equipment, ballfields, golf
course, bike path, walking path, created lakes, community buildings or
similar facilities.



         B.   Additional landscaping, walkways, benches, or
similar items within a village square area.



         C.   Trails through natural areas such as wetlands,
woodlands, and meadows.



      (4)   If additional dwelling units are permitted, the maximum
number of dwelling units shall be determined by multiplying the density
permitted in subsection (c) hereof by the total acreage of the site,
including the wetlands, floodplains, bodies of water, and steep slopes.



   (d)   Lot size standards shall be as follows:



      (1)   Lots within an OSN shall be permitted to be smaller in
area and width and have lesser setbacks than the minimum requirements of the
zoning district in which the OSN is to be located in order to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.  Specifically, the lot size in the R-1 Zone
shall be permitted a ten percent reduction, and the lot sizes in the R-2 and
R-3 Zones shall be permitted a twenty-five percent reduction.



      (2)   The minimum permitted lot sizes, lot widths and building
setbacks in an Open Space Neighborhood shall be as set forth in Table 1.



TABLE 1



 

ZONE
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3


Min. Permitted Lot Size
 
7,200 sq.ft.
 
9,000 sq.ft.
 
12,375 sq.ft.


Min. Permitted Lot Width
 
60 ft.
 
65 ft.
 
75 ft.


Min. Front Setback
 
15 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.


Min. Rear Setback
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.


Min. Side Setback (total/min.)
 
13/5 ft.
 
15/6 ft.
 
20/8 ft.



 



   (e)   The height of any building within an OSN shall not exceed
twenty-five feet except as provided for in Section 1286.08(d).



   (f)   The minimum size for any structure within the OSN shall be the
same as that which is required by the district in which the OSN is located.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1270.04   PROVISIONS FOR OPEN SPACE.



   (a)   A minimum of eight percent of the gross site area of the OSN
shall be permanently allocated as open space.



   (b)   Land designated as permanent open space shall be maintained as
parks, squares, greenbelts or natural areas.



   (c)   At least one contiguous area of open space shall be centrally
located within the development, and shall be maintained as a village square,
playground, or park.  It is the intent of this chapter that the centrally
located portion of the dedicated open space will have houses facing it, will
be contiguous to the roadway, and will be maintained in a more formal sense,
so as to promote visibility, monitoring, and safety of the area.



   The minimum size of maintained greens, playgrounds, or recreational
parks shall be 5,000 square feet;  the maximum size of maintained greens,
playgrounds, or recreational parks shall be 60,000 square feet.  The
Planning Commission may approve other dedicated open space areas of less than
5,000 square feet and more than 60,000 square feet if such areas are designed
and established as pedestrian or bicycle paths or are otherwise determined by
the Planning Commission to be open space reasonably usable by residents of
the OSN.



   (d)   Narrow bands of open space around the perimeters of sites will
generally not qualify as usable dedicated open space, unless those areas are
portions of walking trails that connect to larger areas of open space. 
Rather, those areas that provide usable amounts of play area or that preserve
significant areas of natural features will qualify as dedicated open space.



   (e)   Open space areas shall be located so as to be reasonably
accessible to all residents of the OSN.  Pedestrian access points to the
dedicated open space areas from the interior of the OSN shall be provided and
shall be clearly identifiable by a sign or improved pathway.



   (f)   Grading in the open space areas shall be minimal except where
grading can be shown to offer a demonstrated improvement in the design of the
site.



   (g)   Dedicated open spaces may consist of ball fields, tennis
courts, swimming pools and related buildings, community buildings, golf
courses, and similar recreational facilities.  These uses may not, however,
utilize more than fifty percent of the dedicated open space.



   (h)   Dedicated open space within the OSN shall be linked, if
possible, with any adjacent existing neighborhoods, public spaces, or
walkways.  In addition, dedicated open spaces shall be linked with
undeveloped lands that are adjacent to the OSN.



   (i)   The Planning Commission and the City Council may, at their
discretion, consider variations from the design standards for Open Space
Neighborhoods, provided that the applicant can demonstrate that the intent of
the chapter is met.



   (j)   The applicant shall provide an open space preservation and
maintenance agreement to the City Council stating that all dedicated open
space portions of the development shall be maintained in the manner
approved.  Documents shall be presented that bind all successors and future
owners in title to commitments made as part of the proposal.  This provision
shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or control, provided notice of
such transfer is provided to the City of Ionia and the land uses continue as
approved in the plat or site condominium, unless an amendment is approved by
the City Council.



   The agreement must be acceptable to the City Council and may consist of
a dedicated City park, a recorded deed restriction, covenants that run
perpetually with the land or a conservation easement established according to
the Michigan Conservation and Historic Preservation Act, Act 197 of the
Public Acts of 1980, as amended.  The agreement shall:



      (1)   Indicate the allowable use(s) of the dedicated open
space.



      (2)   Require that the dedicated open space be maintained by
parties who have an ownership interest in the open space, whether those
parties are of a private or Municipal nature.



      (3)   Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the
dedicated open space, including necessary maintenance of vegetation, and
repair, maintenance or management of the site amenities and facilities.



      (4)   Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by the City of
Ionia in the event that the dedicated open space is inadequately maintained,
or is determined by the City to be a public nuisance.  Any costs incurred by
the City shall be assessed to the owners of the property within the OSN.



   (k)   Areas not considered open space:



      (1)   The area within any public or private street
right-of-way, or access easement.



      (2)   Any easement for overhead utility lines, storm drainage
rights-of-way, or stormwater detention areas.



      (3)   Fifty percent of any floodplain, lakes, streams,
wetlands, or other surface water bodies, including created ponds.



      (4)   The area within a platted lot or site condominium.



      (5)   Sidewalks, excepting those walkways that are a portion
of a dedicated trail system.  However, trail systems alone may not
constitute the entire percentage of the dedicated open space.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1270.05  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OPEN SPACE NEIGHBORHOODS.



   (a)   Within an OSN, the developer is encouraged to locate lots so
that they face upon the centrally located village green or play area.  This
central green or play area shall be adjacent to the public or private
roadway.  Ideally, the central green or play area should be encircled by the
roadway or by a sidewalk.



   (b)   Within any single OSN, the edge of any central green or play
area shall be located no more than 1,320 feet (one-quarter mile) from another
green, play area, or other dedicated open space.  In addition, no lot within
an OSN shall be located further than 1,320 feet (one-quarter mile) from any
central green, play area, or natural area. 



   (c)   Roads serving new developments shall be designed to connect
with adjoining properties, both developed and undeveloped.



   (d)   Every effort should be made to connect each street with
another so that dead-ends are minimized, to provide safe and efficient access
for emergency and public service vehicles, and to avoid conditions where
single streets become collectors that carry a majority of the neighborhood
traffic.



   (e)   Whenever feasible, streets should be designed with shorter
straight or curving segments, ninety degree turn angles, "T" intersections,
and traffic circles to reduce speeds and to facilitate pedestrian safety
within the neighborhood.



   (f)   Block lengths shall generally be no more than 800 feet.  For
blocks which are 600 feet or more in length as measured between
rights-of-way, a five-feet wide walkway shall be provided in mid-block to
facilitate pedestrian access within the development.  This walkway shall be
improved with asphalt, concrete, wood chips or similar surface and shall be
located within an easement dedicated for use by the residents of the
development.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



CHAPTER 1271
Resurrection Life Church Planned Unit Development (PUD) District



1271.01   Planned Unit Development District.



1271.02   Conditions on the Planned Unit Development.



1271.03   Findings by the City Council.



1271.04   Compliance with other applicable city ordinances.



1271.05   Enforcement.



1271.01  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   Title Six of the City Code entitled Zoning is hereby amended so as to
rezone the following described lands from the B-2 Community Business District
to the Planned Unit Development District, in accordance with the Final
Development Plan of the Resurrection Life Church Planned Unit Development,
subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.



   (a)   416 West Main Street - Tax Identification
#34-201-050-000-290-00  CITY OF IONIA ORIGINAL TOWN W 23 FT OF E 24 FT OF
LOT 35 ALSO 1/2 OF THE BRICKWALL ADJACENT TO AND LOCATED ON THE EAST SIDE OF
THE ABOVE DESC PROPERTY. ALSO THE S 12 FT OF LOT 7 AND 8, SUB. TO EASEMENT OF
RECORD.



   (b)   418 West Main Street - Tax Identification
#34-201-050-000-295-00  CITY OF IONIA ORIGINAL TOWN W 25 FT OF E 49 FT OF
LOT 35.



   (c)   420 West Main Street - Tax Identification
#34-201-050-000-300-00  CITY OF IONIA ORIGINAL TOWN LOT 36 & W 9 FT 4 IN OF
LOT 35.



   (d)   The following described parcels which were rezoned by the City
Council to the Planned Unit Development District by Ordinance No. 486
effective April 12, 2011 remain zoned as Planned Unit Development:



      (1)   426 West Main Street - Tax Identification
#34-201-050-000-305-00 CITY OF IONIA ORIGINAL TOWN E24FT LOT 37 OF IONIA EXC
W 6IN.



      (2)   430 West Main Street - Tax Identification
#34-201-050-000-030-00 CITY OF IONIA ORIGINAL TOWN LOT 37, EXC E 24 FT
THEREOF; ALSO 15 FT IN WIDTH OFF T S END OF LOT 6, ALSO THE WEST 6 INCHES OF
THE E 24 FT OF LOT 37.



      (3)   434 West Main Street - Tax Identification
#34-201-050-000-310-00 CITY OF IONIA ORIGINAL TOWN LOT 38 & E 28 FT OF LOT 39.



      (4)   419 West Washington Street - Tax Identification
#34-201-050-000-035-00 CITY OF IONIA ORIGINAL TOWN LOTS 7 & 8 EXC S 12FT BUT
INCLUDING A R/W OVER S 12FT.



(Ord. 486.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 509.  Passed 12-3-13.)



1271.02  CONDITIONS ON THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   The rezoning of the subject parcels to the Planned Unit Development
District, in accordance with the final development plan of the Resurrection
Life Church Planned Unit Development (“the Development”), is expressly
subject to all of the following terms and conditions:



   (a)   Development Plan Compliance and Plan Modifications.




      (1)   The Resurrection Life Church Planned Unit Development as
submitted by Resurrection Life Church, also known as Restore Church ( “the
Applicant”), shall comply in all respects with the final development plans
(the “Plan”) except where the plans have been changed, revised or
modified by this chapter.  In such case, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.  The final development plans consist of the four sheet site
plan prepared by Roosien and Associates dated July 1, 2015; the parking lot
lighting plan prepared by Visual dated November 5, 2013 and associated
lighting specification sheets; the landscape plan prepared by Corneliesse
Design Associates dated November 18, 2013 and the colored architectural
elevation and interior layout plan prepared by Jeffery Parker Architects
dated April 15, 2015; all of which were submitted with the application for
PUD rezoning.  The final development plan applies to those properties listed
in Section 1271.01(a), (b) and (c) and properties described in Section
1271.01(d) except for 434 West Main Street.





      (2)   Any revisions to the final development plans shall be
made by the applicant and this plan shall be signed and dated by the
Community Development Director and become the final development plan.





      (3)   Modifications to Plan.  Any modification to the
approved site plan shall comply with the requirements of Section 1266.06 of
the City Code including any changes to the architectural elevation drawings
approved as part of the final development plans.





   (b)   Phasing of the Development.  The development shall be
constructed in one phase as illustrated on the plan.




   (c)   Land Uses.  Permitted land uses in the Resurrection Life
Church PUD include only those described on the approved final development
plans submitted by the applicant and referenced in Section 1271.02(a)(1). 
The future interior renovation of the Church-owned buildings as described in
the narrative shall not require additional approval from the City provided
that all exterior renovations are in compliance with the approved final
development plans.



   (d)   Parking.  On street and off street parking as illustrated on
the final development plan appears to be sufficient to meet the needs of the
proposed Resurrection Life Church expansion.



   (e)   Use of and Improvements to Adjoining Lands.



      (1)   Sheet 4 of 4 of the approved final development plans
illustrates certain improvements to adjoining public parcels labeled as
parcels 4, 5 and 6 on Sheet 4 and the adjoining public streets.  These
parcels and street improvements are not included within the Resurrection Life
Church PUD but are necessary for the operation of Resurrection Life Church. 
The improvements to parcels 4, 5 and 6 and adjoining streets have been
approved by the City Council according to the site plan review requirements
of the City Code.  These improvements shall be completed according to the
approved site plan and as may be modified by the City prior to occupancy of
the new buildings constructed within the Resurrection Life Church PUD. 



      (2)   Following completion of the improvements approved for
parcels 4, 5 and 6 any future alterations or changes to the improvements on
these parcels must first be approved by the Planning Commission or Community
Development Director to ensure that such changes do not have a negative
effect on the Resurrection Life Church PUD.  In determining if such change
should be reviewed by the Planning Commission or Community Development
Director the provisions of Section 1266.06 shall be followed.



      (3)   Sheet 4 of 4 of the approved final development plans
illustrates the easements which must be obtained by Resurrection Life
Church.  Such easements shall be reviewed and approved by the City with
copies of the recorded easements provided to the City prior to the issuance
of any permits by the City.



      (4)   The City shall enter into an agreement with the
applicant and other applicable property owners regarding the reconstruction
and maintenance of the City owned parking lot and entrances to the parking
lot at the southwest corner of the Steele Street/West Washington Street
intersection.  Such agreement shall be completed before the occupancy of the
new buildings in the Resurrection Life Church PUD.



      (5)   Improvements to parcels owned by the City as illustrated
on the final development plan including but not limited to the
re-construction of West Washington Street and the pedestrian walkway on
parcel 34-201-050-000-285-00 may be implemented by the City at its discretion.



      (6)   Improvements to the alley which exists between 420 West
Main Street and 426 West Main Street shall be implemented by the applicant at
the applicant's expense upon final plan approval by the City Council.



   (f)   Storm-Water Management.  A storm water management plan shall
be provided to ensure that storm water runoff does not adversely impact
adjacent or nearby properties. This plan shall be subject to the approval of
the City Engineer before any demolition or construction of buildings shall
occur on the property. 



   (g)   Construction Plans.  Complete construction plans for all site
improvements shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval before any
construction commences.



   (h)   Signs.  Signs for the development shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the sign standards for the B-2 Community Business
District.



(Ord. 486.  Passed 4-12-11; Ord. 509.  Passed 12-3-13; Ord. 525.  Passed
7-7-15.)



1271.03  FINDINGS BY THE CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council hereby determines that the plan, as modified by this
chapter, complies with the approval standards for a Planned Unit Development
as contained in the City Code and promotes its intent and purposes and
specifically meets the following goals of the City’s Master Plan:



   (a)   DDA GOAL: Downtown Events.  Increase the number of family
events taking place in the DDA district, especially those that are family
oriented.



   (b)   DDA GOAL: Lead efforts to retain DDA district businesses and
anchors, while simultaneously recruiting new businesses, as identified in the
Blueprints Study.  Actions:  Participate in efforts to retain key downtown
anchors, including: Ionia County administrative operations, the Ionia
Community Library, and the Ionia Theatre.



   (c)   DDA GOAL: Façade Improvement/Building Rehabilitation. Improve
the appearance of buildings within the DDA district to continue to further
revitalize the downtown area. 



   (d)   DDA GOAL: Downtown Appearance. Continue and expand efforts to
maintain a well-kept and attractive appearance in the downtown.



   (e)   DDA GOAL:  Residential Development.  Identify and implement
initiatives to aid in the rehabilitation and development of residential units
within the DDA district.



(Ord. 486.  Passed 4-12-11.)



1271.04  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE CITY ORDINANCES.



   Except as expressly otherwise exempted by chapter or the approved final
development plan of the Development, all uses, activities, buildings and
structures for the development shall comply with all applicable requirements
and standards of the City Code.



(Ord. 486.  Passed 4-12-11.)



1271.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   (a)   (1)   The City may enforce the provisions of this chapter
and applicable provisions of the City Code, laws and regulations to the
extent and in any manner provided by law. Any violation of this chapter or
the approved final development plan of the Resurrection Life Church Planned
Unit Development shall constitute a violation of the City Code.



      (2)   In the event that the applicant shall fail to carry out
any provision or requirement of this chapter or other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation, in addition to any other legal remedies, the City
may through its Zoning Administrator or other City agency issue and post a
stop work order at the site of any improper or non-complying part of the
development, directing that all further construction of such part of the
development be ceased forthwith, pending the compliance with any applicable
provisions of the City Code or State law.



   (b)   Upon the correction of any matters as to which the stop work
order was issued, the City shall promptly rescind and remove the stop work
order, whereupon the applicant may again proceed with construction or other
permissible activity as to the development.



(Ord. 486.  Passed 4-12-11.)



Chapter 1272
Site Condominiums



1272.01   Purpose and scope.



1272.02   Definitions.



1272.03   Administration.



1272.04   Schedule of fees.



1272.05   Review of preliminary plans by the Planning Commission.



1272.06   Review and approval of final plans by City Council.



1272.07   Construction in compliance with approved final site condominium
project plan.



1272.08   Review and approval of changes to approved site condominium
project.



1272.09   Incorporation of approved provisions in the Master Deed.



1272.10   Approval effective for one year.



1272.11   Variances.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Conversion of one-family structures - see P. & Z. 1250.04



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



   Distance spacing for multiple dwellings - see P. & Z. Appx. XI



1272.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures for the
orderly use and development of property which is not otherwise regulated by
the Michigan Land Division Act, Act 591 of the Public Acts of 1996, as
amended.  This chapter ensures that a site condominium development shall be
reviewed with the objective and intent of achieving many of the same
characteristics and land use results as if the proposed development and
improvements were being reviewed under the City of Ionia Subdivision
Regulations.  This chapter identifies minimum standards for the development
of property as site condominiums in the City, and sets forth procedures to be
followed by the City in applying these rules, regulations and standards.



   (b)   In addition, the purpose of this chapter is to:



      (1)   Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of
the City consistent with orderly growth policies;




      (2)   Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated
street systems with proper relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining
subdivisions, and public facilities;



      (3)   Achieve adequate provisions for water, drainage, and
sanitary facilities and other health requirements;



      (4)   Encourage the provision of recreational areas and
facilities, school sites and other public facilities;



      (5)   Ensure against the creation of unsafe or undesirable
conditions;



      (6)   Regulate the density of development in relation to the
availability of, or lack of, utilities service;



      (7)   Conserve natural features;



      (8)   Carry out the purpose and intent of the City’s Master
Plan and this chapter; and



      (9)   Provide procedures for the achievement of these purposes.



   (c)   Site condominium projects are condominium developments in
which each condominium unit consists of an area of vacant land and a volume
of vacant air space within which a building or other improvements may be
constructed by the condominium unit owner.  Each site condominium unit may
also have an appurtenant limited common element reserved for the exclusive
use of the owner of the condominium unit.



   (d)   Either the condominium unit by itself, or the condominium unit
taken together with any contiguous, appurtenant limited common element, shall
be considered to constitute a building site which is the functional
equivalent of a lot for purposes of determining compliance with the
requirements of this Zoning Code and other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations.  Site condominium projects may also include general common
elements consisting of common open space, recreational areas, streets, and
other areas available for use by all owners of condominium units within the
project.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   (a)   Building envelope means the area of a condominium unit within
which the principal building or structure may be constructed, together with
any accessory structures, as described in the master deed for the site
condominium project.  In a single-family residential site condominium
project, the building envelope refers to the area of each condominium within
which the dwelling and any accessory structures may be built.



   (b)   Condominium Act means Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1978
(M.C.L. 559.101 et seq.; M.S.A. 26.50(101) et seq.).



   (c)   Condominium project means a condominium project developed
under the Condominium Act.



   (d)   Condominium structure means the principal building or
structure intended for or constructed upon a lot or building site, together
with any attached accessory structures; e.g. in a residential development,
the condominium structure would refer to the house and any attached garages.



   (e)   Condominium unit means a condominium unit established in
compliance with the Condominium Act, which consists of an area of vacant land
and a volume of vacant air space, designed and intended for separate
ownership and used as described in the site condominium project master deed,
and within which a building or other improvement may be constructed by the
condominium unit owner.



   (f)   Exempt change means a change to a site condominium project
(other than a major or minor change) that is exempt from review and approval
as required for major or minor changes under this chapter.  Exempt changes
shall be limited to the following:



      (1)   A change in the name of the project, in the name of a
street within the project, or in the name of the developer of the project;



      (2)   A change in the voting rights of co-owners or
mortgagees; or



      (3)   Any other change in the site condominium project which,
as determined by the Community Development Director, does not constitute a
major or minor change or will not otherwise change the site configuration,
design, layout, topography or any other aspect of a project which is subject
to regulation under this chapter.



   (g)   Limited common element means an area appurtenant to a site
condominium unit and reserved in the master deed for the site condominium
project for the exclusive use of the owner of the site condominium unit.



   (h)   Lot means the same as building site and is that portion of a
condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and/or
exclusive use, as described in the master deed.  “Lot” may be further
defined as:



      (1)   A condominium unit consisting of the area under a
building envelope and the contiguous area around the building envelope which,
by itself, meets the minimum area and yard requirements for lots as required
by this chapter; or



      (2)   The contiguous limited common element under and
surrounding a condominium unit that is or shall be assigned to the owner of
the condominium unit for the owner’s exclusive use, and which, together
with the condominium unit, meets the minimum area and yard requirements for
lots as required by this chapter.



   (i)   Major change means a change in the site configuration, design,
layout or topography of a site condominium project (or any portion thereof),
including any change that could result in:



      (1)   An increase of twenty percent or more in the number of
site condominium units;



      (2)   Any other change in the site configuration, design,
layout, topography, or other aspect of the project subject to regulation
under this chapter, including, without limitation, a change in the location
of streets and utilities, or in the size, location, area, horizontal
boundaries or vertical boundaries of a site condominium unit, and which is
determined by the Planning Commission to constitute a major change to the
site condominium project.



   (j)   Master deed means the legal document prepared and recorded
pursuant to the Condominium Act to which is attached as exhibits and
incorporated by reference the approved bylaws for the project and the
approved condominium subdivision plan for the project.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.03  ADMINISTRATION.



   To ensure that site condominium projects comply with this chapter,
preliminary review of site condominium project plans by the Planning
Commission is required followed by final review and approval by the City
Council, as provided by the Condominium Act.  Site condominium projects may
be approved as provided by this chapter in any zoning district for the uses
permitted in the zoning district in which the project is located.



(3)   (Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.04  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   The schedule of fees for the review of projects under this chapter
shall be as required by City Council resolution as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.05  REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLANS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION



   (a)   Required.  Prior to final review and approval of a site
condominium project plan by the City Council, a preliminary site condominium
project plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission in accordance with
the procedures, standards and requirements provided by this chapter.



   (b)   Application Submittal Requirements.  An application for
preliminary site plan review, along with twelve sets of the plan, shall be
submitted to the Community Development Director at least four weeks prior to
the next scheduled Planning Commission meeting along with a fee as set by the
City Council.  The application shall at a minimum, contain the following
information:



      (1)   The applicant's name, address, and phone number.



      (2)   Proof that the applicant is the owner of the property or
has a legal or financial interest in the property such as a purchase
agreement.



      (3)   The name, address and phone number of the owner(s) of
record if different than the applicant.



      (4)   The address of the property.



      (5)   A legal description or the permanent parcel number of
the property.



      (6)   A project description.



      (7)   The size of the parcel in acres.



      (8)   The signature of the applicant and the owner of the
property.



   (c)   Technical Review.  The Community Development Director shall
review the preliminary plan for compliance with ordinance requirements. 
Copies may also be sent to the City Planner, the City Engineer, the Fire
Chief and the Police Chief as deemed necessary.  The site plan shall be
reviewed for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and a report
prepared for the Planning Commission.



   (d)   Requirements for Preliminary Plans.  The preliminary plan
shall, at a minimum, contain those items required by Section 1224.02 of the
Subdivision Regulations.  In addition the following requirements and
standards shall apply:



      (1)   The site condominium shall be constructed in accordance
with Chapter 1232 of the Subdivision Regulations.



      (2)   A condominium project plan shall include the documents
and information required by Section 66 of the Condominium Act (M.C.L.
559.166; M.S.A. 26.50(16)), including the signature and seal of the
architect, land surveyor, or engineer who prepares the plan.



      (3)   A statement describing the proposed method of providing
potable water supply, waste disposal facilities and public and private
utilities, and a statement from the District County Health Department
indicating the suitability of the land for the operation of septic tanks, if
proposed, shall be included.



      (4)   All private streets in a site condominium shall comply
with the standards for City public street construction.



      (5)   The location of any and all general and limited common
elements, as well as the use and occupancy restrictions and maintenance
provisions for all general and limited common elements that will be included
in the Master Deed, shall be included.



      (6)   A storm drainage and a storm water management plan,
including all lines, swales, drains, basins, and other facilities and
easements granted to the appropriate municipality for installation, repair
and maintenance of all drainage facilities, shall be included.



      (7)   In its review of a site condominium project plan, the
Planning Commission may consult with the City Manager, City Planner, City
Engineer, or other appropriate persons regarding the adequacy of the proposed
common elements and maintenance provisions, use and occupancy restrictions,
utility systems and streets, project layout and design, or other aspects of
the proposed project.



      (8)   The Planning Commission shall require that portions of
the plan as relevant to the reviewing authority in question be submitted to
the District  Health Department, County Road Commission, County Drain
Commission, Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Michigan Department of
Public Health, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and other
appropriate State and County review and enforcement agencies having direct
approval or permitting authority over any aspect of the proposed site
condominium project.



      (9)   The building site for each site condominium unit shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code for the zoning
district in which it will be located, including minimum lot area, minimum lot
width, required front, side and rear yards, and maximum building height. 
For example, the area and width of the building site shall be used to
determine compliance with the minimum lot area and lot width requirements. 
Compliance with required front, side or rear yards shall be determined by
measuring the distance from the equivalent front, side, or rear yard
boundaries of the building site closest respective front, side or rear
boundary of the building envelope.  Building setback lines showing
dimensions from all streets and lot lines shall be illustrated on the project
plan.



      (10)   If a site condominium project is proposed to have
public streets, the streets shall be paved and developed to the minimum
design, construction, inspection, approval and maintenance requirements for
platted public streets as required by the City.



      (11)   The site condominium project shall be connected to the
City water and sanitary sewer facilities in accordance with the City of Ionia
Municipal Standards Ordinance.



      (12)   The names of abutting developments, if any, shall be
included.



      (13)   A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if
the proposed project is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development, shall be included.



      (14)   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed
project shall be included.  Zoning and land use on adjacent parcels should
also be illustrated.



      (15)   A table listing the proposed lots by number, and the
respective lot area for each lot, shall be included.



      (16)   Additional information which will assist the applicant
in proceeding in a reasonable and sound manner toward final approval of the
project shall be included.



   (e)   Planning Commission Review.



      (1)   Preliminary site condominium plans shall be referred to
the Planning Commission, which shall consider the preliminary plan and make a
recommendation to the City Council.  Such consideration and recommendation
shall take place following a public hearing by the Planning Commission on the
preliminary plan.  For such hearing, notice shall be given as required by
Section 1240.07.



   The preliminary plan, together with meeting minutes showing the action
of the Planning Commission, shall be referred to the City Council for review
and action.



      (2)   If the preliminary project plan does not meet all
requirements contained herein, the Planning Commission shall notify the
applicant by letter indicating any additional information or changes required.



(Ord. 390. Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 469. Passed 10-6-09.)



1272.06  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF FINAL PLANS BY CITY COUNCIL.



   (a)   After receiving the Planning Commission's recommendations on
the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development
Director twelve copies of a final site condominium development plan which
complies with the requirements for a preliminary site condominium project
plan.  The applicant shall also submit copies of reviews by those agencies
with jurisdiction over the project.  The Community Development Director
shall forward the copies of the final plan and other information to the City
Council.



   (b)   The final site condominium project plan submitted by the
applicant shall incorporate all of the recommendations, if any, made by the
Planning Commission based on its prior review of the preliminary plan.  If
any of the Planning Commission's recommendations are not incorporated in the
final plan, the applicant shall clearly specify in writing which
recommendations have not been incorporated and the reasons why those
recommendations have not been incorporated.  Except for changes made to the
plan as necessary to incorporate the recommendations of the Planning
Commission, the final plan shall otherwise be identical to the preliminary
plan which was reviewed by the Planning Commission.  Changes made to the
plan other than those necessary to incorporate the recommendations of the
Planning Commission shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as provided
by this chapter prior to approval of the plan by the City Council.



   (c)   After receiving the Planning Commission's recommendations on
the preliminary plan and a final site condominium development plan from the
applicant, the City Council shall review and may approve, deny or approve
with conditions the plan in accordance with the standards and requirements of
the Subdivision Regulations and other applicable procedures, standards and
requirements provided by this chapter.



   (d)   The City Council may grant tentative approval of the project
and shall set forth in writing the requirements that must be met for approval.



   (e)   The City Council shall not review, approve or reject a final
project plan until it has received a report and recommendation from the
Planning Commission on the preliminary project plan.



   (f)   As a condition of approval of a final site condominium project
plan:



      (1)   The City Council may require that a cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable
to the Council, covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with
the site condominium project for which approval is sought, be deposited with
the City Clerk.



      (2)   The City Council may impose additional reasonable
conditions of approval necessary to insure that public services and
facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of
accommodating increased service and facility load caused by the land use or
activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources
and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to
promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.



   (g)   Approval of a final site condominium project plan shall not
constitute approval of expandable or convertible portions of a site
condominium project unless the expandable or convertible areas were
specifically reviewed and approved by the City Council in compliance with the
procedures, standards, and requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.07  CONSTRUCTION IN COMPLIANCE WITH APPROVED FINAL SITE CONDOMINIUM
PROJECT PLAN.



   (a)   No buildings or structures shall be constructed, nor shall any
other site improvements or changes be made on the property, in connection
with a proposed site condominium project, except in compliance with a final
site condominium project plan as approved by the City Council, including any
conditions of approval.



   (b)   Required permits may be issued by the City Community
Development Director, and the developer may proceed with the project provided:



      (1)   A final site condominium project plan has been approved
by the City Council and the approved plan signed by the City Clerk and Mayor.



      (2)   All conditions to commencement of construction imposed
by the City Council have been met; and



      (3)   All applicable inspections, approvals, or permits from
appropriate County and State review and enforcement agencies have been
obtained for the project.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.08  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF CHANGES TO APPROVED SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT.



   Any change proposed in connection with a project for which a final site
condominium project plan has previously been approved by the City Council
shall be subject to review as provided by this section:



   (a)   Any change that constitutes a major change shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission and reviewed and approved by the City Council as
provided by this chapter for the original review and approval of preliminary
and final plans.



   (b)   Any change that constitutes a minor change shall be reviewed
and approved by the Planning Commission alone without the need for a City
Council review.



   (c)   Any change that constitutes an exempt change shall not be
subject to review by the City under this article, but a copy of changes
proposed (and of the changes made, if different than the proposed) shall be
filed with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.09  INCORPORATION OF APPROVED PROVISIONS IN THE MASTER DEED.



   All provisions of a final site condominium project plan that are
approved by the City Council as provided by this chapter shall be
incorporated by reference in the master deed for the site condominium
project.  Further, all major changes to a project shall be incorporated by
reference in the master deed.  The master deed shall be reviewed by the City
Attorney to ensure that all provisions approved by the City Council have been
included in the master deed.  Following this, a copy of the master deed
shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds, and a copy of the
recorded master deed provided to the City Clerk within ten (10) days after
recording the plan with the County.



(Ord. 390. Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 469. Passed 10-6-09.)



1272.10  APPROVAL EFFECTIVE FOR ONE YEAR.



   (a)   No approval of a final site condominium project plan by the
City Council shall be effective for a period of more than one-year, unless
construction of the project commences within that one-year period and is
diligently pursued to completion in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the approval.  This one-year period may be extended by the Council in its
discretion for additional periods of time as determined appropriate by the
Council if the extension is applied for by the applicant within the effective
period of the approval.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1272.11  VARIANCES.



   A variance from the provisions of this chapter may be granted if the
applicant demonstrates that literal enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter is impractical or will impose undue hardship in the use of the
land because of special or peculiar conditions pertaining to the land.  Upon
application, the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning
Commission, may permit a variance or variances which are reasonable and
within the general policies and purposes of this chapter.  The Planning
Commission and City Council may attach conditions to the variance. 
Variances from regulations not contained but required by this chapter, such
as lot width or lot size, shall be reviewed by the Board of Zoning Appeals as
required by this chapter.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



CHAPTER 1274
Special Land Uses



1274.01   Purpose.



1274.02   Authority of Planning Commission.



1274.03   Special land use procedure.



1274.04   Standards for approval.



1274.05   Imposition of conditions.



1274.06   Expiration of permit.



1274.07   Revocation of permit.



1274.08   Special land use standards.



1274.09   Two-family dwellings



1274.10   Bed and breakfast establishments.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Variances - see P. & Z. 1244.04(b), 1268.10, 1272.11



   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1278



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



1274.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for uses which
are not essentially incompatible with uses permitted by right in a given
district, but which should not be permitted without restrictions or
conditions being imposed by reason of special problems presented by the use
itself or its particular location to neighboring properties.  The special
use permit procedure established herein is designed to provide the Planning
Commission with an opportunity to review and act upon any application for a
special use permit.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1274.02  AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The Planning Commission shall have the power to hear and decide such
questions as are involved in determining whether special use permit
applications should be granted; to approve special use permit applications
with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter; or
to deny special use permit applications where not in harmony with the purpose
and intent of this chapter.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1274.03  SPECIAL LAND USE PROCEDURE.



   Application for a special land use shall be submitted and processed
under the following procedures:



   (a)   An application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
on a form for that purpose.  Each application shall be accompanied by the
payment of a fee as determined by resolution of the City Council.



   (b)   Applications for a special land use permit shall also be
accompanied by a site plan which shall contain the information for final site
plans required by Chapter 1276.



   (c)   The Planning Commission may also require that the applicant
provide additional information about the proposed use.  Such information may
include, but shall not be limited to, traffic analysis, environmental impact
statement, an economic analysis justifying the need for a proposed commercial
use or uses, impact on public utilities and services and effect on the public
school system.



   (d)   Upon receipt of an application for a special land use a public
hearing shall be held.  The public hearing shall comply with the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 as amended and the other provisions of
this section with regard to public notification.



      (1)   Responsibility for public notice.  The City Clerk, or
his or her designee, shall be responsible for preparing the content of the
public notice, having it published and mailed or delivered as provided in
this section.



      (2)   Notice requirements.  Notice of a public hearing for a
special land use shall be given not less than fifteen days before the date of
the public hearing.  The notice shall be given as follows:



         A.   Newspaper notice.  The notice shall be published
in a newspaper that circulates in the City.



         B.   Mail and personal notice.  The notice shall be
sent by first class mail or personal delivery to:



            1.   The owner of property for which approval is
being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner of the
property.



            2.   Except for rezoning requests that are
proposed for eleven (11) or more adjacent parcels, the notice shall be sent
to all persons to whom property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet
of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether
the property or occupant is located within the municipal boundaries of the
City.  If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be
used in making notification.  In the case of a single structure containing
more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or
leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations,
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be
requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.  In
structures containing four (4) or fewer dwelling units, only one (1) occupant
of each unit must be given notice of the public hearing.



            3.   All neighborhood organizations, public
utility companies, airports, railroads, and other persons, which have
requested to receive notice pursuant to this section.



      (3)   Record of Mailing.  The City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall prepare an affidavit of mailing which shall include those to
whom the notice was mailed and the date of mailing.



      (4)   Content of Notice.  The public notice shall:



         A.   Describe the nature of the request.



         B.   Indicate the property that is the subject of the
request.  The notice shall include a listing of all existing street
addresses within the subject property.  Street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently exist for the property. 
If there are no street addresses, other means of identified may be used, such
as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross streets,
or including a map showing the location of the property. 



         C.   Indicate the date, time and place of the public
hearing.



         D.   Include a statement describing when and where
written comments will be received concerning the request and a statement that
the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.



      (5)   Registration to receive notice by mail.  Any
neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other
person may register with the City Clerk to receive written notice of any
public hearing held pursuant to Part Twelve, Planning and Zoning, of the City
Code.



   (e)   At the public hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter,
the Planning Commission shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions, the
request for a special land use.  The decision shall be incorporated in a
statement containing the conclusions relative to the special land use under
consideration which specifies the basis for the decision, and any conditions
imposed.



   The decision of the Planning Commission rendered pursuant to the
request shall be final unless such decision is reversed or modified by a
court of competent jurisdiction.  The Board of Zoning Appeals is without
jurisdiction to accept appeals or grant variances from the decision of the
Planning Commission.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 443.  Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 469. Passed
10-6-09.)



1274.04  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.



   The following general standards shall serve as the basis for decisions
by the Planning Commission involving special land use permits.  The
Commission shall find that, in addition to specific standards for a
particular use, the proposed use shall:



   (a)   Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so it will
be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not significantly
change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed.



   (b)   Be adequately served by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police, fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities and schools.



   (c)   Not create excessive additional requirements at public cost
for public facilities and services.



   (d)   Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and
equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.



   (e)   Be consistent with the intent and purpose of the zoning
district in which such use will be located.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1274.05  IMPOSITION OF CONDITIONS.



   Reasonable conditions may be imposed with approval of a special land
use.  The conditions may include conditions necessary to insure that public
services and facilities will be capable of accommodating increased service
and facility loads caused by the proposed land use or activity, to protect
the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure
compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a
socially and economically desirable manner.  Conditions imposed shall meet
all of the following requirements:



   (a)   Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety,
and welfare and the social and economic well-being of those who will exercise
the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community
as a whole.



   (b)   Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and
purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.



   (c)   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Zoning
Code, be related to any standards established in this Zoning Code for the
land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure
compliance with those standards.



   (d)   The conditions imposed shall be recorded in the record of the
approval action, and shall remain unchanged except as provided by law.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1274.06  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   A special land use permit shall expire one year after it is granted,
unless construction is complete or commencement of the use has substantially
begun.  The Planning Commission may, upon request by the applicant, extend
the term of the special land use by successive periods of up to one year each
upon a finding that there have been no changed conditions in the area which
would require reconsideration of the special land use application or site
plan.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1274.07  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   If a violation of any of the conditions or standards imposed on a
special land use is found to exist following inspection, the Community
Development Director shall notify the owner of the premises of the special
land use and the Planning Commission that such violation exists and that the
permit will be revoked within fifteen days of such notification.  If said
violation is not corrected within fifteen days, the Planning Commission shall
revoke the permit.  Furthermore, such a violation is hereby declared to be a
violation of this Zoning Code, subject to all of the remedies and penalties
provided for in this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1274.08  SPECIAL LAND USE STANDARDS.



   The following provisions are standards and requirements for specific
land uses which must be satisfied to qualify for a special land use, in
addition to the general standards set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 08-2002-07. Passed 9-3-02.)



1274.09  TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   (a)   A two-family dwelling, whether it is a newly constructed
building or a conversion of a single family dwelling shall, insofar as
practical, have the appearance of a single family dwelling. This can be
accomplished by locating the doors, garage, mailboxes, utility meters on
different planes of the dwellings or by a design or configuration or
screening which creates the general appearance of a single family dwelling.



   (b)   A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit. Such spaces must be within a garage or driveway. The
Planning Commission may approve other locations for parking but only if such
spaces do not detract from the existing character of the neighborhood.



   (d)   The applicant for a two-family dwelling is exempt from the
site plan requirements of Chapter 1276. However, a scaled drawing must be
submitted which illustrates the size and dimensions of the building,
setbacks, all parking spaces and front elevation drawing to demonstrate
compliance with Section 1274.09(a). The Commission may require additional
information to ensure compliance with this section.



   (d)   A two-family dwelling shall only be located on a lot which
contains 8,000 square feet of area with 65 feet of lot width. A two-family
dwelling shall comply with all other requirements for the RT Zone found in
Appendix I of this Code.



(Ord. 08-2002-07. Passed 9-3-02.)



1274.10  BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (a)   The term "lodger" is defined to mean a person who rents a room
in a bed and breakfast for fewer than 30 consecutive days.



   (b)   There shall be a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet in size
with a minimum street frontage of 65 linear feet.



   (c)   The minimum livable area of the building must be 2,500 square
feet.



   (d)   A site plan to scale shall be submitted showing property
lines, structures, driveways, parking area and sign, along with full
dimension drawings showing interior room layout or arrangement, size,
entrances and exits of the structure.



   (e)   Easily accessible off-street parking must be available in the
following proportion:



      (1)   Two off-street parking spaces for the
owner/occupant/innkeeper; and



      (2)   One off-street parking space for each bedroom which is
available for rent.



   (f)   There shall be a minimum distance of 1,500 feet from property
line to property line of an existing bed and breakfast facility.



   (g)   Smoke detectors shall be installed and maintained in operable
condition in locations that the local, County, State or Federal regulations
or departments require to reasonably protect the lodgers.



   (h)   Any and all present or future City, County, State, or Federal
laws regarding regulations for building, health, safety and welfare as they
related to bed and breakfast shall be required to be followed.



   (i)   Any and all present or future City, County, State, or Federal
inspections required of a bed and breakfast shall be completed and approved
prior to occupancy, along with any other required periodic or timely
inspections presently required or required in the future.



   (j)   A residential structure shall not have been or be converted to
more rental rooms than the number of bedrooms which exist at the time of
enactment of this section and adequate living space must be preserved for the
manager's, innkeeper's or owner's quarters.



   (k)   Additions to a structure for purposes of providing additional
rental rooms shall not be allowed unless made a part of said approval when
granted.



   (l)   Only one identification two-faced sign not to exceed eight
square feet shall be allowed if made a part of the application with approval
granted.



(Ord. 08-2002-07. Passed 9-3-02.)



Chapter 1276
Site Plan Review



1276.01   Purpose.



1276.02   Site plan review required.



1276.03   Approval authority.



1276.04   Application and procedures.



1276.05   Site plan review.



1276.06   Final site plan approval.



1276.07   Standards for approval.



1276.08   Conditions of approval.



1276.09   Validity of final site plans.



1276.10   Performance guarantees.



1276.11   Amendments to approved site plan.



1276.12   Expansion of existing use, structure or building.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Site condominiums - see P. & Z. Ch. 1272



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



1276.01  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of site plan review are to determine compliance with the
provisions of this Zoning Code; to promote the orderly development of the
City; to prevent the depreciation of land value through uses or structures
which do not give proper attention to siting or area protection; and to
provide consultation and cooperation between the applicant and the City
Planning Commission in order that applicants may accomplish their objectives
in the utilization of their land within the regulations of this Zoning Code
and achieve the purposes of the City of Ionia Master Plan.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.02  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.



   A site plan shall be submitted for review and approval prior to the
issuance of a building permit as follows:



   (a)   Planning Commission Level.  The Planning Commission shall
review the following site plans:



      (1)   Any new principal commercial, office, industrial,
business or institutional use or a residential use having more than two
dwellings.



      (2)   Special land uses and planned unit developments.



      (3)   Existing commercial, industrial, business or
institutional uses and buildings or residential uses having more than two
dwellings proposed to be increased in size fifty percent or more of the
existing building or use.  The existing size shall be determined by the
gross square footage of an existing building, or if the principal use is
primarily out of doors, then the land area occupied by the use shall be used
to determine the existing size.



      (4)   Accessory buildings which are more than fifty percent of
the size of the largest principal building on site.



   (b)   Staff Level.  The Community Development Director shall review
the following site plans or may refer such plans to the Planning Commission.



      (1)   Expansion of an existing use or building which comprises
less than fifty percent of a building or less than fifty percent of the land
area occupied by a use which is principally outdoors.



      (2)   A building which is accessory to the principal building
if such accessory building is no more than one half of the size of the
largest principal building on site.



      (3)   A change in the use of a property which results in the
need for more parking spaces.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.03  APPROVAL AUTHORITY.



   The Planning Commission or Community Development Director shall have
the power to approve, deny, modify, or approve with conditions all site plans
submitted under this Zoning Code.  A building permit shall not be issued
until a site plan has been approved as required herein.



   Review of site plans by the Community Development Director shall be in
accordance with the same procedures, requirements and standards used by the
Planning Commission except that the number of site plan copies and the
submittal date shall be subject to the discretion of the Director.



   The Community Development Director may waive specific site plan review
submittal requirements if it is determined that such requirements are not
relevant to the site plan under consideration.  The Director shall keep a
record of those items specifically waived and document reasons for the waiver.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.04  APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.



   An application for site plan review along with twelve sets of the site
plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Director in accordance
with the submittal schedule established by the Planning Commission along with
the fee as set by the City Council.  The application shall at a minimum
contain the following information:



   (a)   The applicant’s name, address and phone number.



   (b)   Proof that the applicant is the owner of the property or has a
legal or financial interest in the property, such as a purchase agreement.



   (c)   The name, address and phone number of the owner(s) of record
if different than the applicant.



   (d)   The address of the property.



   (e)   A legal description of the property.



   (f)   The current zoning.



   (g)   A project description.



   (h)   The size of the parcel in acres.



   (i)   The signature of the applicant and the owner of the property.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.05  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   (a)   Upon receipt of the site plan and application, the Community
Development Director shall forward copies to the Fire Department and the
Department of Public Works and others as necessary for review and subsequent
report to the Planning Commission.  The Director shall send the application
and site plan to members of the Planning Commission prior to the meeting at
which it will be considered.



   (b)   A public hearing shall be held for each site plan considered
by the Planning Commission.  The public hearing shall comply with the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 as amended and the other
provisions of this section with regard to public notification.



      (1)   Responsibility for public notice.  The City Clerk, or
his or her designee, shall be responsible for preparing the content of the
public notice, having it published  and mailed or delivered as provided in
this section.



      (2)   Notice requirements.  Notice of a public hearing for
site plan review shall be given not less than fifteen days before the date of
the public hearing.  The notice shall be given as follows:



         A.   Newspaper notice.  The notice shall be published
in a newspaper that circulates in the City.



         B.   Mail and personal notice.  The notice shall be
sent by first class mail or personal delivery to:



            1.   The owner of property for which approval is
being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner of the
property.



            2.   Except for rezoning requests that are
proposed for eleven (11) or more adjacent parcels, the notice shall be sent
to all persons to whom property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet
of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether
the property or occupant is located within the municipal boundaries of the
City.  If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be
used in making notification.  In the case of a single structure containing
more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or
leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations,
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be
requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.  In
structures containing four (4) or fewer dwelling units, only one (1) occupant
of each unit must be given notice of the public hearing.



            3.   All neighborhood organizations, public
utility companies, airports, railroads, and other persons, which have
requested to receive notice pursuant to this section.



      (3)   Record of mailing.  The City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall prepare an affidavit of mailing which shall include those to
whom the notice was mailed and the date of mailing.



      (4)   Content of notice.  The public notice shall:



         A.   Describe the nature of the request.



         B.   Indicate the property that is the subject of the
request.  The notice shall include a listing of all existing street
addresses within the subject property.  Street addresses do not need to be
created and listed if no such addresses currently exist for the property. 
If there are no street addresses, other means of identified may be used, such
as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross streets,
or including a map showing the location of the property.



         C.   Indicate the date, time and place of the public
hearing.



         D.   Include a statement describing when and where
written comments will be received concerning the request and a statement that
the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.



      (5)   Registration to receive notice by mail.  Any
neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other
person may register with the City Clerk to receive written notice of any
public hearing held pursuant to Part Twelve, Planning and Zoning, of the City
Code.



   (c)   Final site plans shall be drawn at a scale of not more than
one inch to 100 feet and shall contain the following information unless
specifically waived by the Planning Commission:



      (1)   The date on which the site plan was prepared.



      (2)   The name, address and professional seal of the
architect, landscape architect, engineer or professional surveyor who
prepared the plan.



      (3)   A north arrow and legal description based upon the most
current survey.



      (4)   Property lines, dimensions, and building setback
distances and all structures, lot lines and wetlands within 100 feet of the
site.



      (5)   Existing and proposed topographic elevations at two-feet
intervals on the site and to a distance of fifty feet outside the boundary
lines of the site.



      (6)   Direction of storm water drainage and how storm water
runoff will be handled as well as a statement describing where storm water
will be ultimately discharged such as a creek, stream, lake or wetland.



      (7)   Location of existing and proposed buildings, their
intended use, the length, width and height of each building, and the square
footage of each building.



      (8)   Location of abutting streets, rights-of-way, service
drives, curb cuts, and access easements serving the site, as well as
driveways opposite the site and driveways within 100 feet on either side of
the site.  Also driveway width, curb radii and design of proposed
deceleration lanes.



      (9)   Location and size of all water and sanitary sewer lines
and storm drainage lines as well as fire hydrants and catch basins, and
location of septic tanks and drainfields, and utility easements.



      (10)   Location and type of all sidewalks, bike paths, and
other walkways.



      (11)   Location, type and size of any walls, fences or other
screening devices.



      (12)   Location of all proposed landscape materials, including
size and type of plantings.



      (13)   Location, size and height of all proposed accessory
structures, flagpoles, storage sheds, transformers, dumpsters or trash
removal areas or devices, and methods of screening, signs, and existing and
proposed utility poles.  Roof top or outdoor equipment shall also be
indicated, including proposed methods of screening where appropriate.



      (14)   Proposed parking areas and access drives showing the
number and size of spaces and aisles, loading areas, handicapped access
ramps, and the method of surfacing such areas.



      (15)   Exterior lighting showing areas of illumination and
type of fixtures as well as the method of shielding lights from adjacent
properties and roadways.



      (16)   Location and type of significant existing vegetation,
watercourses, and water bodies, including County drains and man-made surface
drainageways, floodplains, and wetlands.  Vegetation which is to be retained
on the site must be illustrated.



      (17)   Location of existing and proposed slopes which are
twenty percent or greater.



      (18)   Zoning and land use on adjacent properties.



      (19)   Location and specifications for any existing or
proposed above or below ground storage facilities for any chemicals, salts,
flammable materials, or hazardous materials as well as any containment
structures or clear zones required by this Zoning Code or by State or Federal
agencies.



      (20)   The Planning Commission may request architectural
elevation drawings of a building and cross-section drawings of the site.



      (21)   Small-scale sketch of properties, streets and zoned
uses of land within one-half mile of the site.



   (d)   The final site plan for developments which have been proposed
in phases shall generally conform to the approved preliminary plan.



   (e)   The Planning Commission may require written statements
relative to the effects on the existing traffic capacity of streets, and the
proposed development’s impact on schools, existing utilities, the
environment and natural features.



   In addition, the Commission may request additional studies, graphics or
other written materials from the applicant in order to assist in determining
the appropriateness of the site plan.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01; Ord. 443. Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 469. Passed
10-6-09.)



1276.06  FINAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.



   (a)   The Planning Commission shall review the final site plan
according to the general standards for site plan review as contained in this
chapter and any other applicable regulations of this Zoning Code.  Based on
these standards and regulations, the Commission shall approve, deny, or
approve with conditions the final site plan.



   (b)   If approved, the applicant shall revise the site plan as
necessary and submit the final site plan to the Community Development
Director to ensure that all revisions as required by the Planning Commission
have been made.



   (c)   Upon approval of the final site plan, two copies of this plan
shall be stamped as approved, dated, and signed by the Community Development
Director.  One copy of the approved plan shall be retained by the applicant
and one shall be retained by the Director as part of the building permit
review process.



   (d)   The Community Development Director shall issue a building
permit upon receipt of an approved final site plan, provided that all other
applicable City regulations have been met including compliance with the
Building and Housing Code.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.07  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.



   (a)   Prior to approving a site plan, the Planning Commission shall
require that the following standards be satisfied.  If these standards and
the other requirements noted in this section or in other City ordinances are
met, the site plan shall be approved.



   (b)   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to limit the
number of driveways for a site, to require that parking lots on contiguous
parcels be connected, that driveways for contiguous parcels be shared, and
that opposite driveways be directly aligned.



   (c)   Landscaping shall be provided and designed in accordance with
the City’s landscape provisions.



   (d)   All elements of the site plan shall be designed to take into
account the site’s topography, the size and type of lot, the character of
adjoining property and the type and size of buildings.  The site shall be
developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or
improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this Zoning Code.



   (e)   The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar
as practical, by removing only those areas of vegetation or by making those
alterations to the topography which are reasonably necessary to develop the
site in accordance with the requirements of this Zoning Code.  A development
shall respect the natural resources of the City.



   (f)   Areas of natural drainage, such as swales, wetlands, ponds, or
swamps, shall be protected and preserved insofar as practical in their
natural state to provide areas for natural habitat, preserve drainage
patterns and maintain the natural characteristics of the land.



   (g)   The site plan shall provide reasonable visual and sound
privacy for all dwelling units located therein.  Fences, walks, barriers,
and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, to accomplish these purposes.



   (h)   All buildings or groups of  buildings shall be arranged so as
to permit necessary emergency vehicle access as requested by the City Fire
Department.



   (i)   In recognition that a sidewalk system along City streets would
enhance pedestrian safety and conserve energy through non-motorized
transportation opportunities, sidewalks shall be required as determined by
the Planning Commission during the site plan review process.  Sidewalks, if
required, shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Ionia sidewalk
standards.  Additions to or renovations of buildings, existing as of the
effective date of this chapter, which require site plan review, shall be
subject to the requirements herein.  In determining the need for a sidewalk,
the following criteria shall be considered:



      (1)   The amount of current and future pedestrian traffic
passing by the site.



      (2)   Whether a sidewalk would enhance the safety of
pedestrians currently walking by the site as well as the safety of future
pedestrians.



      (3)   The existing and future volume of traffic on the street
abutting the site.



      (4)   The existence or probability of sidewalks being
constructed on adjacent properties in order to create or complete a usable
sidewalk system.



      (5)   The location of the proposed use.



      (6)   The location of pedestrian attractors such as schools,
churches, public buildings, and shopping opportunities.



   (j)   The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and
pedestrian circulation shall be connected to existing or planned streets and
pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area.  Streets and drives which are
part of an existing or planned street pattern serving adjacent development
shall be of a condition appropriate to the traffic volume and type of traffic
they will carry.



   (k)   Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that removal of
surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public
storm water drainage system.  Provisions shall be made to accommodate storm
water, prevent erosion, particularly during construction, and prevent the
formation of dust.  The use of detention/retention ponds may be required. 
Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it
will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or create
puddles in paved areas.  The Planning Commission may, in its discretion,
require catch basins to contain oil filters or traps to prevent contaminants
from being discharged to the natural drainage system.



   (l)   Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that illumination is
deflected away from adjacent properties and so that it  does not interfere
with the vision of the motorist along adjacent streets.  Flashing or
intermittent lights shall not be permitted.  Excessive lighting of buildings
or structures shall be minimized to reduce light pollution.



      Street lights which conform to the City of Ionia specifications
for street lighting shall be installed within the right-of-way along all
streets abutting the parcel.  The Planning Commission may, in its
discretion, require these same street lights to be installed on the parcel at
locations which are close to the street in order to maintain a consistent
lighting theme along City streets.



   (m)   Outside storage areas, including areas for the storage of
trash shall conform to the regulations contained in Chapter 1060 of these
Codified Ordinances.



   (n)   Maneuvering space for trucks using on-site loading areas shall
be provided on-premises and shall not necessitate the use of the public
right-of-way.



   (o)   Site plans shall conform to all applicable requirements of
County, State and Federal statutes, and approval may be conditioned on the
applicant receiving necessary County, State and Federal permits before final
site plan approval or any occupancy permit is granted.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.08  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   (a)   As part of an approval to any site plan, the Planning
Commission or the Community Development Director, as applicable, may impose
any additional conditions or limitations as in its judgment may be necessary
for protection of the public interest.



   (b)   Such conditions shall be related to and ensure that the review
standards of Section 1276.07 are met.



   (c)   Approval of a site plan, including conditions made as part of
the approval, shall apply to the property described in the application,
regardless of subsequent changes in ownership.



   (d)   A record of conditions imposed shall be maintained.  The
conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the site plan is
approved in accordance with this Zoning Code.



   (e)   A record of the decision of the Planning Commission, the
reasons for the decision reached and any conditions attached to such decision
shall be kept as part of the minutes of the Planning Commission.



   (f)   The Community Development Director may make periodic
investigations of developments for which site plans have been approved. 
Non-compliance with the requirements and conditions of the approved site plan
shall be violations of this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.09  VALIDITY OF FINAL SITE PLANS.



   (a)   Approval of the final site plan is valid for a period of not
longer than one year unless extended as allowed herein.  If actual
construction of a substantial portion of the improvements included in the
approved site plan has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward
completion during that period, the approval of the final site plan shall be
voided.



   (b)   Upon written application, filed prior to the termination of
the one-year review period, the Planning Commission may authorize a single
extension of the time limit for approval of a final site plan for a further
period of not more than one year. Such extension shall only be granted based
on evidence from the applicant that there is a likelihood of construction
commencing within the one-year extension.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.10  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.



   The Planning Commission may require reasonable performance guarantees
in order to assure the completion of required improvements.  Such
performance guarantees may include a performance bond, letter of credit or
other written guarantees or assurances deemed satisfactory in the
circumstances and authorized by law.  The amount of the performance
guarantee shall be determined by the Planning Commission.  Such arrangements
shall have such sureties or guarantors as are satisfactory to the Planning
Commission and shall be conditioned upon faithful compliance with all of the
provisions and requirements of the approved site plan and construction and
placement of all of the improvements therein.  In its discretion, the
Planning Commission may reduce a proportionate share of the amount specified
in a performance bond, letter of credit or other written assurance, based
upon the percent or other portion of improvements completed, as verified by
the Planning Commission or appropriate City official.  Furthermore, the
Planning Commission may rebate or refund a proportionate share of a cash bond.



(10)   (Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.11  AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED SITE PLAN.



   (a)   A person granted site plan approval shall notify the Community
Development Director of any proposed amendment to the approved site plan.



   (b)   A minor change, one that does not substantially change the
basic design or alter conditions required by the Planning Commission, may be
approved by the Community Development Director.  Determination of a minor
change shall rest solely within the discretion of the Administrator.  The
Administrator may, however, refer a minor change to the Planning Commission
for its approval.



   (c)   A major change, one that does substantially change the basic
design or alter conditions required by the Planning Commission, may be
approved by the Planning Commission.  Determination of a major change shall
rest solely within the discretion of the Community Development Director.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1276.12  EXPANSION OF EXISTING USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING.



   (a)   It is recognized that there are existing land uses, buildings,
and structures which do not conform to the current regulations of this Zoning
Code and as such do not achieve the intended purposes of this Zoning Code. 
When additions to these uses, buildings, and structures are made so that a
site plan review is required per Section 1276.02, the following regulations
shall apply.



   (b)   The site development standards used in reviewing site plans
shall be applied to existing uses, structures or buildings when they are
affected by any expansions, enlargements or increases in intensity.  These
standards shall be applied if it is determined that as a result of such
expansions, enlargements or increases in intensity, any of the following
situations exist:



      (1)   Existing stormwater drainage provisions on-site are
inadequate to protect nearby lakes, streams or creeks from runoff
contaminants or to prevent drainage onto adjoining properties.



      (2)   There is insufficient on-site parking to satisfy current
Zoning Code requirements and/or a hard surface parking area is needed to
reduce dust and reduce gravel and dirt runoff into the public stormwater
drainage system.



      (3)   Existing driveways may result in hazardous vehicle
movements and should be closed or relocated.



      (4)   Additional plantings are needed in order to comply with
the intent of the City of Ionia landscape regulations or to replace trees and
shrubs previously removed, or screening is needed in the form of fencing or
landscaping to provide a buffer between uses, particularly to screen
materials stored outside.



      (5)   Access to adjoining properties is inadequate and can be
improved by way of parking lot connections or installation of service drives
to improve traffic circulation and reduce the number of turning movements
onto the public street system.



      (6)   Safety for pedestrians can be improved and better
emergency vehicle access can be provided.



      (7)   Better lighting conditions are needed to reduce or
eliminate nuisance lighting situations for drivers and nearby properties.



      (8)   Screening of dumpsters is needed to improve the
appearance of a site and reduce the likelihood of windblown trash.



      (9)   Sidewalks are needed to improve pedestrian safety.



   (c)   In determining how to apply the site plan review standards to
address the above deficiencies found on a site, the Planning Commission shall
be guided by the following criteria:



      (1)   Whether or not compliance would ensure safer on-site
conditions, protect the natural environment, improve traffic circulation,
achieve compatibility with adjacent land uses, promote the use of the land in
a socially and economically desirable manner and generally accomplish the
purposes of site plan review as described in this chapter.



      (2)   The practicality of requiring compliance with the
applicable regulations of this Zoning Code based on the existing design,
layout, and operation of the existing use and size of the site.



      (3)   Whether or not requiring compliance would have a
negative impact on the character, safety, and welfare of the neighborhood or
surrounding area.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



Chapter 1278
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses



1278.01   Intent.



1278.02   Nonconforming lots.



1278.03   Nonconforming uses.



1278.04   Nonconforming structures.



1278.05   Abandonment of nonconforming use.



1278.06   Repairs and maintenance.



1278.07   Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses.



1278.08   Change of tenancy or ownership.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Variances - see P. & Z. 1222.02, 1244.05(b), 1272.11



   Special land uses - see P. & Z. Ch. 1274



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



1278.01  INTENT.



   It is recognized that there exist within the districts established by
this Zoning Code and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and uses of
land and structures which were lawful before this Zoning Code was passed or
amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms
of this Zoning Code or future amendments.



   It is the intent of this Zoning Code to permit legal nonconforming
lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their survival.



   Such uses are declared by this Zoning Code to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this
Zoning Code that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district.



   A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land, shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this Zoning Code by attachment on a building or premises, or
by addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally
in the district involved.



   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use or any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent
position and fastened in a permanent manner, except that where demolition or
removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to
rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until
completion of the building involved.



(1975 Code § 5.115)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



1278.02  NONCONFORMING LOTS.



   (a)   All permitted principal and special land uses except for those
special land uses for which a minimum lot size is specified in this Zoning
Code and customary accessory structures may be erected on any single lot of
record or the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code.
This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district, provided that yard dimensions, including minimum setbacks and lot
coverage and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the
lot, shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is
located.



   (b)   In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted
the following regulations shall apply if two or more lots, or combinations or
portions of lots, which are non-conforming, are held in common ownership.



      (1)   If two or more lots, or combination of lots or portions
of lots, located adjacent to each other are at any time held in common
ownership, and if all or part of such lots do not satisfy the minimum
requirements for a buildable lot in the zoning district in which they are
located, then all of such lots shall automatically be considered to be
combined for zoning purposes into one conforming lot, or one lot that is more
nearly conforming than the individual lots.  Such lots shall comply with the
setback requirements contained in Appendix I, Schedule of Regulations herein.



      (2)   Each individual lot which has been combined for zoning
purposes under division (b)(1) of this section shall cease to be considered a
separate lot of record, and shall no longer be considered to be a buildable
lot.



      (3)   Lots combined for zoning purposes pursuant to this
section shall not thereafter be split, re-divided, or otherwise reduced in
area unless all of the resulting lots comply with the minimum lot area
requirement for a buildable lot in the district in which the land is located
unless a lot is divided and legally combined with an adjacent lot or lots,
provided, however, in the case of a platter lot being divided and combined
with an adjacent lot or lots, such division shall be subject to the
provisions of Chapter 1210 Land Division of this City Code.



      (4)   If two or more lots, or combination of lots or portions
of lots, located adjacent to each other are at any time held in common
ownership, then a single-family dwelling and a customary accessory building
may be erected on any such lots, but the applicable regulations pertaining to
required minimum front and rear yard setbacks, maximum building height
limitations and required minimum side yards, shall be satisfied.



(1975 Code § 5.116)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



1278.03  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (a)   Where, on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Zoning Code, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible
under the terms of this Zoning Code as enacted or amended, such use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:



      (1)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code.



      (2)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use on the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code.



   (b)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
Zoning Code in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.



   (c)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, but no such
use shall be extended to occupy and land outside such building.



   (d)   A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use of equal or less nonconformity, subject to the prior approval of the
Zoning Board of Appeals following a public hearing as required by Section
1244.07 of this chapter.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve such
change only if it complies with all of the following standards:



      (1)   The proposed use is comparable to or more conforming
than the existing use in terms of its operations and compatibility with the
character of the area in which it is located;



      (2)   The proposed use does not increase the degree of
nonconformity existing prior to such change of use;



      (3)   No structural alteration of the existing structure will
be required to accommodate the new use.



      (4)   In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may require conditions and safeguards in accordance with the purpose and
intent of this Zoning Code.



   (e)   The operations associated with a nonconforming use shall not
be changed so as to create or increase noise, smoke, dust or other adverse
effects.



   (f)   A nonconforming use located in a conforming building or
structure shall not be re-established if the building or structure is damaged
by fire, wind, act of God or other calamity to the extent that the
replacement cost of the building or structure exceeds 60% of the fair market
value of the building or structure prior to such damage or destruction.  The
fair market value shall be as determined by the Community Development
Director or their agent.



(1975 Code § 5.117)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



1278.04  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Where a lawful structure exists on the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Zoning Code that could not be built under the terms of this
Zoning Code by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, heights, yards,
or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful.



   (a)   A nonconforming building, structure, parking area, or site may
be changed so as to make it more closely conforming to this Zoning Code, if
that change does not increase the nonconformity in any other aspect.



   (b)   A nonconforming building or structure may be expanded provided
the expansion conforms in all respects to the requirements of this Zoning
Code and does not increase the nonconformity of the building or structure. 
For example, a building which is nonconforming as it is closer to the side
lot line than permitted by this Zoning Code may be expanded along the same
plane of the building but the expansion shall be no closer to the side lot
line than the existing building.



   (c)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is removed.



(1975 Code § 5.118)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



1278.05  ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE.



   If a nonconforming use is abandoned for any reason for a period of more
than one year, any subsequent use shall conform to the requirements of this
Zoning Code.  A nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if one
or more of the following conditions exist and shall be deemed to constitute
intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the nonconforming use:



   (a)   Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property,
have been disconnected;



   (b)   The property, buildings and grounds, have fallen into
disrepair;



   (c)   Signs or other indications of the existence of the
nonconforming use have been removed;



   (d)   Removal of equipment or fixtures which are necessary for the
operation of the nonconforming use;



   (e)   Non-payment of property taxes;



   (f)   Other actions, which in the opinion of the Community
Development Director constitute an intention of the part of the property
owner or lessee to abandon the nonconforming use.



(1975 Code § 5.119)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



1278.06   REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   (a)   In the event any nonconforming building or structure is
damaged by fire, wind, act of God or other calamity, it may be rebuilt or
restored in the same configuration as existed before the damage occurred if
the replacement cost thereof does not exceed 60% of the fair market value of
the nonconforming building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, prior
to its damage or destruction.  The fair market value shall be as determined
by the Community Development Director or their agent.



   (b)   In the event any nonconforming building or structure is
damaged by fire, wind, act of God or other calamity to the extent that the
replacement cost of the nonconforming building or structure exceeds 60% of
the fair market value of the building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, prior to such damage or destruction, the building or structure
may be rebuilt or restored only in accordance with the requirements of this
Zoning Code.  The fair market value shall be as determined by the Community
Development Director or their agent.



   However, the Zoning Board of Appeals may approve the re-establishment
of such nonconforming building or structure, after a public hearing is held
in accordance with the requirements of Section 1244.07 of this chapter, but
only to the extent necessary to provide the minimum reasonable use of the
building or structure.  In considering  the approval of any such
re-establishment of a nonconforming building or structure, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may impose reasonable terms and conditions and shall not permit an
increase in the nonconformity.



   (c)   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to prevent the
normal repairs and maintenance on any nonconforming building or structure or
prevent the strengthening or correcting of any unsafe condition of the
building or structure.



(1975 Code § 5.120)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



1278.07  USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES.



   Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this
Zoning Code shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without
further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district.



(1975 Code § 5.121)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



1278.08  CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.



   There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any
existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and structures and land in
combination.



(1975 Code § 5.122)  (Ord. 500.  Passed 5-7-13.)



Chapter 1280
Wireless Communication Towers and Equipment



1280.01   Intent.



1280.02   Definitions.



1280.03   General regulations.



1280.04   Requirements for wireless communication towers and antennas
which do not exceed the maximum height in feet as allowed for structures as a
use by right.



1280.05   Co-location of new wireless communications equipment and
modification of existing wireless communications support structures permitted
by right.



1280.06   Wireless communications equipment and wireless communications
support structures which exceed the maximum height in feet as allowed for
structures allowed as a special land use.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



1280.01  INTENT.




   (a)   The intent of this section is to regulate commercial wireless
communication towers, antennas, and equipment in each zoning district, in
accordance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Sequestration
Act of 2012 and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as
amended.  Within the general parameters of these laws, this chapter also
intends to reduce the impact of these communication elements on adjacent land
uses by reasonably regulating their location, height, safety, general
appearance, and eventual removal.





   Additionally, this section intends to promote and encourage the
collocation of attached communication antennas on existing towers and support
structures.  Amateur radio antennas operating under a license issued by the
Federal Communications Commission which are proposed to be installed on a new
wireless communications support structure shall be subject to the provisions
of this section, unless such provisions would preclude or prevent the
operation of the antenna, then such provisions shall not apply.





   (b)   Exemptions for Antennas Only.  The following antennas which
are installed on an existing wireless communications support structure are
exempt from the requirements of this section but are subject to the
applicable building code requirements of the City of Ionia:





      (1)   Amateur radio antennas operating under a license issued
by the Federal Communications Commission;





      (2)   Television reception antennas;





      (3)   Citizen band radio antennas;





      (4)   Short wave antennas;





      (5)   Satellite dishes;





      (6)   Government wireless communications equipment and support
structures which are subject to State and Federal law or regulations that
preempt Municipal regulatory authority.




(Ord. 514.  Passed 9-2-14.)



1280.02  DEFINITIONS.




   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





   (a)   "Collocate" means to place or install wireless communications
equipment on an existing wireless communications support structure or in an
existing equipment compound. "Collocation" has a corresponding meaning.





   (b)   "Equipment compound" means an area surrounding or adjacent to
the base of a wireless communications support structure and within which
wireless communications equipment is located.





   (c)   "Wireless communications equipment" means the set of equipment
and network components used in the provision of wireless communications
services, including, but not limited to, antennas, transmitters, receivers,
base stations, equipment shelters, cabinets, emergency generators, power
supply cables, and coaxial and fiber optic cables, but excluding wireless
communications support structures.





   (d)   "Wireless communications support structure" means a structure
that is designed to support, or is capable of supporting, wireless
communications equipment, including a monopole, self-supporting lattice
tower, guyed tower, water tower, utility pole, or building.




(Ord. 514.  Passed 9-2-14.)



1280.03  GENERAL REGULATIONS.




   (a)   Wireless communication equipment and support structures which
do not exceed the maximum height in feet as allowed for structures may be
permitted within any zoning district in accordance with the requirements of
this section.





   (b)   Wireless communication equipment and support structures which
exceed the maximum height in feet as allowed for structures may be permitted
within any zoning district in accordance with the requirements of Section
1280.05 herein.





   (c)   A non-commercial tower may be erected as an accessory use in
any zoning district provided such tower does not exceed seventy feet in
height and:





      (1)   Is owned and operated by a Federally-licensed amateur
radio station operator; or





      (2)   Is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.





   (d)   A non-commercial tower that exceeds 70 feet in height and:





      (1)   Is owned and operated by a Federally-licensed amateur
radio station operator; or





      (2)   Is used exclusively for receive-only antennas is subject
to the requirements of this chapter.





   (e)   The lot size for wireless communication equipment and support
structures shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet.





   (f)   A wireless communications support structure tower shall be of
a monopole design.





   (g)   The wireless communications support structure shall be set
back from all lot lines a minimum distance equal to one-half the height of
the tower.  All other buildings, structures, guy wires  and supports shall
meet the minimum setback requirements of the zone district.





   (h)   A security fence at least six feet in height shall be
constructed around the tower and related buildings and structures, guy wires
and support.





   (i)   Whenever possible, joint use of tower facilities, including
publicly-owned elevated storage tanks, shall be required to minimize the
number of separate towers and their location in the City.  As a condition of
approval, an applicant shall agree to permit future users to share its tower
facility and shall adequately demonstrate that it is not feasible to locate
its proposed tower on an existing tower or a publicly-owned tower or elevated
storage tank.





   (j)   No signs other than warning or other cautionary sign shall be
permitted at the site of the tower.




(Ord. 514.  Passed 9-2-14.)



1280.04  REQUIREMENTS FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS WHICH
DO NOT EXCEED THE MAXIMUM HEIGHT IN FEET AS ALLOWED FOR STRUCTURES AS A USE
BY RIGHT.




   Wireless communication equipment and support structures which do not
exceed the maximum height in feet as allowed for structures shall comply with
the following regulations:





   (a)   Towers and Antennas Allowed by Right.  The following towers
antennas are allowed in all zoning districts subject to the requirements of
the district, approval by the Zoning Administrator and the issuance of a
building permit:





      (1)   An antenna which is no more than the maximum height in
feet as allowed for structures when attached to a new or existing structure
such as a tower or pole. The height shall be measured from the top of the
antenna to the average grade within 25 feet of the base of the structure.





      (2)   An antenna which is attached to or placed on the roof of
an existing building provided the antenna does not exceed the maximum height
in feet as allowed for structures as measured from the top of the antenna to
the average grade at the base of the building or the antenna does not extend
above the highest point of the building roof whichever is greater.





   (b)   The antenna or tower shall be permanently secured to a stable
foundation.





   (c)   All antennas and towers must be grounded to protect against
damage from lightning.





   (d)   A newly installed structure containing an antenna shall be set
back from all lot lines a distance equal to its height and shall not be
located in the required front yard.  The height shall be measured from the
top of the antenna to the average grade within 25 feet of the base of the
structure.  An antenna installed on a building shall be located so that it
is setback from all lot lines a distance equal to the height of the antenna
as measured from the top of the antenna to the base of the antenna.




(Ord. 514.  Passed 9-2-14.)



1280.05  CO-LOCATION OF NEW WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT AND
MODIFICATION OF EXISTING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURES PERMITTED
BY RIGHT.




   Collocation of new wireless communications equipment and modification
of existing wireless communications support structures shall be permitted as
a use by right subject to the conditions contained in this section.





   (a)   The collocation of new or the replacement of existing wireless
communications equipment as defined herein and the modification of existing
wireless communications support structures shall be permitted by the Zoning
Administrator subject to compliance with all of the following requirements
and the issuance of the applicable City building and electrical permits:





      (1)   The wireless communications equipment will be collocated
on an existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing
equipment compound;





      (2)   The existing wireless communications support structure
or existing equipment compound is in compliance with the City Zoning
Ordinance or was approved by the appropriate zoning body or official of the
City;





   (b)   The proposed collocation will not do any of the following:





      (1)   Increase the overall height of the wireless
communications support structure by more than 20 feet or 10% of its original
height, whichever is greater. The height shall be measured from the top of
the structure to the average ground grade within 25 feet of the base of the
wireless communications support structure;





      (2)   Increase the width of the original wireless
communications support structure by more than the minimum necessary to permit
collocation; or





      (3)   Increase the area of the existing equipment compound to
greater than 2,500 square feet.





   (c)   The proposed collocation complies with the terms and
conditions of any previous final approval of the wireless communications
support structure or equipment compound by the appropriate zoning body or
official of the City.





   (d)   Any wireless communications equipment which meets the
requirements of Section 1280.04(a)(1) and (2) but does not meet the
requirements of Section 1280.04(b) or (c), shall only be allowed if it is
approved as a special land use according to the requirements of this section
and Chapter 1274 of the City Zoning Ordinance.





   (e)   Application and Submittal Information.  The applicant shall
file with the City an application for wireless communications equipment and
wireless communications support structures under Section 1280.04 that shall
include the following information:





      (1)   A complete written and graphic description of the
proposed wireless communications equipment and wireless communications
support structure.  This shall include an illustration of the antenna and
support structure to be installed and its design including cross section and
elevation drawings and a diagram of how the tower/antenna will be anchored.





      (2)   A statement that the proposed wireless communications
equipment and wireless communications support structure will be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and applicable City
codes.  A set of drawings sealed by a professional engineer for the
installation of the wireless communications equipment and wireless
communications support structure shall also be provided.





      (3)   A description of the tower maintenance program.





      (4)   A decommissioning plan explaining the process to be
undertaken by the applicant for tearing down the tower and removing all tower
equipment, materials and structures and restoring the site so it can be used
by a use permitted in that zoning district.





      (5)   Security measures including emergency contact personnel.





      (6)   The applicant shall provide documentation that indemnity
and insurance coverage exist for the wireless communications equipment and
wireless communications support structure in the event that damage or
personal injury occurs or the provider abandons the structure.  The specific
dollar amount of the indemnity and insurance coverage shall be approved by
the City and the cancellation of such policy shall not be effective without
the approval of the City.





      (7)   All required fees shall be paid to the City at the time
of application.





   (f)   Site Plan Requirements.  The applicant shall also file with
the City three copies of a site plan accurately drawn at a scale of not more
than one inch equals 100 feet containing the following information unless
specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator:





      (1)   The date on which the site plan was prepared as well as
the name of the preparer.





      (2)   A north arrow and legal description of the property.





      (3)   The area and dimensions of the parcel containing the
tower and antenna including any area leased for the tower.





      (4)   A location map sufficient to show the character of the
area surrounding the proposed antenna and the zoning and land use on adjacent
properties.





      (5)   The height of the tower and antenna and its distance to
all property lines.





      (6)   Any buildings or structures existing on the parcel.





      (7)   The distance to the closest building on adjacent
property.





      (8)   The location of any overhead transmission lines on the
site or on adjacent property which might be affected by the tower.





      (9)   Any tower supporting structures or devices.





      (10)   Type and height of fencing to be installed around the
tower or an equipment building.





      (11)   Elevation drawings of any buildings designed to serve
the tower.





      (12)   Access road, width and construction standards along
with access easement.





      (13)   Any lighting proposed to be located on the tower.





      (14)   Visual impact.  The applicant shall demonstrate how
the visual impact of the proposed communication towers and attached
communication antennas will be reduced through the use of color or other
techniques.





   (h)   Procedures.





      (1)   The application materials shall be reviewed for
completeness by the Zoning Administrator or his or her agent.  An
application shall be considered complete if it contains all of the
information contained in Sections 1280.04(e) and (f).  The Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of any missing items.





      (2)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the Zoning
Administrator shall make a decision regarding approval or denial.





      (3)   Upon approval of the application, the applicant may
proceed to obtain the applicable building and electrical permits.




(Ord. 514.  Passed 9-2-14.)



1280.06  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT AND WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
SUPPORT STRUCTURES WHICH EXCEED THE MAXIMUM HEIGHT IN FEET AS ALLOWED FOR
STRUCTURES ALLOWED AS A SPECIAL LAND USE.




   (a)   Wireless communications equipment which is proposed to be
mounted or attached to a newly installed wireless communications support
structure which will exceed the maximum height in feet as allowed for
structures, or a proposed collocation subject to the provision of Section
1280.04(d) are allowed in all zoning districts, provided a special land use
permit is approved by the Planning Commission subject to the regulations and
requirements of this chapter, the general standards for approval in Section
1274.04,  and all application and review procedures of Chapter 1274.





   (b)   Wireless communications support structures shall be designed
(structurally, electrically, and in all other respects), to accommodate both
the applicant's equipment and comparable equipment for a least two additional
users.  Approval shall be conditional upon the applicant's agreements to
permit use by others.  Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of equipment upon the tower to accept equipment mounted at
varying heights.





   (c)   Wireless communications equipment and support structures shall
be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of
color and architectural treatment, except in instances where color is
dictated by other State or Federal authorities.  Towers shall be of a
monopole design unless the Planning Commission determines that an alternative
design would better blend into the surrounding environment.





      The Planning Commission may require such structures or equipment
on the ground to be screened with landscaping, berms, walls, or a combination
of these elements.





   (d)   Wireless communications equipment and support structures shall
not be illuminated unless required by other State or Federal authorities. 
No signs or other advertising not related to safety or hazard warnings shall
be permitted on any part of the tower or associated equipment or buildings.





   (e)   Wireless communications equipment and support structures which
are abandoned or unused shall be removed, along with any associated
structures or equipment, within 12 months of the cessation of operations,
unless a time extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator.  One
three-month extension shall be permitted only if the Zoning Administrator
finds that the owner or former operator of the facility is taking active
steps to ensure its removal.





   (f)   Procedures.





      (1)   An application for a special use permit for wireless
communications equipment and wireless communications support structures shall
be reviewed for completeness by the Zoning Administrator or his or her
agent.  An application shall be considered complete if it contains all of
the information contained in Sections 1280.04(e) and (f), and
1280.05(f)(5).  Within 14 days of receiving the application the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of any missing items. 
Failure to do so shall mean that the special use permit application is
considered complete (but not approved).





      (2)   Once a completed application is received, a public
hearing shall be scheduled in accordance with the requirements of Section
1274.03 of this Code.





      (3)   The Planning Commission shall render a decision on a
completed application within 60 days of its receipt.  Failure to do so shall
result in the approval of the application as submitted.  In the case of
special land use approval for wireless communications equipment that does not
meet the requirements of Section 1280.04(d), the period for approval or
denial is 90 days.





      (4)   Any conditions imposed upon the approval of the special
use permit shall relate directly to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance
and any applicable City ordinances as well as applicable State of Michigan
and Federal laws.





      (5)   Application Requirements.  In addition to application
requirements as required by Chapter 1274, an application for wireless
communications equipment and wireless communications support structures which
require special land use approval shall include all of the following
information.  The fee paid by the applicant shall not exceed the actual cost
to process the application or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is
less.





         A.   Proposed use.  A complete written and graphic
description of the proposed wireless communications equipment and wireless
communications support structure.  This shall include an illustration of the
antenna and support structure to be installed and its design including cross
section and elevation drawings and a diagram of how the tower/antenna will be
anchored.





         B.   Location justification.  Written materials which
document the need for the proposed location.





         C.   Ownership interest. The nature and extent of the
applicant's ownership or lease interest in the property, building or
structure upon which the facilities are proposed for placement.





         D.   Other tower locations.  A map depicting other
locations of wireless communications support structures within three miles of
the proposed site.





         E.   Collocations. Documentation that the applicant has
investigated the potential of collocation with other wireless communication
service providers or owners of wireless communications support structures
located in the City or neighboring communities and which may meet the
coverage needs of the applicant.  The documentation must include written
evidence that the applicant has had direct communication and response
regarding the potential for collocation with the owners/operators of such
other wireless communications support structures.  All applications for
construction of a wireless communications support structure will be required
to provide plans for future collocation with other owners/operators at a fair
and reasonable rental rate.





         F.   Engineering certification and plans.  A statement
that the proposed wireless communications equipment and wireless
communications support structure will be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications and applicable City codes.  A set of drawings
sealed by a professional engineer for the installation of the wireless
communications equipment and wireless communications support structure shall
also be provided.





         G.   A description of the tower maintenance program.





         H.   A decommissioning plan explaining the process to be
undertaken by the applicant for tearing down the tower and removing all tower
equipment, materials and structures and restoring the site so it can be used
by a use permitted in that zoning district.





         I.   Security measures including emergency contact
personnel.





         J.   Liability.  The applicant shall provide
documentation that indemnity and insurance coverage exist for the wireless
communications equipment and wireless communications support structure in the
event that damage or personal injury occurs or the provider abandons the
structure.  The specific dollar amount of the indemnity and insurance
coverage shall be approved by the City and the cancellation of such policy
shall not be effective without the approval of the City.





   (g)   Site Plan Requirements.  Twelve copies of a site plan
accurately drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet. 
However, a larger scale may be accepted by the Planning Commission depending
upon the size of the parcel.  The plan shall be prepared and sealed by a
professional engineer.  The site plan shall contain at a minimum the
information required by Section 1280.04(g) and any information required by
Chapter 1276 Site Plan Review of this Code, or as may be required by the
Planning Commission unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission.





   (h)   Performance Standards.  Wireless communications equipment and
wireless communications support structures shall comply with all of the
following requirements:





      (1)   The tower and antenna shall comply with all applicable
State construction and electrical codes and local building permit
requirements as well as the manufacturer's installation requirements provided
they do not conflict with the State and local requirements;





      (2)   All tower lighting required by the FAA shall be shielded
to the extent possible to reduce glare and visibility from the ground.  The
tower shaft shall not be illuminated unless required by the FAA, and the
minimum FAA lighting standards shall not be exceeded;





      (3)   The applicant shall provide written documentation of
compliance with the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23 of 1950) and
the Michigan Tall Structures Act (Public Act 259 of 1959);





      (4)   The maximum height of a wireless communications support
structure and any attached wireless communications equipment shall be 200
feet.  A structure  greater than 200 feet may be approved, if in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, the applicant has sufficiently
demonstrated that the proposed structure and attached equipment  in excess
of 200 feet will be safe and also reduce the total number of potential
similar structures within the City and the surrounding areas;





      (5)   The antenna or tower shall be permanently secured to a
stable foundation;





      (6)   No part of the antenna or tower shall conduct or display
any advertising, message or other graphic representation;





      (7)   All antennas and towers must be grounded to protect
against damage from lightning;





      (8)   All towers shall be located so that they do not
interfere with any reception in nearby residential areas.  In the event a
communication tower causes interference, the communication company shall take
all steps necessary to correct and eliminate such interference; and





      (9)   The use of guy wires is prohibited.  Only monopole
towers are allowed.





   (i)   Approval Standards.  In order to approve the application, the
Planning Commission shall find that:





      (1)   The proposed use and structure meet the special land use
general standards of Section 1274.04;





      (2)   The proposed use and structure meet requirements of
Section 1280.05;





      (3)   Approval of the project will fill a significant gap in
the service coverage of the applicant; and





      (4)   That alternate sites or facilities for the wireless
communications equipment and wireless communications support structure are
not available or feasible.





   (j)   Conditions of Approval.  Any conditions imposed on an
approval must relate directly to this chapter, other applicable City
ordinances and codes and applicable State and Federal laws.





   (k)   Noncompliance with Section 1280.05 Requirements.  If the
Planning Commission determines to deny an application for special use permit
approval because the proposed project does not meet one or more of the
requirements contained in Section 1280.05 or any of the special land use or
site plan standards of approval found elsewhere in this chapter, the Planning
Commission shall nevertheless approve the proposed project if no other
alternative tower sites or facilities are available or feasible and at least
one of the following applies:





      (1)   A denial would prohibit (or have the effect of
prohibiting) the providing of personal wireless services to the area in
question;





      (2)   There is not substantial evidence on the record
justifying a denial; or





      (3)   A significant gap in the existing service coverage
exists in the area and the proposed project would close that gap.





   Pursuant to any such approval by the Planning Commission, the wireless
communication support structure and equipment shall still comply with all of
the requirements of Section 1280.05 and other applicable provisions of this
chapter except to the extent that the applicant demonstrates that compliance
with a particular requirement or regulation would (a) prohibit or have the
effect of prohibiting the providing of personal wireless services to the
area, or (b) prohibit the applicant from closing a significant gap in
existing service coverage to the area involved.




(Ord. 514.  Passed 9-2-14.)



CHAPTER 1282
Off-Street Parking and Loading



1282.01   Off-street parking requirements.



1282.02   Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and
maintenance.



1282.03   Off-street loading and unloading.




1282.04   Required parking variation.




1282.05   Maximum amount of parking.



 



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Parking generally - see TRAF. Ch. 440



   General exceptions - see P. & Z. 1286.08



1282.01  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or
enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking
space with adequate access to all spaces.  The number of off-street parking
spaces in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed.




   (a)   All off-street parking areas except for single and two-family
dwellings shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the rear and side lot
lines, and a minimum of ten feet from the front lot line.  The Planning
Commission may approve a setback of less than ten feet from the front lot
line if the minimum number of parking spaces required by the Zoning Code for
the proposed use is no more than ten or if the applicant can demonstrate that
there is insufficient space on site to provide the ten-foot setback and still
allow for the efficient operation of the proposed use.  In approving a
lesser setback, the Planning Commission may require additional landscaping.





         The Planning Commission may also permit parking aisles or
vehicle maneuvering areas to encroach within the required setback and may
require additional screening or landscaping.





   (b)   Off-street parking for other than residentially zoned
properties shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building
it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to
the nearest point of the off-street parking lot.  Ownership shall be shown
of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant.





   (c)   Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist
of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage, or combination thereof and
shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and subject to
the provisions of Section 1286.01, Accessory Buildings.





   (d)   Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall
never be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are
provided elsewhere in conformance with this Zoning Code.





   (e)   Off-street parking existing on the effective date of this
Zoning Code, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use,
shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a
similar new building or new use.





   (f)   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the
required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking
spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several
individual uses computed separately.





   (g)   In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces
where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the Planning Commission
may approve a lesser parking requirement for such uses if evidence of a
signed agreement between the owners of both properties agreeing to such joint
use is provided to the Planning Commission.





   (h)   The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks,
or the repair of vehicles is prohibited.





   (i)   For uses not specifically listed in division (l) of this
section, the Community Development Director may establish the parking
requirements by making the determination that the proposed use is similar in
parking requirements to a use which is listed in division (l).  The
Community Development Director shall refer to engineering or planning
manuals, publications and reports, or to the parking requirements used by
other municipalities in order to determine the minimum parking requirements.





   (j)   When units or measurements determining the number of required
parking spaces result in the requirements of a fractional space, any fraction
up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half
shall require one parking space.  For requirements stated in terms of
employees, the calculation shall be based upon the maximum number of
employees likely to be on the premises during the largest shift.





   (k)   For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces
required, the definition of Usable Floor Area in Section 1240.11(29) shall
govern.





   (l)   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use
shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule:




 


Use

 

Number of Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces Required per Unit of Measure





(1)
 
Residential
 


 
A.
 
Single family, two family, or multiple family with three or more bedrooms.
 
Two for each dwelling unit.


 
B.
 
Multiple family and attached dwellings with one or two bedrooms.
 
Two for each two bedroom dwelling unit and 1.5 for each one bedroom dwelling
unit.


 
C.
 
Efficiencies.
 
One for each dwelling unit.


 
D.
 
Mobile home parks.
 
Two for each mobile home or mobile home site.


 
E.
 
Senior housing or retirement communities.
 
One for each dwelling unit plus one per employee.


 
F.
 
Assisted living and congregate care facilities.
 
One for each three dwelling units plus one per employee.


 
G.
 
Bed and breakfast, boarding houses.
 
One for each guest room plus two for the dwelling unit.


(2)
 
Institutional/Public Assembly
 


 
A.
 
Churches, temples, mosques, synagogues, or similar types of facilities.
 
One space per each four seats in the worship room.


 
B.
 
Hospitals.
 
One for each four beds plus one for each staff doctor, plus one for each two
employees other than doctors.


 
C.
 
Outpatient care stations.
 
Two spaces per exam room/station or procedure/operating room, plus one space
per laboratory or recovery room plus one per employee.


 
D.
 
Child care centers.
 
One space for every four children of licensed capacity, plus one space for
each employee.


 
E.
 
Elementary, junior high, middle schools.
 
Two spaces per classroom, plus one space for each three seats of maximum
seating capacity for that indoor place of assembly having the greatest
seating capacity or 0.12 spaces per student, whichever is greater.


 
F.
 
High schools, trade schools.
 
0.25 spaces per student.


 
G.
 
Private club and lodges.
 
One space per 2.5 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as
established by the appropriate fire, health, or building code.


 
H.
 
Auditoriums (non-school), stadiums, and sports arenas.
 
One space per each three seats.


 
I.
 
Conference rooms, exhibit halls, halls, ballrooms, civic clubs, or similar
places of assembly without fixed seats whether public or private.
 
One space per each four persons allowed within the banquet maximum occupancy
load as determined by the City building or fire codes.


 
J.
 
Libraries, museums, and non-commercial art galleries.
 
One parking space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.


(3)
 
Offices
 


 
A.
 
Medical/dental clinics or offices.
 
Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.  A minimum of six
spaces shall be required.


 
B.
 
General office buildings.
 
Three spaces per 1000 square feet of gross floor area.  A minimum of four
spaces shall be required.


 
C.
 
Banks, credit unions, or savings and loans.
 
Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus four on-site
waiting spaces for each drive up window or drive through automatic teller.


(4)
 
Retail and Service Uses
 


 
A.
 
Retail shopping centers, discount stores, and department stores containing
between 25,000 and 400,000 square feet.
 
Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area.


 
B.
 
Retail centers containing between 400,000 and 600,000 square feet.
 
Four and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area.


 
C.
 
Retail centers containing greater than 600,000 square feet.
 
Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area.


 
D.
 
Other retail uses not otherwise specified herein.
 
One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area plus one per employee.


 
E.
 
Supermarkets and grocery stores.
 
One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area.


 
F.
 
Personal service establishments not otherwise provided herein.
 
One space per each 300 square feet of usable floor area plus one per employee.


 
G.
 
Appliance stores.
 
Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.  A minimum of six
spaces shall be required.


 
H.
 
Automobile service stations.
 
Two parking spaces per each service bay, plus one per each per each employee,
plus one per each 200 square feet of retail area.  A service bay and the
area on each side of a gas pump may count as a parking space.


 
I.
 
Vehicle wash establishments (automatic).
 
One parking space per each employee, plus 15 on-site waiting spaces at each
wash-bay entrance, plus two drying spaces at the exit.


 
J.
 
Vehicle wash establishments (self-service or "touchless" facilities).
 
One parking space per each employee, plus two on-site waiting spaces at each
wash-bay entrance.


 
K.
 
Barber shops, beauty salons.
 
Two for each barber or beauty operator chair/station plus one for every two
employees.


 
L.
 
Building supply store, home improvement store, paint and hardware store
containing up to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area.
 
Two spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area plus one for each
employee.


 
M.
 
Building supply store, home improvement store, paint and hardware store with
more than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area.
 
Three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area plus one for each
employee.


 
N.
 
Convenience stores.
 
Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.  A minimum of six
spaces shall be required.


 
O.
 
Dry cleaners.
 
Two spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.  A minimum of four
spaces shall be required.


 
P.
 
Funeral homes and mortuaries.
 
One space per 50 square feet of parlor and chapel areas.


 
Q.
 
Furniture, carpet, and home furnishing stores.
 
One space per 800 square feet of usable floor area.


 
R.
 
Hotel, motel, or other commercial lodging establishment.
 
One space for each guest room, plus one for each two employees.


 
S.
 
Laundromats.
 
One space per each three washing machines.


 
T.
 
Mini-storage houses/ warehouses.
 
Six spaces.


 
U.
 
Motor vehicle dealerships.
 
One space per 5,000 square feet of outdoor sales area, plus one space per
sales desk/office, plus three spaces per service bay.  A minimum of six
spaces shall be required.


 
V.
 
Quick oil change establishments.
 
Two spaces per bay plus one per each employee.


 
W.
 
Recreational vehicle and boat dealerships.
 
One space per 800 square feet of gross floor area, plus two spaces per each
vehicle service bay.  A minimum of six spaces shall be required.


 
X.
 
Restaurants that serve non-fast food and have no drive-through window.
 
Twelve spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or 0.4 spaces per
seat, whichever is greater.


 
Y.
 
Restaurants that serve mostly take-out, with six or less booths or tables.
 
Six spaces plus one for each employee.


 
Z.
 
Restaurants that serve fast food and have no drive-through window.
 
Eight spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.


 
AA.
 
Restaurants that serve fast food and have a drive-through window and indoor
seating.
 
Ten spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus three designated
drive-through waiting spaces.


 
BB.
 
Pharmacies with or without a drive-up window
 
Two and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.


 
CC.
 
Video rental stores.
 
Three spaces per each 100 square feet of gross floor area plus one per each
employee.


 
DD.
 
Service companies doing repair.
 
Two spaces per 1,000 square feet of  work gross floor area.  A minimum of
five spaces shall be required.


(5)
 
Recreational Entertainment
 


 
A.
 
Arcades.
 
One space for every 70 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of six
spaces shall be required.


 
B.
 
Batting cage facilities.
 
Three spaces per cage.


 
C.
 
Bowling centers.
 
Five spaces per bowling lane plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required for
accessory uses such as restaurants, bars, banquet facilities, etc.


 
D.
 
Golf driving ranges.
 
One and one-half spaces per tee.


 
E.
 
Golf courses, miniature.
 
One and one-half spaces per each hole.


 
F.
 
Golf courses, par-three.
 
Three spaces per hole.


 
G.
 
Golf courses.
 
Five spaces per hole.


 
H.
 
Health fitness centers.
 
Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.


 
I.
 
Movie theaters.
 
One space per each four seats.


 
J.
 
Racquetball and tennis centers.
 
Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or six spaces per
court, whichever is greater.


 
K.
 
Public recreation centers.
 
Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.


 
L.
 
Roller/ice skating rink.
 
Six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.


(6)
 
Industrial Uses
 


 
A.
 
Manufacturing, light industrial, and research establishments and other
industrial uses not otherwise specified herein.
 
One and one-half parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.


 
B.
 
Wholesale, warehouses, or distribution facilities, and trucking terminals.
 
One half parking space per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or one
per employee whichever is greater.




 



(1975 Code § 5.124; Ord. 276.  Passed 3-4-80; Ord. 08-2002-02.  Passed
9-3-02; Ord. 518.  Passed 3-3-15.)



1282.02  OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE.



   Whenever the off-street parking requirements in Section 1282.01 require
the building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lots
shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following standards and regulations:



   (a)   No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit
therefor is issued by the Community Development Director.  Applications for
a permit shall be submitted to the Building Department in such form as may be
determined by the Director and shall be accompanied with three sets of site
plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that
the provisions of this section will be fully complied with.



   (b)   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be
in accord with the following minimum requirements:



 


MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SIZE OF PARKING AISLES AND DRIVEWAYS




Parking Angle

 

Maneuvering Aisle Width

 

Parking Stall Width

 

Parking Stall Length

 

Total Width of
Two Stalls of Parking
Plus Maneuvering Aisle





 

One Way

 

Two Way

 


 


 

One Way

 

Two Way



0° parallel
 

12 feet

 

22 feet

 

9 feet

 

22 feet

 

29 feet

 

39 feet



Up to 53°
 

13 feet

 

22 feet

 

10 feet

 

18 feet

 

49 feet

 

58 feet



54° to 74°
 

16 feet

 

22 feet

 

10 feet

 

18 feet

 

52 feet

 

58 feet



75° to 90°
 

12 feet

 

25 feet

 

10 feet

 

18 feet

 

48 feet

 

60 feet




 



   (c)   All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of
maneuvering lanes.  Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited.



   (d)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of
clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles.



Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than
single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for
single-family residential use.




   (e)   All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic
movement, except that the 90-degree pattern may permit two-way movement.





   (f)   Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot
located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall
be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any
Single-Family Residential District.





   (g)   The entire parking area, including parking spaces and
maneuvering lanes, required under this section, shall be provided with
asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by
the City Engineer.  The parking area shall be surfaced within one year of
the date the occupancy permit is issued.





         Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose
of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to
preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings.





   (h)   The Planning Commission may approve alternate parking lot
surfaces which are dustless and which allow for storm water drainage directly
through the parking surface or other similar surface.





   (i)   In order to reduce the amount of impervious surface and the
corresponding storm water runoff and reduce heat given off by paved surfaces,
the Planning Commission may approve alternate parking lot surfaces for
overflow parking, or employee parking, or parking or maneuvering areas
devoted to loading activities or parking for trucks or similar heavy
equipment.  Such surface may include but shall not be limited to gravel,
crushed stone, or products which are installed in the ground to support
vehicles but allow grass to grow within the supporting spaces or similar
dustless material.





   (j)   Lighting fixtures used to illuminate off-street parking areas
shall be so arranged as to deflect the light away from any adjoining
residential properties or streets and highways.  Lighting fixtures for the
parking lots serving non-residential uses which are located within 50 feet of
any residentially zoned property or residential use shall not exceed 20 feet
in height.  All other fixtures shall not exceed 35 feet in height.  Light
fixtures shall be designed to achieve total luminary cutoff.





   (k)   In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means
of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible
to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to
permit a wider means of access to the parking area.





   (l)   Traffic Islands.  Parking areas shall be designed to
delineate access aisles or drives and to provide drivers proper sight
distance at the end of parking rows where such rows intersect access aisles
or drives.  The Planning Commission may require traffic islands, striped
pavement or other methods to achieve this requirement.





   (m)   Pedestrian Protection.  Parking lots shall be designed to
limit the number of points where pedestrians must cross in front of
vehicles.  In particular, vehicle access in front of building entrances and
exits should be minimized.  Landscaped pedestrian walkways to and from
parking areas may be required to enhance pedestrian safety.





   (n)   Screening of Parking Area.  Where off-street parking areas
for non-residential uses abut residentially zoned property, a greenbelt not
less than 15 feet wide shall be provided between the parking area and the
residentially zoned property.  The greenbelt shall be landscaped according
to the landscape requirements of Section 1286.03(f) of the Zoning Code.





   (o)   Driveways.  Driveways serving off-street non-residential
parking areas shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide for two-way traffic and a
minimum of 13 feet wide for one-way traffic.





   (p)   Snow Storage.  Snow shall not be stored in areas with
plantings or where it may create visibility problems for drivers or
pedestrians.





   (q)   Barrier-free parking shall be provided as follows:




 

Total Parking in Lot
 
Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces Required





1 to 25

 

1




26 to 50

 

2




51 to 75

 

3




76 to 100

 

4




101 to 150

 

5




151 to 200

 

6




201 to 300

 

8




301 to 400

 

12




401 to 700

 

14




701 to 1,000

 

1 per 50 spaces provided or fraction thereof




Over 1,000

 

20 plus 1 per 100 over 1,000 or fraction thereof





 




         Requirements for barrier-free parking spaces, curbs, ramps,
and signs shall be as required by local building code and the Michigan
Barrier Free Rules.




(1975 Code §5.125)  (Ord. 518.  Passed 3-3-15.)



1282.03  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.



   On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof,
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for
standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with
public use of a dedicated right-of-way.  Such space shall be provided as
follows:




   (a)   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in size and
quantity sufficient to prevent interference with adjacent streets or required
off-street parking areas.





   (b)   Required loading spaces shall not be included in the county of
off-street parking spaces.





   (c)   Loading space shall not use any portion of any public
right-of-way.





   (d)   Maneuvering space for trucks using the loading spaces shall be
provided on premise, and shall not necessitate the use of public right-of-way.





   (e)   The design, location, and screening of off-street loading
areas shall be reviewed at the same time of site plan approval to ensure
adequate protection is afforded adjacent properties, especially residential
districts.





   (f)   Off-street parking loading spaces shall be no closer than 50
feet to any residential zone unless such space is wholly within a completely
enclosed building or enclosed on all sides by a wall or uniformly painted
solid board or masonry fence of uniform appearance not less than six feet in
height.





   (g)   No off-street loading space or dock in the B-3 and I-1 Zoning
Districts shall be located in a required front yard areas within the required
30-foot setback.  However, off-street loading space or dock may be located
in a front yard area provided the front setback is increased to 60 feet. 
Should the 60-foot setback be met, the front yard area shall be screened from
view from all adjacent streets or side yard areas.  The screening location
shall be at a point 30 feet from the front property line for the area
affected by the front yard loading space or dock.




(1975 Code § 5.126)  (Ord. 518.  Passed 3-3-15.)



1282.04  REQUIRED PARKING VARIATION.




   In order to avoid excessive amounts of impervious surface and to allow
for an opportunity to provide parking which meets the demonstrated needs of a
proposed use, the Planning Commission may approve a development which
provides less than the minimum number of parking spaces required herein
according to the following requirements:





   (a)   The applicant must provide written evidence to the Planning
Commission that the parking proposed on the site for the use is sufficient to
meet the parking needs of those who will patronize the use as well as the
parking needs for employees during the largest working shift.





         Such evidence may consist of:  arrangements for nearby
shared parking; evidence that the proposed use will also be patronized by
pedestrians or by those using bus service; or evidence from the parking
history of the proposed use or a use similar to the proposed use at other
locations; or that there is sufficient space on the site for the required
parking to be provided if it becomes necessary at a later time.





   (b)   If a plan is approved to allow fewer parking spaces than
required by this section such parking plan shall only apply to the stated
use.  Any other use shall comply with the requirements of this section
before any occupancy permit is issued or such use shall first obtain approval
from the Planning Commission in accordance with this section before any
occupancy permit is issued.





(Ord. 518.  Passed 3-3-15.)




1282.05  MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PARKING.




   In order to minimize excess areas of pavement which may result in
adverse aesthetic impacts and contributed to high rates of storm water
runoff, off-street parking lots exceeding the minimum parking space
requirements by greater than 20% shall be prohibited, unless the applicant
can demonstrate that additional parking is necessary to the operation of the
proposed use.





   Factors to be considered in such documentation shall include but need
not be limited to the type of use proposed, examples of similar uses,
requiring such additional parking and whether such additional parking is for
seasonal or peak periods only.




(Ord. 518.  Passed 3-3-15.)



Chapter 1284
Signs and Advertising Devices (Repealed)



EDITOR’S NOTE: Former Chapter 1284, Sign and Advertising Devices, was
repealed by Ordinance No. 464, passed February 3, 2009. See new Chapter 1234,
Signs.



Chapter 1286
Miscellaneous Regulations



1286.01   Accessory buildings.



1286.02   Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district.



1286.03   Landscaping.



1286.04   Exterior lighting.



1286.05   Residential entranceways.



1286.06   Corner clearance.



1286.07   Fences (residential).



1286.08   General exceptions.



1286.09   Outdoor boilers.



1286.10   Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq.,
as amended (MMMA).



1286.11   Home occupations.



1286.12   Donation drop boxes.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Zoning and planning in home rule cities - see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i



   Regulation of location of trades, buildings and uses by local
authorities - see M.C.L.A. § 125.581



   Regulation of buildings; authority to zone - see M.C.L.A. § 125.582



   Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of
legislative bodies; acquisition of property - see M.C.L.A. § 125.583a



   Fences for junk dealers - see B.R & T. 832.05



   Sight lines - see S.U. & P.S. 1024.11



   Variances - see P. & Z. 1222.02, 1244.05(b), 1272.11



1286.01  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   (a)   Accessory Buildings and Structures General Requirements. 
Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this Zoning Code, shall
be subject to the following general requirements:



      (1)   Accessory buildings and structures that are customarily
incidental and subordinate to an existing principal building or structure or
use permitted by right within the applicable zoning district, located on the
same lot and not otherwise regulated by this Zoning Code, shall be permitted
subject to the regulations of this Zoning Code.



      (2)   Attached accessory buildings and structures shall be
made structurally a part of the principal building and shall conform to the
minimum setback requirements and other site development standards of the
zoning district in which the building or structure is located.



      (3)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not be
constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic film, nylon or similar pliable material
that does not provide long-term durability.



      (4)   Accessory buildings and structures six hundred (600)
square feet in floor area or greater shall be securely attached to a frost
free footing meeting building code requirements.  Accessory buildings and
structures less than six hundred (600) square feet in floor area but two
hundred (200) square feet and greater shall be securely attached to a
foundation, footing or a concrete slab so that they are a permanent fixture
on the property.  In both cases a building permit is required before
construction begins.



      (5)   For the purposes of this Section, a tent or awning that
is erected for a special event on a short-term basis shall not be regulated.



   (b)   Accessory Buildings and Structures; Residential Districts or
Uses.



      (1)   Accessory buildings and structures shall only be located
in the rear yard.  When an accessory building or structure is located on a
corner lot which is considered to have two (2) front yards and two (2) side
yards for the purposes of this Section, the side that is larger in terms of
square foot shall be considered the rear yard. Detached buildings and
structures shall be no closer than six (6) feet from any lot line and shall
not be placed closer than ten (10) to any building on the same lot.



      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures shall be permitted in
conjunction with the table below:



 



 
Maximum # Of Accessory Building
 
Total of All Access. Bldgs Cannot Exceed (Foot print of bldg)
 
Max. Bldg Height (Per App. IV)


Less than 12,000 square feet
 
1
 
720 sq ft
 
16


12,000 to less than 1 acre
 
1
 
960 sq ft
 
18


1 acre to less than 2 acres
 
2
 
3,000 sq ft
 
24


2 acres or more
 
3
 
5,000 sq ft
 
28



 



   NOTE:  The maximum building sizes identified above by lot size are
subject to the "Maximum of Lot Area Covered By All Buildings" contained in
Appendix I - Schedule of Regulations contained in this Zoning Code.



      (3)   One (1) additional accessory building or structure shall
be permitted for a residential district or use not to exceed one hundred
twenty (120) square feet in area.



      (4)   For the purposes of this Section an above-ground or
in-ground swimming pool shall not be subject to the provisions contained in
Subsection (2) above but shall be subject to the setback requirements
contained in this Section.



   (c)   Accessory Buildings; Nonresidential Districts or Uses.



      (1)   The total area of all accessory structures or buildings
shall not exceed one hundred-fifty (150) percent of the floor area of the
main building on the site.



      (2)   Accessory buildings or structures shall meet all setback
requirements for the principal building, except that in no case shall they be
closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line.



      (3)   No accessory building or structure shall be located
closer than ten (10) feet to any building.



      (4)   No accessory building or structure shall exceed the
height for principal buildings or structures in the district in which it is
located.



   (d)   Recreational Vehicles.  A recreational vehicle, for the
purposes of this Section, is a vehicle designed to be used primarily for
recreational purposes which contains sleeping quarters and/or cooking
facilities, or a unit designed to be attached to a vehicle and used for such
purposes including self propelled motor homes, pick-up campers, fifth wheel
trailers, travel trailers, tent trailers and folding camping trailers. 



   All recreational vehicles owned by residents of the City and stored on
their individual lots shall be stored in the driveway or in the rear yard of
the property and shall further respect the requirements of this Subsection
applicable to accessory buildings in terms of setbacks from lot lines and
buildings.  All recreational vehicles parked or stored shall not be
connected to sanitary, water, or gas facilities and shall not be occupied.



(1975 Code § 5.123)(Ord. 468. Passed 10-6-09.)



1286.02  USES NOT OTHERWISE INCLUDED WITHIN A SPECIFIC USE DISTRICT.



   Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics
making it impractical to include them in a specific use district
classification, they may be permitted by the Council, under the conditions
specified and after public hearing, and after a recommendation has been
received from the Planning Commission.  In every case, the uses hereinafter
referred to shall be specifically prohibited in any Residential District.



   These uses require special consideration since they service an area
larger than the City and require sizable land areas, creating problems of
control with reference to abutting use districts.  Reference to those uses
falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows:



   (a)   Outdoor Theaters.  Because outdoor theaters possess the
unique characteristics of being used only after darkness and since they
develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress
from their parking area, they shall be permitted in I-1 Districts only. 
Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Proposed internal design shall receive approval from the
Community Development Director and the City Manager as to adequacy of
drainage, lighting and other technical aspects.



      (2)   Outdoor theaters shall abut a major thorofare and points
of ingress and egress shall be available only from such major thorofare.



      (3)   All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility,
shall be provided off-street waiting space.  No vehicle shall be permitted
to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way.



      (4)   The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie
screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major
thorofares.  All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed
as to be confined within and directed onto the premises of the outdoor
theater site.




   (b)   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  Division (b) was repealed by Ordinance No.
514, passed September 2, 2014.)




(1975 Code §5.127)



1286.03  LANDSCAPING.



   (a)   Intent and Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to
promote the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum
standards for the design, installation and maintenance of landscaping in
parking lots, as buffer zones between uses and along roadways.  Landscaping
is considered by the City to be an important element of land development,
which is a critical factor in maintaining an attractive community character
and conserving the value of land and buildings in the City.



   (b)   Interpretation.  The landscape standards of this section are
considered the minimum necessary to achieve the objectives noted above.  In
several instances, the standards are intentionally flexible to encourage
flexibility and creative design.  Applicants are encouraged to provide
additional landscaping to improve the function, appearance and value of their
property.



   (c)   Applicability.



      (1)   The standards contained in this section shall be
applicable to any site plan, special land use request, condominium,
subdivision plan or PUD submitted for review and approval under this section,
subject to the limitations given in paragraph (c)(2) hereof.  The
regulations of this article shall not apply to individual single-family and
two-family dwelling units.



      (2)   For existing and proposed uses that require site plan
approval to either expand or be built, landscaping should be installed
insofar as practical.  The Planning Commission in its review of the site
plan has the authority to increase, decrease or otherwise modify the
landscaping and screening requirements of this section.  In doing so, the
Commission shall consider the following criteria:



         A.   The amount of space on the site available for
landscaping.



         B.   Existing landscaping on the site and on adjacent
properties.



         C.   The type of use on the site and the size of the
development.



         D.   Existing and proposed adjacent land uses.



         E.   The effect the required landscaping would have on
the operation of the existing or proposed land use.



   (d)   General Regulations.



      (1)   Landscaping shall be installed within 180 days of
occupancy of the building or structure unless a longer period is permitted in
writing by the Community Development Director.



      (2)   All landscaping shall be hardy plant materials and
maintained thereafter in a neat, healthy and orderly manner.  Withered
and/or dead plant materials shall be replaced within a reasonable period of
time, but no longer than one growing season.



      (3)   For the purpose of this section, a corner lot is
considered as having a front yard along each street, and the appropriate
landscaping shall be provided for both yards.



   (e)   Buffer Zone Requirements.



      (1)   A landscape or buffer zone as required herein shall be
provided wherever a non-residential zone or use abuts a residential use or
zone and wherever a RM-1 or RM-2 Zone abuts an R1, R2, R3 or RT Zone.  The
buffer zone shall be located along the boundary between adjoining lands in
different zoning districts.



      (2)   Where the boundary between zoning districts lies on an
active or abandoned railroad right-of-way, parcels adjacent to and separated
solely by the railroad right-of-way shall be considered adjoining, and
subject to buffer zone requirements.



      (3)   Buffer zone requirements shall not apply where adjacent
zoning districts are separated by a public street.  In such case, the front
yard landscaping requirements of this section shall apply.



      (4)   A buffer zone shall be required even if the abutting
parcel is unimproved land.



      (5)   Where the buffer zone width requirements of this section
are greater than the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district of
the subject property, a building footprint may encroach into the required
buffer zone; however, no parking area or driveway shall be permitted to
encroach within a required buffer zone.



   (f)   Width and Planting Requirements.



      (1)   A buffer zone shall be a minimum of fifteen feet wide.



      (2)   For each twenty-five linear feet abutting the adjacent
property, one canopy, two evergreen and one ornamental tree shall be planted
within the buffer zone.



   (g)   Plant Spacing and Size Requirements.



      (1)   Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four
feet from the fence line or property line.



      (2)   Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows,
plantings shall be staggered in rows.



      (3)   Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than
twenty-five feet on centers and shall be not less than five feet in height.



      (4)   Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than six
feet on centers and shall be not less than three feet in height.



      (5)   Ornamental trees or tree-like shrubs shall be planted
not more than ten feet on centers and shall be not less than four feet in
height.



      (6)   Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than
four feet on centers and shall be not less than three feet in height.



      (7)   Large deciduous trees shall be planted not more than
twenty-five feet on centers and shall be not less than three-inch caliper.



   (h)   Trees Not Permitted.  The following trees are not permitted:



      (1)   Box Elder.



      (2)   Silver Maples.



      (3)   Elms.



      (4)   Poplars.



      (5)   Willows.



      (6)   Horse Chestnut (nut bearing).



      (7)   Tree of Heaven.



      (8)   Catalpa.



   (i)   Suggested Plant Materials.  The following plant materials are
suggested:



      (1)   Evergreen Trees - Juniper, Fir, Spruce, Hemlock, Pine,
Douglas Fir.



      (2)   Narrow Evergreens - Column Hinoki Cypress, Blue Columnar
Chinese Juniper, Pyramidal Red Cedar, Swiss Stone Pine, Pyramidal White Pine,
Irish Yew, Douglas Arbor-Vitae, Columnar Giant Arbor-Vitae.



      (3)   Ornamental Trees or Tree-Like Shrubs - Flowering Crab,
Mountain Ash, Redbud, Horn-beam, Magnolia, Russian Olive, Dogwood, Rose of
Sharon, Hawthorn.



      (4)   Large Deciduous Shrubs - Honeysuckle, Mock Orange,
Lilac, Cottoneaster, Euonymus, Buckthorn, Viburnum, Forsythia and Ninebark,
Hazelnut, Privet and Sumac.



      (5)   Large Deciduous Trees - Oak, Hackberry, Planetree
(Sycamore), Ginkgo, Sweet Gum, Linden, Hard Maple, Birch Beech, Honeylocust,
Hop Hornbeam.



(1975 Code § 5.128)



   (j)   Berms, Walls and Fences.



      (1)   If a berm is used for all or part of the buffer zone,
required plant material quantities may be reduced by twenty-five percent. 
The berm shall comply with minimum standards contained in this section.  All
plant materials shall be placed along the top and exterior side slope of the
berm.  The buffer zone width shall be increased as needed to accommodate
maximum berm side slopes of one foot vertical rise to three feet horizontal.



      (2)   A screen wall or fence may be used for all or part of
the buffer zone.  If a fence or screen wall is used as a buffer zone, the
following regulations shall apply. 



         A.   Required quantities of plant materials may be
reduced by fifty percent for that area abutting the fence or wall.



         B.   All required plant materials shall be on the
exterior side of the screen wall or fence.



         C.   The fence or wall shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this Zoning Code.



   (k)   Cover for Buffer Strip.  All areas of the buffer strip
outside of planting beds shall be covered with grass or other living ground
cover.



   (l)   Stormwater Detention/Retention Basins.  Stormwater
detention/retention areas shall be permitted within buffer zones, provided
they do not reduce the screening effect.



   (m)   Solid Waste Dumpsters.  Solid waste dumpsters may be located
in buffer zones, provided they are screened on three sides by a continuous
opaque wall or fence six feet in height.



   (n)   Front Yard Landscaping.  Except for necessary driveways,
frontage roads, service drives or walkways, the front yard shall be
landscaped according to the following minimum requirements.  If the building
is not set back sufficiently to allow adequate area for such landscaping, the
Planning Commission or the Community Development Director, as the case may
be, shall determine the proper amount of plantings.



      (1)   One canopy tree, one ornamental and one evergreen tree
for each seventy-five feet in length of road frontage.



      (2)   Shrubs at a rate of one per each tree required.



      (3)   Earthen berms may be permitted within the required front
yard landscape area.  Credit of up to twenty-five percent may be received
against providing the required plantings through the use of berms three feet
in height or greater.



      (4)   Plantings and berms shall be located so as not to
obstruct the vision of drivers entering or leaving a site.



   (o)   Off-Street Parking Area Landscaping Requirements.  All
parking areas having twenty or more parking spaces shall be landscaped
according to the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   One canopy tree for every twenty parking spaces, with a
minimum of two trees, shall be planted adjacent to and within the parking
area.



      (2)   Trees shall be located to prevent damage by motor
vehicles.



      (3)   Landscaping islands shall be dispersed through the
parking lot in order to break up large expanses of paved surfaces and improve
traffic flow and line of sight for drivers.  Each landscape island shall be
a minimum of six feet wide and shall contain at least one canopy tree.



      (4)   Landscaping shall be arranged so as not to obscure
traffic signs or fire hydrants, or obstruct drivers' sight distance within
the parking area and at driveway entrances.



      (5)   All landscape acres shall be protected by raised curbs,
parking blocks or other similar methods.



      (6)   Where any parking area, excepting areas serving
one-family or two-family dwellings, abuts or faces a public right-of-way, a
three-foot high continuous obscuring screen at least three but no more than
four feet high may be required between the parking area and the public road
right-of-way line.  The screen may be comprised of natural or man-made
material or any combination of these elements.  Such screening may be
required for parking lots across the street from residential uses where
vehicle lights, noise or appearance may create a nuisance or safety hazard
for residents.



      (7)   Landscaping required for buffer zones and front yard
landscaping that abuts off-street parking areas may substitute for up to
fifty percent of the required parking lot landscaping.



   (p)   Minimum Standards for Berms.



      (1)   Wherever a berm is used to meet the minimum requirements
of this section, it shall have a maximum height of five feet above grade.



      (2)   Berms shall be constructed so as to maintain side slopes
not to exceed a one-foot vertical rise to three feet horizontal ratio.



      (3)   Berm areas shall be covered with grass or other living
ground cover.



      (4)   Berms shall be constructed so as not to alter drainage
patterns on the site or on adjacent properties.



(Ord. 390.  Passed 3-6-01.)



1286.04  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   (a)   All outdoor lighting in all use districts used to light the
general area of a specific site shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall
be so arranged as to reflect lights away from all adjacent residential
districts or adjacent residences.



   (b)   Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded downward so
as not to interfere with the vision of persons on the adjacent highways or
adjacent property.



   (c)   An illumination of signs and any other outdoor feature shall
not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type.  Artificial light shall
be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
when used.



(1975 Code § 5.130)



1286.05  RESIDENTIAL ENTRANCEWAYS.



   In all Residential Districts, so-called entranceway structures,
including, but not limited to, walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to
single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects, may be permitted and
may be located in a required yard, except as provided in Section 1286.06,
provided that such entranceway structures shall comply with all codes of the
City of Ionia, and shall be approved by the Community Development Department
and a permit issued. 



(1975 Code § 5.131)



1286.06  CORNER CLEARANCE.



   No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a
height of two feet from the established street grades shall be permitted
within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street
right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines
at a distance along each line of twenty-five feet from their point of
intersection.



(1975 Code § 5.132)



1286.07  FENCES (RESIDENTIAL).



   Fences are permitted or required, subject to the following:



   (a)   Fences on all lots of record in all Residential Districts
which enclose property and/or are within a required side or rear yard shall
not exceed six (6) feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground,
shall have the finished side of such fence face the adjacent property, and
shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of the
house except that a decorative fence may be placed in the front yard subject
to the following conditions:



      (1)   It shall not block the view of traffic.



      (2)   It must be approved by the Community Development
Director with appropriate fees collected upon application for review.



      (3)   It shall consist of split rail, decorative iron, wood,
engineered wood, plastic products, or similar material.



      (4)   Chain link, snow fence, woven fence, or rubber or any
kind shall not be allowed.



      (5)   It shall not exceed 50% opacity.



      (6)   It shall not be installed in the right-of-way.



      (7)   A building permit application for a front yard
decorative fence shall consist of a standard building permit application
together with a detailed site plan drawn to scale.  A drawing or picture of
the fence indicating its style and height shall also be provided.



      (8)   The finished side of the fence shall face the adjacent
property.



      (9)   Maximum height of any part of the posts shall not be
greater than forty-eight (48) inches absent approval from the Community
Development Director, and the height of the fencing between the posts shall
not be greater than forty-two (42) inches.



(1975 Code § 5.134) (Ord. 07-2003-01.  Passed 8-5-03; Ord. 469. Passed
10-6-09.)



1286.08  GENERAL EXCEPTIONS.



   (a)   Area, Height and Use Exceptions.  The provisions of this
Zoning Code shall be subject to the following interpretations and
exceptions. 



(1975 Code § 5.151)



   (b)   Essential Services.  Essential services shall be permitted as
authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the City, it being
the intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the application
of this Zoning Code.



(1975 Code § 5.152)



   (c)   Voting Places.  The provisions of this Zoning Code shall not
be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a
voting place in connection with a Municipal or other election. 



(1975 Code § 5.153)



   (d)   Height Limits.  The height limitations of this Zoning Code
shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles, or
public monuments, provided, however, that the Board of Zoning Appeals may
specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires
authorization as a conditional use.  The height of wireless communication
towers and equipment shall be as regulated by Chapter 1280.



(1975 Code §5.154)(Ord. 514.  Passed 9-2-14.)



   (e)   Lot Area.  Any lot existing and of record on the effective
date of this Zoning Code may be used for any principal use, other than
conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in
this Zoning Code, permitted in the district in which such lot is located,
whether or not such lot complies with the lot area requirements of this
Zoning Code, except as provided in Section 1278.02.  Such use may be made,
provided that all requirements other than lot area requirements prescribed in
this Zoning Code are complied with, and provided that not more than one
dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions
of this Zoning Code for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 



(1975 Code § 5.155)



   (f)   Lots Adjoining Alleys.  In calculating the area of a lot that
adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this
Zoning Code, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be
considered as part of such lot. 



(1975 Code § 5.156)



   (g)   Yard Regulations.  When yard regulations cannot reasonably be
complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of
peculiar shape or topography or due to architectural or site arrangement,
such regulations may be modified or determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(1975 Code § 5.157)



   (h)   Porches.  An open, unenclosed, and uncovered porch or paved
terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet,
but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 



(1975 Code § 5.158)



   (i)   Projections Into Yards.  Architectural features, not
including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side
yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard,
and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more
than three feet. 



(1975 Code § 5.159)



   (j)   Access Through Yards.  For the purpose of this chapter,
access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to
provide access to rear yards and/or accessory or attached structures.  These
drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side
yards.  Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement serving a like
function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed,
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, not be considered to be a structure,
and shall be permitted in any required yard. 



(1975 Code § 5.160)



   (k)   Lots Having River Frontage.  Those residential lots and/or
parcels having river frontage and abutting a public thorofare shall maintain
the yard on the river side as an open unobscured yard, excepting that a
covered and/or uncovered boat well shall be permitted after review and
approval of plans by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  Accessory structures
shall be permitted in the setback between the abutting road right-of-way and
the main building, provided the front yard setback required in Appendix I,
Schedule of Regulations, is met. 



(1975 Code § 5.161)



1286.09  OUTDOOR BOILERS.



   (a)   Outdoor Boilers, Defined.  An outdoor boiler is considered to
be an accessory structure consisting of an above or below grade chamber or
furnace constructed of metal or other non-combustible material in which wood,
wood pellets, grain pellets or other combustible material is burned to heat
water or other liquid which is piped aboveground or underground to provide
heat for a house or other structure.



   (b)   Outdoor Boilers, Prohibited.  Outdoor boilers are prohibited
in all zoning districts until the State or Federal government enacts rules
governing outdoor boilers.



   (c)   Outdoor Boilers, Existing.  All existing outdoor boilers must
be registered with the City Clerk within thirty days after the effective date
of this section.  No replacement outdoor boilers shall be installed or put
into use within the City.



(Ord. 442.  Passed 2-6-07.)



1286.10  MICHIGAN MEDICAL MARIHUANA ACT, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26241 ET SEQ., AS
AMENDED (MMMA).



   (a)   The medical use of marihuana as defined by the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq., as amended is
permitted in accordance with all requirements of the MMMA and any rules
promulgated by the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs of the
State of Michigan.



   (b)   The following shall apply to the medical use of marihuana as
permitted and regulated by the MMMA:



      (1)   A qualifying patient who has been issued and possesses a
registry identification card is not subject to arrest or penalty in any
manner provided that the qualifying patient possesses an amount of marihuana
that does not exceed a combined total of 2.5 ounces of usable marihuana and
usable marihuana equivalents in the form of marihuana-infused products, and
if the qualifying patient has not specified that a primary caregiver will be
allowed under state law to cultivate marihuana for the qualifying patient,
the qualifying patient may possess 12 marihuana plants, and any incidental
amount of seeds, stalks, and unusable roots, kept in an enclosed, locked
facility, as defined herein.



      (2)   A primary caregiver who has been issued and possesses a
registry identification card is not subject to arrest or penalty in any
manner, for assisting a qualifying patient to whom he or she is connected
through the department's registration process with the medical use of
marihuana in accordance with the MMMA. The privilege from arrest applies only
if the primary caregiver presents both his or her registry identification
card and a valid driver license or government-issued identification card that
bears a photographic image of the primary caregiver.  The privilege from
arrest applies only if the primary caregiver possesses marihuana in forms and
amounts that do not exceed any of the following:



         A.   For each qualifying patient to whom he or she is
connected through the department's registration process, a combined total of
2.5 ounces of usable marihuana and usable marihuana equivalents.



         B.   For each registered qualifying patient who has
specified that the primary caregiver will be allowed under state law to
cultivate marihuana for the qualifying patient, 12 marihuana plants kept in
an enclosed, locked facility as defined herein, and any incidental amount of
seeds, stalks, and unusable roots.



(Ord. 481. Passed 12-7-10; Ord. 515. Passed 10-7-14; Ord. 539. Passed 3-5-19.)



1286.11  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (a)   A home occupation is a permitted use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, RT,
RM, RM-1 and Planned Unit Development Districts according to the requirements
of this section.



   (b)   Two levels of home occupations, Level 1 and Level 2, are
permitted according to the following requirements.



   (c)   Level 1 home occupation requirements:



      (1)   A Level 1 home occupation is a home occupation which is
conducted entirely within the dwelling or an attached accessory building and
is conducted in such a manner that under normal circumstances there is no
external evidence of the home occupation operation except that a Level 1 home
occupation is permitted to have one sign which shall be attached to the wall
of the dwelling or accessory building.  Such sign shall not be lighted and
shall not be more than four square feet in size.



      (2)   A permit from the City is not required to conduct a
Level 1 home occupation.



      (3)   Only family members who reside on the premises shall be
employed by or involved in the home occupation.



      (4)   The use of the dwelling for a home occupation must be
clearly accessory, incidental, subordinate and attached to the permitted
principal use.  A home occupation shall occupy no more than 25 percent of
the total floor area of the dwelling in which it is conducted exclusive of
any porch, attached garage, or similar space not suited or intended to be
occupied as living quarters provided.



      (5)   Exterior storage of equipment or accessory items and/or
display of materials, goods, or supplies, used in the conduct of the home
occupation is prohibited.



      (6)   The dwelling shall not be altered from its residential
appearance in order to conduct the home occupation, but for the addition of
an advertising sign as permitted above.



      (7)   The home occupation shall be conducted so it does not
constitute a nuisance or annoyance to adjoining residents by reason of noise,
smoke, odor, electrical disturbance or night lighting or the creation of
unreasonable traffic to the premises.



      (8)   There shall be no selling of goods, merchandise,
supplies or products, or the offering of services to customers except on an
occasional basis, generally less than five times per week.



   (d)   Level 2 home occupation requirements:



      (1)   A Level 2 home occupation is a home occupation which has
one employee or one individual involved in the operation of the business
outside of the family members who reside on the premises and/or which has
customers coming to the home occupation for services or products offered by
the home occupation on more than an occasional basis, generally more than
five times per week.



      (2)   A Level 2 home occupation shall only be permitted if a
special land use is approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with
the procedures and standards of Chapter 1274 herein.



      (3)   An application for a Level 2 home occupation shall
contain the following information:



         A.   Name and address of property owner and occupant of
dwelling.



         B.   Description of proposed home occupation including
materials to be used, days and hours of operation, estimated customer and
delivery vehicle trips per week, and if an employee will be involved in the
business.



         C.   A site plan as would normally be required by
Chapter 1276 herein shall not be required.  Instead, an accurate drawing
shall be submitted illustrating the property, buildings on the property, the
area within the building to be devoted to the home occupation, parking for
the business, screening, sign and other information as may be required by the
Community Development Director to insure compliance with the requirements of
this section.



      (4)   The home occupation shall be conducted only within the
dwelling or an attached or detached accessory building.



      (5)   Only family members who reside on the premises and no
more than one other person who does not reside on the premises shall be
employed by or involved in the home occupation.



      (6)   Traffic generated by the home occupation shall be
compatible with traffic normally expected in the zoning district in which the
home occupation is located.



      (7)   A home occupation shall provide a minimum of two on-site
parking spaces in addition to the parking spaces required for the dwelling.



      (8)   A home occupation is permitted to have one sign which
shall be attached to the wall of the dwelling or accessory building.  Such
sign shall not be lighted and shall not be more than four square feet in size.



      (9)   A Level 2 home occupation shall also comply with the
requirements for a Level 1 home occupation contained in Section
1286.01(c)(4)-(7) herein.



      (10)   In its approval of a Level 2 home occupation, the
Planning Commission may prescribe certain conditions to ensure that the home
occupation can be compatible with its residential surroundings.  Such
conditions may include but are not limited to restricting the hours of
operation, the number and type of delivery vehicles, and limiting the number
of customer visits to the home occupation.



(Ord. 483.  Passed 2-1-11.)



1286.12  DONATION DROP BOXES.



   (a)   Donation Drop Boxes and Collection Bins, Defined.  A
receptacle or other portable structure made of metal, steel or a similar
durable material placed outdoors and intended and used for the collection of
clothing, shoes, books, toys, household items or other non-perishable goods
and materials donated by the public but no including facilities and
structures owned and operated by a governmental entity such as but not
limited to post office mail drop boxes, bill payment drop boxes, library
collection boxes and recycling boxes.



   (b)   Donation Drop Boxes and Collection Bins, Prohibited. 
Donation drop boxes and collection bins as defined herein are prohibited in
all zoning districts.



   (c)   Donation Drop Boxes and Collection Bids, Existing.  Donation
drop boxes and collection bins which are existing as of the effective date of
this Section 1286.12 shall be removed from the property on which they are
located within 60 days of January 21, 2014 as they are considered to be
portable accessory uses and are not considered permanent non-conforming uses
by virtue of the adoption of this Section 1286.12.  Failure to remove a
donation drop box or collection bin within the 60 day period shall be
considered a civil infraction subject to payment of fines as set forth in
Section 202.99(b) of this City Code.



(Ord. 510.  Passed 1-7-14.)



CHAPTER 1287
Wind Energy Systems



1287.01   Purpose.



1287.02   Definitions.



1287.03   Standards for all wind energy systems.



1287.04   Requirements for wind energy systems - 35 feet or less in height.



1287.05   Requirements for wind energy systems - over 35 feet.



1287.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures by
which the installation and operation of wind energy systems shall be
regulated within the City of Ionia, in order to promote the safe, effective
and efficient use of wind energy.



(Ord. 475.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1287.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   (a)   Ambient Sound Level:  The amount of background noise at a
given location prior to the installation of a wind energy system which may
include, but not be limited to, traffic, machinery, lawnmowers, human
activity, and the interaction of wind with the landscape.  The ambient sound
level is measured on the dB(A) weighted scale as defined by the American
National Standards Institute.



   (b)   Applicant:  The person, firm, corporation, company, limited
liability corporation or other entity which applies for City approval
pursuant to this chapter for permission to construct a wind energy system, as
well as the applicant's successors, assigns, and/or transferees.



   (c)   Building Mounted Wind Energy System:  A wind energy system
mounted or attached to a building.



   (d)   Interconnected Wind Energy System:  A wind energy system
which is electrically connected to the local electrical power utility system
and can provide power to the local electrical power utility system.



   (e)   Nacelle:  The structure which houses all of the generating
components, gearbox, drive train and other components.



   (f)   Rotor Diameter:  The cross-sectional dimension of the circle
swept by the rotating blades of a wind energy system.



   (g)   Shadow Flicker:  The moving shadow created by the sun shining
through the rotating blades of a wind energy system.  The amount of shadow
flicker created by a wind energy system is calculated by a computer model
that takes into consideration turbine locations, elevation, tree cover,
location of all structures, wind activity and sunlight.



   (h)   Total Wind Energy System Height:  The vertical distance
measured from the ground at the base of a tower or pole mounted wind energy
system mounting system tower to the uppermost vertical extension of any blade
or to the maximum height reached by any part of the wind energy system. 
This definition shall not apply to a building mounted wind energy system.



   (i)   Tower Mount Wind Energy System:  A wind energy system mounted
or attached to a tower, pole or similar structure which is not a building.



   (j)   Wind Energy System Setback:  The distance from the base of
the structure, tower, pole or building upon which the wind energy system is
mounted to a public right-of-way, overhead public utility line or lot line. 
In the case of multiple parcels utilized a single or multiple wind energy
system(s), the setbacks shall be taken from the outside boundary of the
parcels utilized for the wind energy system project.



   (k)   Wind Energy System:  Equipment that converts and then stores
or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy and includes
any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer,
turbine, vane, wire or other component used in the system.



(Ord. 475.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1287.03  STANDARDS FOR ALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   All wind energy systems shall comply with the following requirements:



   (a)   Sounds Pressure Level.



      (1)   When in operation a wind energy system shall not exceed
either 55 dB(A), or ambient noise level as measured at any property line of
the parcel containing the wind energy system.  For example, if the ambient
noise level is less than 55 dB(A) before the wind energy system begins
operation then the noise level when the WES is operating shall not exceed 55
dB(A) and if the ambient noise level before the wind energy system begins
operating is 60 dB(A) then the noise level when the wind energy system is
operating shall not exceed 60 dB(A).  This sound pressure level may be
exceeded during short-term events such as severe wind storms.



      (2)   Wind energy systems which are under single ownership or
control and which involve more than one property shall be subject to the
requirements of paragraph (a)(1) hereof but the sound pressure level shall be
measured at the property line closest to the wind energy system at the
outside boundary of all property used for the wind energy system.  In
addition, if required by the Planning Commission or Community Development
Director, the applicant shall provide documentation through modeling or other
evidence that will demonstrate that the wind energy system will not exceed
the maximum permitted sound pressure.



      (3)   At the applicant's expense, a baseline noise emission
study of the proposed site and impact upon all areas within one quarter mile
of the proposed wind energy system location may be required for a wind energy
system which requires a special land use permit prior to the placement of a
wind energy system which, if required, shall be submitted to the City for
review.  The applicant shall also provide estimated noise levels which the
wind energy system is likely to produce at the nearest property lines at the
time of submitting a request for a special land use permit.



   (b)   Setbacks for Wind Energy Systems.



      (1)   Tower mounted wind energy system.  The minimum setback
for a tower mounted wind energy system from a property line, public
right-of-way, or public overhead utility line shall be a distance which is at
least equal to the total height of the wind energy system.



      (2)   Building mounted wind energy system.  The setback for a
building mounted wind energy system shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the
property line, public right-of-way, or public overhead utility line if
mounted directly on a roof or other elevated surface of the building.  The
setback shall be measured from the furthest outward extension of all moving
parts.  The 15 foot minimum setback requirement may be reduced by the
Community Development Director under either or both of the following
circumstances:



         A.   If the applicant provides a registered engineer's
certification that the wind energy system is designed to collapse, curl or
bend within a distance less than the required setback of the wind energy
system.



         B.   If the Community Development Director determines
that a lesser setback will not be detrimental to adjoining properties.  In
making the determination the Community Development Director shall, at a
minimum, take into consideration the type and location of the building
containing the wind energy system, the type of wind energy system proposed,
the installation requirements of the wind energy system and the location of
buildings or uses on the adjacent properties.



   (c)   Location of Tower and Guy Wires.



      (1)   A tower mounted wind energy system shall only be located
in the rear yard and must be on the same lot as the principal use.



      (2)   Guy wires and anchors shall not be located within or
above the front yard.



   (d)   Shared Wind Energy System Usage.  A wind energy system may
provide electrical power to more than one dwelling unit or building, provided
the dwelling units or buildings are located on property or properties that
are adjacent to the property or properties on which the wind energy system is
located.



   (e)   Rotor Clearance.



      (1)   Blade or rotor arcs created by a tower mounted wind
energy system shall have a minimum of 20 feet of clearance over and from any
structure, adjoining property or tree.



      (2)   The blade or rotor arcs created by a building mounted
wind energy system shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above the
roof or be designed in the opinion of the Community Development Director so
the blade or other moving parts do not present a safety hazard to any person
on the roof.



   (f)   Shadow Flicker.  The Planning Commission or Community
Development Director may request that the applicant perform an analysis of
potential shadow flicker.  The analysis shall identify locations of shadow
flicker that may occur, and shall describe measures such as screening that
shall be taken to eliminate or minimize the shadow flicker.



   (g)   Construction Codes and Interconnection Standards.  A wind
energy system shall comply with the following:



      (1)   All applicable state construction and electrical codes
and local building permit requirements.



      (2)   Federal Aviation Administration requirements.



      (3)   The Michigan Airport Zoning Act, being Public Act 23 of
1950, as amended.



      (4)   The Michigan Tall Structures Act, being Public Act 259
of 1959, as amended.



      (5)   The Michigan Public Service Commission and Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission requirements if a wind energy system is an
interconnected system.



   (h)   Safety Requirements.



      (1)   Each wind energy system shall be equipped with both a
manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping the wind energy
system operation in high winds or must be designed so that the rotational
speed of the rotor blade does not exceed the design limits of the rotor.



      (2)   To prevent unauthorized access, each tower mounted wind
energy system must comply with at least one of the following provisions, and
more than one if required by the Planning Commission or the Community
Development Director:



         A.   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located
within 12 feet of the ground.



         B.   A locked anti-climb devise shall be installed and
maintained.



         C.   A tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed
by a locked, protective fence at least 10 feet high with barbed wire fencing.



      (3)   All wind energy systems shall have lightning protection.



      (4)   If a tower is supported by guy wires, the wires shall be
clearly visible to a height of at least eight feet above the guy wire anchors.



   (i)   Signs.



      (1)   Each tower mounted wind energy system shall have one
sign not to exceed two square feet posted at the base of the tower, or, if
the structure is fenced, on the fence.  The sign shall include a warning
about high voltage and emergency phone numbers.



      (2)   A wind energy system shall not include any advertising
of any kind, except the nacelle may have lettering that exhibits the
manufacturer's and/or owner's identification.



   (j)   Electromagnetic Interference.  A wind energy system shall be
designed, constructed and operated so as not to cause radio and television
interference.



   (k)   Maintenance.  All wind energy systems must be kept and
maintained in good repair and condition at all times and shall not pose a
potential safety hazard.



   (l)   Inspection.  The City shall have the right upon approving any
wind energy system to inspect the premises on which the wind energy system is
located at all reasonable times with permission of the property owner.  The
City may hire a consultant to assist with any such inspections at the
applicant's cost.



   (m)   Insurance.  The wind energy system operator shall maintain a
current liability insurance policy for the wind energy system.  The amount
of the policy shall be a condition of approval.



   (n)   Other.



      (1)   The wind energy system, except for building mounted wind
energy systems, may be located on a lawful parcel or parcels which do not
have frontage on a public or private road.



      (2)   All distribution lines from a wind energy system shall
be located and maintained underground, both on the property the wind energy
system is located and off-site.  The Planning Commission may waive the
requirement that distribution lines for the wind energy system which are
located off-site (i.e. are not located on or above the property where the
wind energy system is located) be located and maintained underground if the
Planning Commission determines that to install, place or maintain such
distribution lines underground would be impractical or unreasonably expensive.



      (3)   A wind energy system shall be painted a non-obtrusive
(i.e. - beige or gray) non-reflective color.  No striping of color or
advertisement shall be visible on the blades or tower.



(Ord. 475.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1287.04  REQUIREMENTS FOR WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS - 35 FEET OR LESS IN HEIGHT.



   Any tower mounted or building mounted wind energy system which is 35
feet or less in total height shall be a by-right use in all zoning districts,
subject to the requirements of Section 1287.03 and the following:



   (a)   Permit Required.  A zoning permit shall be obtained from the
City to construct and operate any tower mounted or building mounted wind
energy system which is 35 feet or less in total height.  The total height of
a wind energy system shall be as defined in Section 1284.02.  Any wind
energy system which is greater than 35 feet in total height shall be required
to obtain a special land use permit as set forth in Section 1287.05 herein.



   (b)   Permit Contents.  The following information is required upon
submitting an application for a zoning permit for a wind energy system:



      (1)   Name of the property owner(s) and address.



      (2)   An accurate drawing showing the proposed location of the
wind energy system, property lines, existing building(s), proposed wind
energy system setback, right-of-way lines, public easements and overhead
utility lines and the distance from the wind energy system to principal
buildings on adjacent lots.



      (3)   The proposed type and height of the wind energy system
to be constructed, including the manufacturer and model, product
specifications including maximum noise output (measured in decibels), total
rated generated capacity, dimensions, rotor diameter, and a description of
ancillary functions.



      (4)   If the applicant intends to install an interconnected
wind energy system, the applicant must provide documentation that the
applicable utility company  has or will approve the proposed interconnection.



      (5)   Other relevant information as may be reasonably
requested by the Community Development Director.



   (c)   Final Approval.  Final approval shall be issued after and
inspection of the wind energy system by the City or an authorized agent of
the City, and where the inspection finds that the wind energy system complies
with the requirements of Sections 1287.03 and 1287.04, all applicable State
construction and electrical codes, local building permit requirements, and
all manufacturers' installation instructions.



(Ord. 475.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1287.05  REQUIREMENTS FOR WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS - OVER 35 FEET.



   Any tower mounted or building mounted wind energy system which is over
35 feet in total height may be allowed as a special land use in all zoning
districts subject to the following regulations and requirements of this
section and also the general special land use review procedures and standards
contained in Chapter 1274.



   (a)   Application Requirements.  In addition to the special land
use application form, an applicant for a wind energy system over 35 feet in
total height shall provide the following information as part of the
application.



      (1)   The proposed type and height of the wind energy system
as constructed, including the manufacturer and model, product, specifications
including maximum noise output (measured in decibels), total rated generating
capacity, dimensions, rotor diameter, and a description of ancillary
facilities.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to install an interconnected
wind energy system the applicant must provide documentation that the
applicable company has or will approve the proposed interconnection.



   (b)   Site Plan Requirements.  A site plan for a wind energy system
for which a special land use permit is required shall include the following
items with or on the site plan.



      (1)   All requirements for site plan contained in Chapter 1276
herein.



      (2)   Dimensions of the area purchased or leased where the
wind energy system is to be located.



      (3)   Location and height of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures, electrical lines, towers, guy wires, guy wire anchors,
security fencing, and any other above-ground structures proposed or existing
for the parcel or parcels containing the wind energy system.



      (4)   Specific distances from the wind energy system
structures to all other buildings, structures, and above ground utilities
which are on the parcel or parcels upon which the wind energy system is
proposed to be located and on abutting parcels.



      (5)   Land uses within 300 feet of the parcel.



      (6)   Access drives or the wind energy system including
dimensions and composition, with a narrative describing proposed maintenance
of the drives.



      (7)   All lighting proposed for the site, including diagrams
of lighting fixtures proposed if requested by the Planning Commission.



      (8)   Security measures proposed to prevent unauthorized
trespass and access.



      (9)   Standard drawings of the structural components of the
wind energy system, including structures, towers, bases and footings. A
registered engineer shall certify drawings and any necessary calculations
that show that the system complies with all applicable local, State and
Federal building, structural and electrical codes.



      (10)   Additional information as may be required by the
Planning Commission.



      (11)   The Planning Commission may waive or modify the above
requirements at the request of the applicant if it is determined that those
items would not be needed to properly review the project.



   (c)   Lighting.  A wind energy system shall provide lighting as may
be required by the Federal Aviation Administration.



   (d)   Maintenance Program Required.  The applicant shall provide a
written description of the maintenance program to be used to maintain the
wind energy system, including a maintenance schedule of types of maintenance
tasks to be performed.



   (e)   Site Standards and Visual Impact.



      (1)   A wind energy system shall be designed and placed in
such a manner to minimize adverse visual and noise impacts on neighboring
areas.



      (2)   A wind energy system project with more than one wind
energy system structure or tower shall utilize similar design, size, color,
operation and appearance throughout the project as is practicable.



   (f)   Performance Guarantee.  If a special land use permit is
granted pursuant to this section, the Planning Commission may require a
security in the form of a cash deposit, surety bond, or irrevocable letter of
credit in a form, amount, and duration with a financial institution deemed
acceptable to the City, which shall be furnished by the applicant to the City
in order to ensure full compliance with this section and any conditions of
approval.



   (g)   Final Approval.  Final approval shall be issued after and
inspection of the wind energy system by the City or an authorized agent of
the City, and where the inspection finds that the wind energy system complies
with the requirements of Sections 1287.03 and 1287.05, all applicable state
construction and electrical codes, local building permit requirements, and
all manufacturers' installation instructions.



(Ord. 475.  Passed 5-4-10.)



CHAPTER 1288
Solar Energy Systems



1288.01   Purpose.



1288.02   Definitions.



1288.03   General requirements.



1288.04   Permit required.



1288.05   Standards for solar energy systems.



1288.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures by
which the installation of and operation of solar energy systems shall be
regulated within the City of Ionia, in order to promote the safe, effective
and efficient use of solar energy and to protect adjoining properties from
any incompatible effects of such systems and to conserve and enhance property
values.



(Ord. 474.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1288.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   (a)   Solar Access:  The right of a property owner to have sunlight
shine onto the property owner's land.



   (b)   Solar Energy System:  A system which converts solar energy
for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating
primarily for on-site use and which consists of solar panels, photovoltaic
laminates, electrical lines, pipes, batteries, mounting brackets, frames,
foundation and other appurtenances or devices necessary for the operation of
the system.



(Ord. 474.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1288.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   Solar energy systems shall be a permitted accessory use in all
zoning districts subject to the requirements of this chapter.



   (b)   This chapter applies to solar energy systems installed or
constructed after the effective date of this chapter.



   (c)   Solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date
of this chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements contained in
this chapter; provided that any structural change, upgrade or modification to
an existing solar energy system that materially alters the size or placement
of such system shall comply with this provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 474.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1288.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (a)   An electrical permit to install a solar energy system which
generates electricity must be obtained before the installation of such system.



   (b)   For a solar energy system which heats water, no permit is
required unless used for potable water.



(Ord. 474.  Passed 5-4-10.)



1288.05  STANDARDS FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   (a)   A solar energy system may be installed on the ground or on a
wall or roof of a principal or accessory building.



   (b)   A roof mounted system shall not extend more than two feet
above the roof line.



   (c)   A roof or wall mounted solar energy system shall only be
located on that portion of the roof or wall which faces a side or rear lot
line unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Community Development
Director that such location would render the system ineffective or that the
construction or slope of the roof makes installation of the system
impractical in which case the system may be placed in another location on the
roof or wall.



   (d)   A solar energy system installed in the front yard shall not
exceed 42 inches in height, if installed in the side or rear yard shall not
exceed six feet in height, as measured from the highest point of the solar
energy system to the ground if it is a ground mounted system.  A solar
energy system that is a roof mounted system shall not exceed 42 inches in
height as measured from the point of attachment to the roof.



   (e)   A ground mounted solar energy system and a solar energy system
attached to an accessory building shall comply with the following
requirements:



      (1)   A solar energy system shall not be erected in any front
yard unless the applicant can demonstrate that other locations in the yard
would not allow the system to function as efficiently as in the front yard. 
In such case the system may be placed in the front yard but shall only be as
close to the front lot line as necessary to permit the system to function
efficiently.



      (2)   Setbacks:



         A.   In all residential zones, a solar energy system,
when placed in a side or rear yard, shall be a minimum of ten feet from the
principal building, and shall be no closer than six feet to any lot line.



         B.   In all non-residential zones, a solar energy
system, when placed in a side or rear yard, shall be a minimum of ten feet
from any princnipal building, and shall be no closer than ten feet from any
lot line.



         C.   When a solar energy system is located on a corner
lot, which is considered to have two front yards and two side years for the
purposes of this chapter, the solar energy system shall not be located in
either front yard except as may be allowed by paragraph (e)(1) herein.



      (3)   A solar energy system shall not occupy more than 25
percent of the lot area.



   (f)   Multiple solar panels and supporting equipment shall be
considered one system.



   (g)   The granting of any permit for a solar energy system does not
constitute solar access rights.



   (h)   A solar energy system shall be constructed and placed so it
does not create glare for persons off-site.



   (i)   A solar energy system shall be properly maintained at all
times.



   (j)   A solar energy system which is no longer used for its intended
purpose shall be removed within 60 days of notification by the Community
Development Director.



(Ord. 474.  Passed 5-4-10.)



CHAPTER 1289
Medical Marihuana Facilities



1289.01   Applicability.



1289.02   Purpose.



1289.03   Definitions.



1289.04   Authorization of facilities and fee.



1289.05   Development requirements.



1289.06   Operational requirements.



1289.07   Operational regulations that apply to all medical marihuana
facilities.



1289.08   Application and processing procedures.



1289.09   Standards for approval.



1289.10   Variances.



1289.11   Change of ownership, licensee, or location.



1289.12   Violations and penalties.



1289.01  APPLICABILITY.



   This Chapter applies to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations,
and corporations owning, occupying, or having control or management of any
premises located within the City.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.02  PURPOSE.



   This Chapter is intended to provide for the regulation of medical
marihuana facilities; to establish procedures for application for medical
marihuana facilities; to establish procedures for review of medical marihuana
facilities; to establish operational, land use, and zoning requirements for
medical marihuana facilities; to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the City of Ionia, its residents, its neighborhoods, and property
owners; to set fees for the purpose of defraying costs associated with the
implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; to declare
this chapter to be for a public purpose; and to provide penalties for
violations of this Chapter.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   (a)   Any term defined by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act,
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq., as amended (MMMA), shall have the definition
given in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.



   (b)   Any term defined by the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing
Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., as amended (MMFLA),
shall have the definition given in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing
Act.



   (c)   Any term defined by the Marihuana Tracking Act, PA 282 of
2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27901 et seq., as amended (MTA) shall have the
definition given in the Marihuana Tracking Act.



   (d)   "Grower" means a licensee that is a commercial entity located
in this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana
for sale to a processor or provisioning center.



   (e)   "Licensee" means a person holding a state operating license
issued under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, M.C.L.A. §§
333.27101 et seq.



   (f)   "Marijuana" or "marihuana" means that term as defined in
section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, M.C.L.A. § 333.7106;
the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq.; the
Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.;
and the Marihuana Tracking Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27901 et seq.



   (g)   "Marihuana facility" means an enterprise at a specific
location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.,
including a marijuana grower, marijuana processor, marijuana provisioning
center, marijuana secure transporter, or marijuana safety compliance
facility. The term does not include or apply to a "primary caregiver" or
"caregiver" as that term is defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act,
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq.



   (h)   "Marihuana plant" means any plant of the species Cannabis
sativa L.



   (i)   "Marihuana-infused product" means a topical formulation,
tincture, beverage, edible substance, or similar product containing any
usable marihuana that is intended for human consumption in a manner other
than smoke inhalation.  Marihuana-infused product shall not be considered a
food for purposes of the food law, 2000 PA 92, M.C.L.A. §§ 289.1101 to
289.8111.



   (j)   "Marihuana tracking act" means the marihuana tracking act, PA
282 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27901 to 333.27904.



   (k)   "Michigan medical marihuana act" means the Michigan medical
marihuana act, 2008 IL 1, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 to 333.26430.



   (l)   "Medical marihuana facilities licensing act" means the Medical
marihuana facilities licensing act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101
et seq.



   (m)   "Park" means an area of land designated by the City as a park
on its Master Land Use Plan, Five-Year Community Parks and Recreation Plan,
or on a City Council approved list of City Parks.



   (n)   "Person" means an individual, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity.



   (o)   "Processor" means a licensee that is a commercial entity
located in the state of Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower and
that extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product
for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center.



   (p)   "Provisioning center" means a licensee that is a commercial
entity located in Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower or
processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered qualifying
patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers.
Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold
at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers.
A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying
patient connected to the caregiver in accordance with the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq., is not a provisioning center
for purposes of this article.



   (q)   "Public playground" means an outdoor facility, open to the
public and on public property and containing playground equipment including
but not limited to slides, climbers, seesaws, swings, or swimming pool
designed for the recreational use by children and owned and operated by a
local unit of government, school district, or other unit or agency of
government.



   (r)   "Rules" means rules promulgated under the administrative
procedures act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, M.C.L.A. §§ 24.201 to 24.328 by the
department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs to establish rules for the
purpose of implementing the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, 2016
PA 281, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.



   (s)   "Safety compliance facility" means a licensee that is a
commercial entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or
registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for
tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and
may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility.



   (t)   "School" means and includes buildings and facilities used for
school purposes for children and youth in grades pre-kindergarten through 12,
and Head Start when that instruction or purpose is provided by a public,
private, denominational, or parochial school.



   (u)   "Secure transporter" means a licensee that is a commercial
entity located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana
between marihuana facilities for a fee.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.04  AUTHORIZATION OF FACILITIES AND FEE.



   (a)   A medical marihuana facility as defined herein may be
authorized within the City of Ionia only upon approval as a special land use,
according to the requirements and procedures of Chapter 1274.



   (b)   No medical marihuana facility may operate within the City of
Ionia without first having been approved for a license from the State of
Michigan pursuant to the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281
of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., as amended (MMFLA).



   (c)   The number of each type of medical marihuana facility that may
be approved for operation within the City of Ionia shall not be limited.



   (d)   A nonrefundable fee shall be paid annually by each marihuana
facility authorized within the City of Ionia in the amount not to exceed
$5,000.00 as set by resolution of the Ionia City Council.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.05  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   Medical marihuana facilities as defined herein are permitted
with special land use approval in the following zoning districts:



      (1)   Grower facilities are permitted only in the I-1 Light
Industrial District. 



      (2)   Processor facilities are permitted only in I-1 Light
Industrial District.



      (3)   Provisioning enter facilities are permitted only in the
B-1 Neighborhood Business District; the B-3 General Business District; the
Office District; and the I-1 Light Industrial District.



      (4)   Provisioning centers shall not be permitted on land
recommended for Central Business District land use or East Main Preservation
land use on the currently adopted Future Land Use Map of the City of Ionia.



      (5)   Secure transporter facilities are permitted only in the
B-1 Neighborhood Business District; the B-3 General Business District; the
Office District; and the I-1 Light Industrial District.  Secure transporter
facilities shall not be permitted on lands recommended for Central Business
District land use or East Main Preservation land use on the currently adopted
Future Land Use Map of the City of Ionia.



      (6)   Safety compliance facilities are permitted only in the
B-1 Neighborhood Business District; the B-3 General Business District; the
Office District; the I-1 Light Industrial District.  Safety compliance
facilities shall not be permitted on lands recommended for Central Business
District land use or East Main Preservation land use on the currently adopted
Future Land Use Map of the City of Ionia.



      (7)   A medical marihuana facility permitted as a special land
use in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District or the B-2 Community Business
District shall not be permitted as a principal use by right in the B-3
General Business Zoning District, but shall be subject to special land use
approval in the B-3 zoning district.



      (8)   Parking shall be as required by Chapter 1282 of the City
of Ionia Zoning Ordinance, with the exception that all parking for a medical
marihuana facility shall be subject to Section 1289.05(d) herein.



      (9)   Landscaping shall be as required by Section 1286.03 of
the City of Ionia Zoning Ordinance.



      (10)   Exterior lighting shall be as required by Section
1286.04 of the City of Ionia Zoning Ordinance with the exception that any
additional or alternate lighting as recommended by the City of Ionia Public
Safety Director shall be provided.



      (11)   Signs shall be as required by Chapter 1234 of the City
of Ionia Code of Ordinances; and by any requirements of the City of Ionia
Zoning Ordinance; with the exception that where the regulations of this
Chapter 1289 shall conflict with any other regulations for signs of the City
of Ionia, or shall be more restrictive than the requirements of any other
regulations for signs of the City of Ionia, the regulations of this Chapter
1289 shall apply.



   (b)   The following development regulations shall apply to all
medical marihuana facilities:



      (1)   Any medical marihuana facility approved as a special
land use in any zoning district shall be subject to all requirements for uses
in that zoning district, and shall be subject to all other applicable
regulations including but not limited to requirements for accessory buildings
and uses; landscaping; screening; lighting; access; and signs.  Where the
regulations of this Chapter 1289 shall conflict with any other regulations of
the City of Ionia Zoning Ordinance, or shall be more restrictive that the
requirements of any other regulations for the City of Ionia, the regulations
of this Chapter 1289 shall apply.



      (2)   Any medical marihuana facility approved as a special
land use shall be subject to all requirements for review and the standards
for approval according to Chapter 1274 Special Land Uses.



      (3)   Medical marihuana facilities may be permitted in a
structure that contains multiple tenants, provided the medical marihuana use
is approved as a special land use; meets all applicable occupancy
restrictions; and that the medical marihuana facility meets all requirements
of the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A.
§§ 333.27101 et seq.; and all rules promulgated by the Michigan Licensing
and Regulatory Affairs Department, including by not limited to security. 
Marihuana facilities shall be partitioned from any other marihuana facility,
activity, business, or dwelling.



      (4)   Any combination of medical marihuana facilities may
operate as separate marihuana facilities at the same location, provided the
marihuana facility meets all requirements of the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.; and all rules
promulgated by the Michigan Licensing and Regulatory Affairs Department,
including by not limited to requirements for partitioned facilities, separate
entrances and exits, separation of inventory, record keeping, transfer of
marihuana, and point of sale operations.  Each marihuana facility operating
at the same location shall have distinct and identifiable areas with
designated structures that are contiguous.  A licensed provisioning center
operating at the same location with any other licensed medical marihuana
facility shall have retail entrances and exits clearly identified.



      (5)   One or more owners may own medical marihuana facilities
at the same location; one or more licensees may be licensed to operate
medical marihuana facilities at the same location.



      (6)   No medical marihuana provisioning center shall be
located within another business.



      (7)   No medical marihuana facility shall be located in an
un-zoned area.



   (c)   (1)   Location and buffering requirements:



      (2)   No medical marihuana provisioning center shall be
located within the following:



         A.   One thousand (1,000) feet of an operational school
as defined herein, and within one thousand (1,000) feet of school property or
a library that constitutes a drug free zone as required by the Michigan
Public Health Code § 333.7410.



         B.   Five hundred (500) feet of the following buffered
uses:



            1.   Public playground as defined herein;



            2.   Park as defined herein;



            3.    Commercial child care facility that is
required to be licensed or registered with the State of Michigan Department
of Health and Human Services or its successor agency;



            4.   Church.



         C.   For the purpose of calculating the buffering
distance requirements of this section, the distance shall be measured as the
distance along a horizontal straight line beginning at the nearest point to
the buffered use on the parcel line of the parcel upon which a provisioning
center is proposed, to the nearest point on the parcel line of the parcel
upon which the buffered use is located.



         D.   For provisioning centers located within a
multi-tenant commercial retail structure or center, the distance to a
buffered use shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the occupied
property of the provisioning center to the closest parcel or boundary line of
the occupied property of the buffered use.  Property for a multi-tenant
retail structure shall not include the parking area of the structure.



   (d)   Parking associated with any medical marihuana facility shall
be on the same lot or parcel as the facility, or on a contiguous lot under
the same ownership or control as the owner of the lot or parcel on which the
medical marihuana facility is located, and shall not be permitted to be on a
non-contiguous lot.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.06  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (a)   Operational requirements for a medical marihuana provisioning
center shall be as follows:



      (1)   Every medical marihuana provisioning center shall be
located in an enclosed building as defined by Section 1240.11(11).



      (2)   No medical marihuana provisioning center shall be open
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.



      (3)   The licensee of a provisioning center is authorized by
the State of Michigan to purchase or transfer marihuana only from a grower or
processor to only a registered qualifying patient or registered primary
caregiver.  All transfers of marihuana to a provisioning center from a
separate marihuana facility shall be by means of a secure transporter.



      (4)   The licensee of a provisioning center is authorized by
the State of Michigan to transfer marihuana to or from a safety compliance
facility for testing only by means of a secure transporter.



      (5)   A provisioning center shall not allow a physician or
other person to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical
certification document on the premises for the purposes of obtaining a
medical marihuana registry identification card.



      (6)   A provisioning center shall have a separate room that is
dedicated as the point of sale area for the transfer or sale of medical
marihuana product.  The provisioning center shall keep medical marihuana
products behind a counter or other barrier to ensure that a registered
qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver or member of the general
public does not have direct access to the marihuana products. 



      (7)   All medical marihuana storage areas within medical
marihuana provisioning centers shall be separated from any customer and
patient areas by a permanent barrier.  No medical marihuana is permitted to
be stored in an area accessible by the general public, or registered
caregivers, or registered patients.



      (8)   Any medical marihuana remaining on the premises of a
medical marihuana provisioning center while the provisioning center is not in
operation shall be secured in a locked area in the interior of the premises.



      (9)   The premises of a medical marihuana provisioning center
shall be open for inspection by authorized persons during the stated hours of
operation and at such other times as anyone is present on the premises.



      (10)   No licensed medical marihuana provisioning center shall
place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, any advertisement of
medical marihuana in any form or through any medium within the distance to
buffered uses as set forth in Section 1289.05(c), with the exception that a
provisioning center may establish signs in compliance with the requirements
of Chapter 1234 which regulates signs in the City of Ionia, and in compliance
with Section 1289.07(q) herein.



      (11)   A provisioning center may employ an individual to
engage in the home delivery of a medical marihuana product for sale or
transfer to a registered qualifying patient according to the requirements of
the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§
333.27101 et seq., as amended and the promulgated Rules of the Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs.



   (b)   Operational requirements for a medical marihuana grower
facility shall be as follows:



      (1)   A grower license authorizes the grower to perform the
following:



         A.   To grow not more than the numbers of marihuana
plants as authorized under Class A, Class B, or Class C licenses;



         B.   To sell marihuana seeds or marihuana plants to only
a grower by means of a secure transporter;



         C.   To sell marihuana, other than seeds, only to a
processor or provisioning center;



         D.   To transfer marihuana only by means of a secure
transporter.



      (2)   The applicant and each investor with any interest in the
grower facility shall not have an interest in a secure transporter or safety
compliance facility.



      (3)   Consumption and/or use of medical marihuana shall be
prohibited at the grower facility; the dispensing of medical marihuana at the
grower facility shall be prohibited.



      (4)   All grower activity related to the grower facility shall
be performed in an enclosed building as defined by Section 1240.11(11), with
the exception that cultivation may occur in an outdoor area if the outdoor
area is contiguous with the building, and the outdoor area is fully enclosed
by fences or barriers that block outside visibility of the marihuana plants
from public view, with no marihuana plants growing above the fence or barrier
that is visible to the public eye.  The fences or barrier shall be secured
in compliance with the security rules of Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., as amended
and adopted Rules.  All drying, trimming, curing, or packaging of marihuana
shall occur inside the building meeting all the requirements of the Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101
et seq., as amended and promulgated rules.



      (5)   That portion of the facility where any chemicals such as
herbicides, pesticides, and fertilizers are stored shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the City of Ionia Fire Department to insure
compliance with the State of Michigan fire codes.



      (6)   Medical marihuana grower facilities shall produce no
products other than useable medical marihuana intended for human consumption.



      (7)   In furtherance of the public health, safety, and
welfare, exterior signage or advertising identifying the facility as a
medical marihuana grower facility shall be prohibited.



   (c)   Operational requirements for a medical marihuana safety
compliance facility shall be as follows:



      (1)   A safety compliance license authorizes the licensee to
accept a transfer of 2.5 ounces or less of marihuana to the safety compliance
facility from a registered primary caregiver for testing.  The licensee is
also authorized to receive marihuana from, test marihuana for, and return
marihuana to only a medical marihuana facility by means of a secure
transporter.



      (2)   The applicant and each investor with any interest in the
safety compliance facility shall not have an interest in a grower, secure
transporter, processor, or provisioning center.



      (3)   A safety compliance facility shall have a secured
laboratory space that cannot be accessed by the general public, and shall
retain and employ at least one staff member with a relevant advanced degree
in a medical or laboratory science.



      (4)   A safety compliance facility shall become fully
accredited by an entity approved by the State of Michigan Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs within one year after the date the license
is issued, or as otherwise provided by the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., as amended
and the promulgated rules.



      (5)   All safety compliance activity related to the safety
compliance facility shall be performed in an enclosed building as defined by
Section 1240.11(11).



      (6)   All medical marihuana shall be contained within the
building in an enclosed, locked facility.



      (7)   In furtherance of the public health, safety, and
welfare, exterior signage or advertising identifying the facility as a
medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall be prohibited.



   (d)   Operational requirements for a medical marihuana processor
facility shall be as follows:



      (1)   A processor license authorizes the licensee to purchase
medical marihuana only from a grower and authorizes the sale of
marihuana-infused products or medical marihuana only to a provisioning center.



      (2)   A processor license authorizes the processor to transfer
medical marihuana only by means of a secure transporter.



      (3)   All processor activity related to the processor facility
shall be performed in an enclosed building as defined by Section 1240.11(11).



      (4)   All medical marihuana shall be contained within the
building in an enclosed, locked facility.



      (5)   In furtherance of the public health, safety, and
welfare, exterior signage or advertising identifying the facility as a
medical marihuana processor facility shall be prohibited.



      (6)   All medical marihuana processors shall be certified as
accredited under a recognized food safety system such as SQF, ISO 22000, or
the FDA's FSMA (Food Safety Modernization Act) rules or demonstrate that they
are actively pursuing said certification at the time of licensing by the
State of Michigan and at the time of application review by the City of Ionia,
and shall obtain said certification within 18 months of operation.



      (7)   All medical marihuana processors shall comply with all
requirements of the Ionia County Health Department Sanitary Code regarding
food service establishments, and the Michigan Food law, Act 92 of 2000 as
amended, as applicable.



   (e)   Operational requirements for a medical marihuana secure
transporter facility shall be as follows:



      (1)   A secure transporter license authorizes the licensee to
store and transport marihuana and money associated with the purchase or sale
of medical marihuana between medical marihuana facilities for a fee upon
request of a person with legal custody of that marihuana or money.  The
secure transporter license does not authorize the transport of medical
marihuana to a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver.



      (2)   The applicant and each investor with any interest in the
secure transporter facility shall not have an interest in a grower,
processor, provisioning center, or safety compliance facility, and shall not
be a registered qualifying patient or a registered primary caregiver.



      (3)   Each driver transporting medical marihuana shall have a
chauffeur's license as issued by the State of Michigan.  Each vehicle
transporting medical marihuana shall be operated by a two-person crew with at
least one individual remaining with the vehicle at all times during the
transportation of medical marihuana.



      (4)   The medical marihuana shall be transported in one or
more sealed containers and not be accessible while in transit.



      (5)   A secure transporting vehicle shall not bear markings or
other indication that it is carrying medical marihuana or a marihuana-infused
product.



      (6)   A secure transporter is subject to administrative
inspection by a law enforcement officer at any point during the
transportation of medical marihuana to determine compliance with this
chapter, and with the State of Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.



      (7)   A secure transporter shall have a primary place of
business as its marihuana facility.  All vehicles utilized by the secure
transporter facility shall be permanently located at the secure transporter
facility except during the time the vehicles are transporting medical
marihuana or medical marihuana products.  All secure transporter activity
shall be performed in an enclosed building with the exception that loading
and unloading of medical marihuana may take place on a private portion of the
secure transporter facility outside the secure transporter facility building.



      (8)   Loading and unloading of secure transporter vehicles
with medical marihuana may take place on a private, unenclosed portion of any
medical marihuana facility, provided any area of loading and unloading is
under video surveillance as required by the Michigan Medical Marihuana
Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq. 
In no case shall loading and unloading take place in a public place or
street, or private place or street which is not under the ownership and
control of the licensed medical marihuana facility.



      (9)   All medical marihuana stored at the secure transporter
facility shall be contained within the building in an enclosed, locked
facility.  The timeframe for the secure transporter to maintain custody of
the marihuana product shall not be more than 48 hours or by permission of the
Department of Licensing Regulatory Affairs of the State of Michigan on a
case-by-case basis.



      (10)   In furtherance of the public health, safety, and
welfare, exterior signage or advertising identifying the facility as a
medical marihuana secure transporter facility shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5- 19.)



1289.07  OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS THAT APPLY TO ALL MEDICAL MARIHUANA
FACILITIES.



   (a)   Medical marihuana facilities shall comply at all times and in
all circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, 2008 IL 1,
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 to 333.26430; the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.; and the
Marihuana Tracking Act, PA 282 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27901 to 333.27904.



   (b)   Medical marihuana facilities shall be partitioned from any
other marihuana facility, activity, business, or dwelling.  Medical
marihuana facilities shall not allow onsite or as part of the marihuana
facility any of the following:



      (1)   Sale, consumption or serving of food except for as
provided by Rules as promulgated by the Department of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs;



      (2)   Sale, consumption, or use of alcohol or tobacco products
on the premises;



      (3)   Consumption, use, or inhalation of a marihuana product.



   (c)   Access to the medical marihuana facility is restricted to the
licensee, employees of the licensee, and registered qualifying patients and
registered primary caregivers with valid registry cards, if applicable, and
the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, through its
investigators, agents, auditors, the state police, or law enforcement
officials.



   (d)   A separate waiting area may be created for visitors not
authorized to enter the medical marihuana facility.



   (e)   The licensee shall maintain a log tracking all visitors to a
medical marihuana facility in compliance with the Marihuana Tracking Act, PA
282 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27901 to 333.27904.  The visitor log must be
available at all times for inspection by the Michigan Department of Licensing
and Regulatory Affairs, and its investigators, agents, and auditors, or the
state police to determine compliance with the act and these rules.



   (f)   With the exception of staff meetings, employee training, and
similar events associated with the operation of the medical marihuana
facility, no activities such as tours, corporate events, weddings, parties,
receptions, or other similar events may occur on the premises of a medical
marihuana facility at any time.



   (g)   The medical marihuana facility must be at a fixed location.
Mobile medical marihuana facilities and drive-through, drive-up, or walk-up
operations are prohibited. Any sales or transfers of marihuana product by
internet or mail order, consignment, or at wholesale are prohibited, with the
exception that a provisioning center may accept online orders and payments of
sales of medical marihuana to a qualifying patient on a secure website
according to the requirements of the Michigan Department of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs.



   (h)   A state operating license issued under the act must be framed
under a transparent material and prominently displayed in the medical
marihuana facility.



   (i)   Processors, growers, and safety compliance facilities shall
implement appropriate exhaust ventilation systems to mitigate noxious gasses
or other fumes used or created as part of any production process or
operations.  Exhaust ventilation equipment must be appropriate for the
hazard involved and must comply with City of Ionia fire code and Michigan
mechanical codes.  No marihuana shall be cultivated, grown, manufactured,
processed, tested, or provided in any manner that would emit odors reasonably
discernable to another person beyond the interior of the building or occupied
portion of the building where the medical marihuana facility is located.



   (j)   All medical marihuana facilities shall be securely locked,
including all interior rooms, windows, and points of entry and exits with
commercial-grade, nonresidential door locks as reviewed and approved by the
City of Ionia building inspection officials and the City of Ionia public
safety officials.  Access to a medical marihuana facility shall be only by
the licensee or employees as approved by the licensee.  An alarm system
shall be maintained.



   (k)   One or more emergency contact persons with phone numbers shall
be provided to City of Ionia public safety officials and public safety
officials of other jurisdictions if requested by the City of Ionia.



   (l)   All medical marihuana facilities shall have a video
surveillance system that meets all requirements of the rules promulgated by
the department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs Department (LARA) to
establish rules for the purpose of implementing the Medical Marihuana
Facilities Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.



   (m)   Marihuana product that is to be destroyed or is considered
waste shall be rendered into an unusable and unrecognizable form and recorded
in the State of Michigan statewide monitoring system; destroyed marihuana
products or waste shall not be sold; all marihuana waste shall be disposed of
according to the requirements of the rules promulgated by the department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs Department (LARA) to establish rules for the
purpose of implementing the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, 2016
PA 281, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.



   (n)   Wastewater generated during the cultivation of marihuana and
processing of marihuana products shall be disposed of in compliance with
applicable City of Ionia, Ionia County, State of Michigan, and federal laws
and regulations.



   (o)   All applicable building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
water, wastewater, and any other applicable permits shall be obtained from
the City of Ionia or other applicable governmental authority for any portion
of the building or structure in which electrical wiring, lighting,
mechanical, plumbing, watering, cultivating, growing, harvesting, testing,
processing, and other devices that support any operation associated with the
medical marihuana facility are located.



   (p)   Verification from City of Ionia Public Safety personnel that
the facility meets all requirements for fire protection.



   (q)   Marketing and advertising regulations for all medical
marihuana facilities are as follows:



      (1)   Marihuana facilities shall comply with all City of Ionia
municipal ordinances, state law, and administrative Rules regulating signs
and advertising.



      (2)   A licensee shall not advertise marihuana product where
the advertisement is visible to members of the public from any street,
sidewalk, park, or other public place, with the exception that a provisioning
center may include a sign or signs as regulated by Chapter 1234 of the
Codified Ordinances, subject to the following:



         A.   No sign shall advertise a specific medical
marihuana product, or pricing, or special sale of any medical marihuana
product;



         B.   A sign may include the words "Cannabis" or
"Marihuana" or "Medical" and graphics such as leaves but excluding graphics
of specific products;



         C.   A sign may include the name of the establishment.



      (3)   Marihuana products shall be marketed or advertised as
"medical marihuana" for use only by registered qualifying patients or
registered primary caregivers.



      (4)   Marihuana products shall not be marketed or advertised
to minors aged 17 years or younger.  Sponsorships targeted to members aged
17 years or younger are prohibited.



   (r)   Any medical marihuana facility shall not be operated in an
occupied residence.



   (s)   No medical marihuana facility shall be operated in a manner
creating noise, dust, vibration, glare, or fumes beyond the boundaries of the
property on which the medical marihuana facility is operated; or odors
detectable to normal senses beyond the interior of the building or occupied
portion of the building where the medical marihuana facility is located; or
any other nuisance that hinders the public health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Ionia.



   (t)   A medical marihuana facility shall be open for inspection by
authorized local, state, county, or federal officials at any time during
hours of operation and at other times as anyone is present on the premises.



   (u)   Licensees and applicants shall notify the Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, state police, and local law enforcement
authorities within 24 hours of theft or loss of any marihuana product or
criminal activity.



   (v)   Any other operational measures requested by the Department of
Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA) that are not inconsistent with the
Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, and the Rules.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.08  APPLICATION AND PROCESSING PROCEDURES.



   (a)   As required by the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act,
PA 281 of 2016, any applicant for a medical marihuana facility license shall
provide the City of Ionia notification by registered mail informing the City
that the applicant has applied for a license under the Act.  When the City
receives the notice, within 90 days the City shall provide to the Medical
Marihuana Licensing Board a copy of the City of Ionia ordinance permitting
and regulating medical marihuana facilities, and a description of any
previous medical marihuana related ordinance violation of the applicant.



   (b)   An application for special land use approval for a medical
marihuana facility shall be in accordance with the application procedures for
special land uses as required by Chapter 1274 of the City of Ionia Zoning
Ordinance, including a site plan prepared according to the requirements of
Chapter 1276.



   (c)   A notice for public hearing as required by Section 1274.03(d),
and as required by Section 1276.05(b) shall be additionally sent to all
properties within the distance as required for those buffered uses as
required by Section 1289.05(c)(1).



   (d)   In addition to all application materials as required for a
special land use, an application for a medical marihuana facility, on a form
as approved by the City Council, shall be completed and submitted by the
applicant.



   (e)   The application shall include the following information in
addition to any additional information as required by the application form
for a medical marihuana facility:



      (1)   The City of Ionia may request from the applicant a copy
of the Entity/Individual Prequalification Application Packet for a state
medical marihuana facility operating license as required to be submitted to
the State of Michigan.



      (2)   A copy of the proposed Business Plan if requested by the
Planning Commission.



      (3)   Proof of ownership of the entire premises wherein the
medical marihuana establishment is to be operated; or written consent from
the property owner of use of the premises for a medical marihuana facility,
and a copy of any lease agreement.



      (4)   A description of the security plan for the medical
marihuana establishment, prepared as required by the Medical Marihuana
Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., as
amended, including but not limited to any lighting, alarms, barriers,
recording or monitoring devices, and security guard arrangements proposed for
the facility and its premises.  Each medical marihuana facility shall have a
security guard present during business hours, or alternative security
measures by the Planning Commission as a condition of special land use
approval.



      (5)   A professionally prepared scaled drawing of the floor
plan of the medical marihuana facility including uses of all floor areas.



      (6)   A diagram of any proposed text or graphic materials to
be shown on the exterior of the proposed medical marihuana facility.



      (7)   A location area map showing the distance to all buffered
uses as required in Section 1289.05(c).  Each buffered use shall be labeled
on the location area map.



      (8)   A waste disposal plan, indicating how all waste
products, including marihuana that is to be destroyed or is considered waste,
will be disposed of and prevented from being ingested by humans or animals. 
In no case shall waste be burned on site, or introduced into the sanitary
sewer system or stormwater management system.



      (9)   A signed affidavit that neither the applicant nor any
investor with an interest in the medical marihuana facility is in default to
the City of Ionia for failure to pay any property taxes, income taxes,
special assessments, fines, fees, or other financial obligation to the City
of Ionia.



      (10)   In the case of an application for a grower license,
chemical and pesticide storage plan that states the names of the pesticides,
herbicides, and any other chemicals that will be used in cultivation, and a
plan for disposal of unused pesticides, herbicides, and chemicals.



   (f)   All applications for special land use approval for a medical
marihuana facility shall be accompanied by an application fee of $5,000.



   (g)   All applications for a special land use for a medical
marihuana facility shall obtain a building permit for any building utilized
as a proposed medical marihuana facility, or for a change of occupancy for an
existing building to be utilized as a proposed marihuana facility, from the
governmental entity having jurisdiction to approve building permits in the
City of Ionia under the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code
act, PA 230 of 1972.



   (h)   Any other information requested by the Planning Commission,
the City Council, public safety official, or other municipal official in
order to complete the review of the application.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.09  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.



   An approval of a medical marihuana facility in the City of Ionia shall
only be made when in substantial compliance with the following standards:



   (a)   The standards for approval for all special land uses in
Section 1274.04.



   (b)   The standards for approval of all site plans in Section
1276.07.



   (c)   Compliance with any requirements for public safety as stated
in writing by the public safety officials of the City of Ionia, Ionia County,
and the State of Michigan.



   (d)   Compliance with all requirements and conditions of this
Chapter 1289.



   (e)   Compliance with all applicable requirements of the City of
Ionia Codified Ordinances.



   (f)   Compliance with all requirements of the Medical Marihuana
Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., as
amended.



   (g)   Compliance with all requirements of the Marihuana Tracking
Act, PA 282 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27901 et seq., as amended.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.10  VARIANCES.



   (a)   An application for a variance from any requirement of this
Chapter or any other requirement of the City of Ionia Zoning Ordinance
applicable to a medical marihuana facility shall be as required by Chapter
1244 of the City of Ionia Zoning Ordinance with the exception that a notice
for public hearing as required by Section 1244.07 for a variance for a
provisioning center shall be additionally sent to all properties within the
distance as required for those buffered uses as required by Section
1289.05(c)(1).



   (b)   In no case shall a decision regarding the approval of a
special land use be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.11  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, LICENSEE, OR LOCATION.



   (a)   Upon change of ownership of any approved medical marihuana
facility, the Community Development Director shall require the owner and
licensee to provide information in writing to demonstrate any physical or
operational characteristics that are proposed to be altered under the new
owner, or a statement in writing that no physical or operational changes are
proposed.



   (b)   If changes to the approved site plan are proposed, a site plan
prepared according to the requirements of Chapter 1276 shall be submitted
that shows any proposed changes to the site plan.



   (c)   The proposed new owner shall provide proof of licensing by the
State of Michigan for the approved medical marihuana facility.



   (d)   The Community Development Director shall determine whether the
change in ownership and any proposed changes in the approved site plan, shall
require a public hearing and approval by the Planning Commission as required
by Section 1289.08(c) herein.



   (e)   The Community Development Director may, at his or her
discretion, approve the proposed change in ownership, and any changes
proposed to the site plan, without a public hearing.



   (f)   In no case shall an approved medial marihuana facility be
approved or used for a different type of medical marihuana facility except in
accordance with all requirements and procedures of this Chapter 1289.



   (g)   A change of location of a medical marihuana facility after
licensure requires a new license according to the requirements of the Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101
et seq., as amended.  A change of location of a medical marihuana facility
after licensure, or a change of licensee at a location previously approved as
a medical marihuana facility, requires application for approval as a special
land use by the City of Ionia according to the requirements of this Chapter
1289.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



1289.12  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (a)   Any act or failure to act done in violation of the provisions
of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se.



   (b)   A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction
and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 202.99(b) of the Municipal
Code of the City of Ionia.



(Ord. 539.  Passed 3-5-19.)



APPENDICES



APPENDIX I - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS



 

ZONE DISTRICT
 
MINIMUM ZONING LOT SIZE PER UNIT
 
MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
 
MINIMUM YARD SETBACK (PER LOT IN FEET)
 
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA PER UNIT
 
MAXIMUM OF LOT AREA COVERED (BY ALL BUILDINGS)


 
AREA IN
SQ. FT.
 
WIDTH
IN FEET
 
IN FEET
 
EACH
FRONT   SIDE   REAR
 
(SQ. FT.)
 




R-1  One-Family Residential
 
8,000
 
65
 
25
 
25(b)   10-6b   25b
 
900
 
25%


R-2  One-Family Residential
 
(a)

12,000
 
(a)

80
 
25
 
25(b)   12-8b   25b
 
900
 
25%


R-3  One-Family Residential
 
(a)

16,500
 
(a)

100
 
25
 
30(b)   14-10   35b

   (b)
 
900
 
25%


RT  Two-Family Residential
 
4,000
 
35
 
25
 
25(b)   10(b)   25b
 
700
 
25%


RM  Multiple-Family Residential
 
4,500
 
30
 
25
 
30   30   25c

(c, m)   (c)
 
1 BR-800

2 BR-850

3 BR-1100
 
25%


RM-1  Multiple-Family Residential
 
2,900
 
100
 
35
 
30   20   25c

(c)   (c)
 
1 BR-500

2 BR-700

3 BR-900
 
25%


B-1  Local Business
 
--
 
--
 
25
 
25   e. h   20f

(d)
 
--
 
--


B-2  Community Business
 
--
 
--
 
40
 
--   --   --
 
--
 
--


B-3  General Business
 
--
 
--
 
--
 
25   e. h   20f

d, l
 
--
 
--


I-1  Light Industrial
 
--
 
--
 
40
 
30   20   j, k

i, l   h, j, k
 
--
 
--


Office District
 
0
 
0
 
35
 
25(d)   (e)(h)   20
 
NA
 
NA










(Ord. 251.  Passed 11-9-76; Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88;  Ord.  341. 
Passed 11-13-90; Ord. 345.  Passed 6-4-91; Ord. 08-2002-04. Passed 9-3-02;
Ord. 08-2002-05. Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 08-2002-06. Passed 9-3-02.)




I-A.  Notes To Schedule.




   (a)   See I-B below for Subdivision Open Space Plan, regarding
flexibility allowances.





   (b)   For all uses permitted other than single-family residential,
the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback
required in Section 1248.03 or Appendix I, whichever is greater.





   (c)   In the RM and RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts, the
minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to
the length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this
distance be less than thirty feet.  Parking may be permitted within a
required side or rear yard, but shall not cover more than thirty percent of
the area of any required yard, or any minimum distance between the
buildings.  The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two
buildings in the RM and  RM-1 Districts is as follows:





S = LA + LB +2(HA + HB),





6




   where



 



      S =   Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of
building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either.



      LA = Total length of building A.



   The total length of building A is the length of that portion or
portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly
from above, the lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any
wall of building B.



      LB = Total length of building B.



   The total length of building B is the length of that portion or
portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly
from above, the lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any
wall of building A.



      HA = Height of building A.



   The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural
grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of
building A.  Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground
immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the
total length of the building.



      HB = Height of building B.



   The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural
grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of
building B.  Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground
immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the
total length of the building.  (See Appendix XI of this Zoning Code.)



   (d)   Reserved.



   (e)   No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines
of the District, except as otherwise specified in the Building and Housing
Code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot
lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than ten
feet shall be provided.



         On a corner lot which borders on a Residential District,
there shall be provided a setback of 20 feet on the side or residential
street.  On an exterior side yard abutting a Residential District or
abutting a street, there shall be provided a setback of ten feet in width.



   (f)   No building shall be closer than 75 feet to the outer
perimeter (property line) of the District, or to any major thoroughfare.



   (g)   No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to the outer
perimeter (property line) of the District when said property line abuts any
Residential District.



   (h)   All storage shall be in the side yard or rear yard and shall
be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than six
feet high, or with a chain-link type fence and a green belt planting so as to
obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office or business district
or from a public street.



   (i)   A minimum distance of 45 feet shall be provided from the
centerline of any main access service drive or from any service drive serving
more than one four-unit building.



(1975 Code § 5.102) (Ord. 251.  Passed 11-9-76; Ord. 323.  Passed 7-5-88;
Ord. 341.  Passed 11-13-90; Ord. 08-2002-04.  Passed 9-3-02; Ord. 518. 
Passed 3-3-15.)



   I-B.  Subdivision Open Space Plan.



   (a)   The intent of the Subdivision Open Space Plan is to promote
the following objectives.



      (1)   Provide a more desirable living environment by
preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks,
hills and similar natural assets.



      (2)   Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in
the development of residential areas.



      (3)   Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use
of open area, while recognizing a reduction in development costs, by allowing
the developer to by-pass natural obstacles on the site.



      (4)   Encourage the provision of open space within a
reasonable distance from all lot development of the subdivision and further
encourage the development of recreational facilities.



   (b)   Modifications to the standards as outlined in the Schedule of
Regulations, may be made in the One-Family Residential Districts when the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   The area of lots in the R-2 and R-3 One-Family
Residential Districts which are served by a public sanitary sewer system may
be reduced up to ten percent.  In the R-2 and R-3 Districts this reduction
may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to ten feet.  These
lot area reductions shall be permitted, provided that dwelling unit density
shall be no greater than if the land area to be subdivided were developed in
the minimum square foot lot areas as required for each One-Family District
under the Schedule of Regulations.  All calculations shall be predicated
upon the One-Family Districts having the following gross densities (including
roads):



   R-1 – 4.1 dwelling units per acre;



   R-2 – 2.7 dwelling units per acre;



   R-3 – 1.6 dwelling units per acre.



      (2)   Rear yards may be reduced to thirty feet when such lots
border on land dedicated for parks, recreation, and/or open space purposes,
provided that the width of said dedicated land shall not be less than 100
feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of the adjacent
lot.



      (3)   Under the provisions of paragraph (b)(1) hereof, for
each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision through the
reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in the
Schedule of Regulations, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to
the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision in a manner approved by
the City.



      (4)   The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space
purposes shall in no instance be less than four acres and shall be in a
location and shape approved by the Planning Commission.



      (5)   The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements
of Section I-B shall not include bodies of water, swamps or land with
excessive grades making it unsuitable for recreation.  All land dedicated
shall be so graded and developed as to have natural drainage.  The entire
area may, however, be located in a floodplain.



      (6)   This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be permitted
only if it is mutually agreeable to the legislative body and the subdivider
or developer.



      (7)   This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be started
within six months after having received approval of the final plat, and must
be completed in a reasonable time.  Failure to start within this period
shall void all previous approval.



      (8)   Under this planned unit approach, the developer or
subdivider shall dedicate the total park area on all or any portion of the
plat at the time of filing of the final plat.



(1975 Code §5.104)



APPENDIX II: ZONING AND ZONING MAP CHANGES



APPENDIX II-A ZONING MAP



(Click here to view the map in PDF format.)




APPENDIX II-B
ZONING MAP CHANGES




 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




245
 
10-7-75
 
Lot 6, part of M. Bliss Addition, from R-1 to B-1.


256
 
5-2-78
 
Part of Lovell and Dye's Addition, and part of Supervisor Voelker's Addition,
from RM-1 to B-3.


266
 
10-2-79
 
Parcels bounded by Washington St., Layfayette St., Union St. and Jefferson
St., from TR to R-1.


267
 
10-11-79
 
Lots 66 and 67 of Inman's Addition, from R-1 to B-2.


268
 
10-11-79
 
Lots 33 and 34 of Mill's Addition, excepting the north 6 rods, from R-2 to RT.


272
 
1-8-80
 
Lots 38, 39 and 40 of Merritt and York's Addition, from B-1 to B-1.


273
 
3-4-80
 
Part of the northwest 1/4 of Sec. 21, T7N-R6W, from R-1 to I-1.


274
 
3-4-80
 
Lot 103, except the south 56 ft., of Supervisor Inman's Addition, from R-1 to
R-M-1.


275
 
3-4-80
 
Lots 60, 61, 62, 63 and 64 of Supervisor Carten's Addition, and Lot 12 of
Hall's Addition, from R-T to RM-1.


276
 
3-4-80
 
Lot 82, and the north 30 ft. of the west 111 ft. of Lot 81, of Supervisor
Covet's Addition, from R-1 to F-1.


279
 
10-7-80
 
The east 102 ft. of Lot 213 of Supervisor Voelker's Addition, from R-1 to
RM-1.


281
 
1-6-81
 
Lots 45 and 46, except the south 120 ft., of Supervisor Carten's Addition,
from R-T to RM-1.


290-A
 
8-2-83
 
Lot 154, except the south 36.5 ft., of Supervisor Voelker's Addition, from
R-1 to RM-1.


297
 
1-3-84
 
Lot 22, except the north 4.5 ft and the east 3 ft., of Warner's Addition,
from RM-1 to B-1.


298
 
3-6-84
 
Lots 11 and 12, except the west 9.75 ft., of Lovell and Dye's Addition, from
RM-1 to B-1.


299
 
6-18-84
 
Parcel Nos. 34-201-040-000-095-00 and 34-201-190-000-030-00, from R-2 to RT.


300
 
8-14-84
 
422 and 426 E. Lincoln Ave., from R-2 to RT.


301
 
9-4-84
 
112 S. Kidd St., from B-2 to B-3.


302
 
5-7-85
 
869 E. Lincoln Ave., from B-1 to B-3.


303
 
6-4-85
 
618-620 Louisa St., from R-2 to RM-1


304
 
8-6-85
 
540 and 576 N. State St., from B-1 and B-2 to B-3.


306
 
9-3-85
 
648 W. Lincoln, from RM-1 to B-1.


307
 
10-1-85
 
350 W. Washington St., from RT-2 to B-3.


310
 
6-3-86
 
Parcel on the northeast corner of Lincoln Ave. (M-21) and Johnson St., from
RM-1 to R-2.


314
 
    ?
 
2 adjacent parcels on the Southeast corner of Lincoln Ave. and State St.,
from R-1 to B-3.


316
 
6-2-87
 
Parcel on the northeast corner of Lincoln Ave. (M-21) and Johnson St., from
R-2 to R-T.


317
 
10-6-87
 
216 N. Jefferson St., from R-1 to R-T.


324
 
7-5-88
 
11.8 acres, owned by G. Vance and wf. and Ionia Public School District, from
R-1 to RM; 2.0 acres adjacent to Jefferson St., from R-1 to B-3; 11.2 acres
lying south of land owned by Ionia Public School District, from R-1 to RM-1;
the westerly most 10 acres more or less of land owned by Ionia Public School
District, from R-1 to RM-1; all lands bordered by Adam St., the Central
Michigan Railway (formerly Grand Trunk R.R.) main line, S. Steele St., and S.
Jackson St., from I-1 to B-3.


327
 
11-1-88
 
253 and 267 E. Main St., and 250 E. Adams St., from RM-1 to B-1.


328
 
12-27-88
 
Vacant parcel lying adjacent to and on the west side of Haynor Rd., from R-1
to RM-1.


330
 
6-6-89
 
Parcel on the Southeast corner of Lafayette St. and Stevenson St., from R-1
to RT.


331
 
6-6-89
 
Parcel on the northeast corner of W. Washington and Dye Sts., from RT to B-1.


342
 
11-13-90
 
Parcel on the east side of N. State Rd. (State Highway M-66), on the south
side of E. North St., and on the west side of N. Dexter St., from R-1 to RM-1.


355
 
5-26-93
 
Nelson Orchard property, from R-1 and I-1.


358
 
11-9-93
 
174 E. Adams St., from RM-1 to B-1.


370
 
12-5-95
 
423, 431, 435 and 441 N. Dexter St., and 517 W. Lincoln Ave., of Supervisor
Voelker's Addition, from RM-1 to B-3.


374
 
5-23-96
 
S13 W. Washington St., from RM-1 to B-3.


376
 
7-1-97
 
Cleveland Street Dump, from R-1 to B-1.


07-2002-11
 
8-12-02
 
Area 1 to include East Main Historic Preservation District; Area 2 which
includes East Washington St. from Library St. to Jefferson St., from RT to
R-1; Area 5 which includes all property south of the Grand Rapids Eastern
Railroad between the rear of Commercial Property along Steel St. and the
Ionia City Garage, from B-1 and I-1 to R-1; Area 6 which includes the area of
West Washington and West Main St. west of Dexter St. to the City limits, from
RM-1 to R-1; Area 10 which includes vacant land north of Oakwood Ct. to the
north City limits and between Jefferson St. and Orchard View Industrial Park
from I-1 to R-2.


08-2002-11
 
9-3-02
 
Skyview Meadows which includes Whitetail Ct., Skyview Dr. and Skyview Trail,
from R-3 to R-1.


10-2004-01
 
10-5-04
 
Abbey Apartments from RM-1 to Planned Unit Development, small lot
single-family zoning.


12-2004-01
 
12-28-04
 
The south 248.87 feet of a lot located on the northeast corner of Skyview
Drive and Lincoln Avenue (M-21) from R-2 to B-1.


435
 
6-7-06
 
13.56 acres, more or less, commencing at the west 1/4 corner of Section 31
from RM-1 to B-3.


460
 
8-5-08
 
210, 211, 213, 217 and 221 Dye Street, and 410/422 W. Washington Street, from
B-2 or B-3 to RT; 301, 311, 317, 325, 331, 337 and 341 Adams Street, 206 and
208 South Jackson Street, 201, 207, 211 and 215 South Jefferson Street, from
I to R-1.


479
 
10-5-10
 
Property designated as tax ID number 34-202-080-000-015-40;
34-202-080-000-025-00; 34-204-800-000-005-20; 34-204-850-000-010-00;
34-204-850-000-015-00; 34-850-000-020-00; 34-204-850-000-005-10; and
34-204-850-000-005-20 from I-1 to F.
Property designated as tax ID number 34-202-080-000-005-00;
34-202-080-000-010-00; 34-202-080-000-030-00; and 34-202-080-000-015-30 from
I-1 to B-3.


497
 
1-8-12
 
Lot 17, Lovell and Dye Addition, commonly known as 524 West Main Street from
R-1 to O.


504
 
7-2-13
 
101 and 225 Railroad Street, 344 Colby Street, 325 and 329 Webber Street, 400
Mill Street, and properties designated as tax ID number 34-203-110-00-090-00;
34-201-110-000-045-00; 34-203-110-000-095-00; 34-203-240-000-025-00;
34-203-240-000-030-00; 34-203-240-000-155-00, from I-1 to R-1.
302, 312, 320, and 326 West Lincoln Avenue and 513, 525, 533, and 543 Cyrus
Street, from RM-1 to R-1.
Emerson Elementary School, Jefferson Elementary School, Ionia Middle School,
Ionia Educational Center and Rather Elementary School, and Ionia County
Intermediate Schools, as R-1.
340 Lovell Street from RM-1 to B-1.
648 East Lincoln Avenue and 514 North State Street, from B-3 to RT.


507
 
9-10-13
 
508 West Washington Street, from RM-1 to B-3.


508
 
10-1-13
 
120 South Dexter Street, from B-2 to B-3.


519
 
5-5-15
 
Lots 139, 140, 141, 142, 158, 159, 160, and 161, Supervisor Inman’s
Addition, at 520 East Washington Street, from B-1 to O.
Lots 143, 144, 145, and 146, Supervisor Inman’s Addition, at 520 East
Washington Street, from B-1 to R-1.
The north 147 feet of Lot 151, 155, 156, and 157, Supervisor Inman’s
Addition, at 520 East Washington Street, from B-1 to R-1.
Lots 7 and 8, Forest Hill Park Addition, at 601 East Washington Street, from
B-1 to O.


535
 
8-1-17
 

703 West Lincoln Avenue, Lot 190, Supervisor Voelker’s Addition, from R-1
to B-3.



471 North State Street, South 50 feet of Lot 191, Supervisor Voelker’s
Addition, from R-1 to B-3.


475 North State Street, North 50 feet of Lot 191, Supervisor Voelker’s
Addition, from R-1 to B-3.


 
 
 
 
 




 



APPENDIX III: BASEMENT AND STORY









 



APPENDIX IV: BUILDING HEIGHT







 



APPENDIX V: BUILDING LINE







 



APPENDIX VI: FLOOR AREA







 



APPENDIX VII







 



APPENDIX VIII: BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS







 



APPENDIX IX: YARDS







 



APPENDIX X: PARKING LAYOUTS (REPEALED)



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  Appendix X was repealed by Ordinance No. 518, passed March
3, 2015.)



APPENDIX XI: DISTANCE SPACING FOR MULTIPLE DWELLINGS







 



PART FOURTEEN – BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE



TITLE TWO – Building Standards



   Chap. 1420.  Michigan Building Code. (Repealed)



   Chap. 1421.  Building, Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Codes.



   Chap. 1422.  Michigan Mechanical Code. (Repealed)



   Chap. 1424.  Michigan Plumbing Code. (Repealed)



   Chap. 1426.  National Electrical Code. (Repealed)



Chapter 1420
Michigan Building Code



(EDITOR’S NOTE: Chapter 1420, regarding the Michigan Building Code was
repealed in its entirety by Ord. 470, passed 1-5-2010)



CHAPTER 1421
Building, Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Codes



1421.01   Transferring of responsibilities.



1421.02   Effective date of transfer.



1421.01  TRANSFERRING OF RESPONSIBILITIES.



   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 8b(7) of the State Construction
Code Act of 1972, as amended, the City hereby transfers responsibility for
the administration and enforcement of its Building Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code and Electrical Code provisions to the County of Ionia.



(Ord. 470.  Passed 1-5-10.)



1421.02  EFFECTIVE DATE OF TRANSFER.



   The effective date of the transferring of responsibilities for the
administration and enforcement of the Building Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code and Electrical Code shall be January 11, 2010.



(Ord. 470.  Passed 1-5-10.)



Chapter 1422
Michigan Mechanical Code (Repealed)



(EDITOR’S NOTE: Chapter 1422, regarding the Michigan Mechanical Code was
repealed in its entirety by Ord. 470, passed 1-5-2010)



Chapter 1424
Michigan Plumbing Code (Repealed)



(EDITOR’S NOTE: Chapter 1424, regarding the Michigan Plumbing Code was
repealed in its entirety by Ord. 470, passed 1-5-2010)



Chapter 1426
National Electrical Code (Repealed)



(EDITOR’S NOTE: Chapter 1426, regarding the National Electrical Code was
repealed in its entirety by Ord. 470, passed 1-5-2010)



TITLE FOUR – Miscellaneous Building Regulations



   Chap. 1448.  Numbering of Buildings.



   Chap. 1450.  Permits and Fees.



   Chap. 1456.  Smoke Detectors and Fire Extinguishers.



Chapter 1448
Numbering of Buildings



1448.01   Numbering required.



1448.02   Responsibility of owners and occupants; specifications.



1448.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Subdivision Control Law - see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.



1448.01  NUMBERING REQUIRED.



   (a)   All premises shall bear a distinctive street number on the
front thereof, at or near the front entrance of said premises, in accordance
with and as designated upon the street map on file in the office of the
Building Inspector.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1448.02  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS; SPECIFICATIONS.



   The owners and occupants of all buildings in the City shall cause the
correct numbers to be placed thereon in accordance with the street map. 
Such numbers shall be not less than three inches high, shall be facing the
street and adjacent to the principal entrance, and in such position as to be
plainly visible from the street.



(Ord. 362.  Passed 3-1-94.)



1448.99  PENALTY.



   (EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for
the general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



Chapter 1450
Permits and Fees



EDITOR'S NOTE:  There are no sections in Chapter 1450.  This chapter has
been established to provide a place for cross references and any future
legislation.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Municipal building licenses and permits - see M.C.L.A. § 125.54



   Building permits - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1510 et seq.



   Inspection of building construction - see M.C.L.A. § 125.1512



   Permits for swimming pools - see M.C.L.A. § 333.12525



   General fee schedule -see ADM. Ch. 214



   Building permit fees - see ADM. 214.07(a)



   Permits for excavations - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.04



   Permits for moving of buildings - see S.U. & P.S. 1020.14



   Applications for building permits; plans required - see P. & Z. 1242.05



   Issuance of building permits - see P. & Z. 1242.06



   Building permits in RM Multiple-Family Residential Districts - see P. &
Z. 1252.04



Chapter 1456
Smoke Detectors and Fire Extinguishers



1456.01   Installation of detectors and extinguishers required; rental
unit defined.



1456.02   Location of detectors; sleeping area and owner defined.



1456.03   Use of fire detection systems as alternative.



1456.04   Approval of equipment by Fire Chief.



1456.05   Installation specifications.



1456.06   Changes in occupancy.



1456.07   Inspections.



1456.08   Supplemental standards.



1456.09   Placement of fire extinguishers.



1456.10   Use of battery-type and electric plug-in detectors.



1456.11   Responsibility of corporations and partnerships.



1456.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fire prevention fees - see ADM. 214.08



   Compliance with fire regulations required for licensing - see B. R. &
T. 802.09



   Use of fire hydrants - see S.U. & P.S. 1040.21



   Burning of garbage and rubbish - see S.U. & P.S. 1060.05(a)



   International Fire Prevention Code - see F.P. Ch. 1610



1456.01  INSTALLATION OF DETECTORS AND EXTINGUISHERS REQUIRED; RENTAL UNIT
DEFINED.



   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new and
existing rental unit within the City of Ionia to install smoke detectors in
each such rental unit as is hereinafter provided.  It shall also be the
responsibility of the owner of each new and existing rental unit in the City
of Ionia to provide fire extinguishers as is hereinafter provided.  Smoke
detectors shall be capable of sensing visible particles of combustion and
providing a suitable audible alarm thereof; further, they shall be installed
by the first day of April, in the manner hereinafter provided, and thereafter
maintained in working order in compliance with this chapter.  Failure to
install smoke detectors as is required under this chapter will subject the
owner of any such rental unit to the penalties set forth in Section 1456.99
hereof.



   (b)   As used in this chapter, "rental unit" means a residence
apartment, flat, motel room, hotel room, boarding room or boarding house, for
which consideration is paid by one person to another for use or occupancy
thereof.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.02  LOCATION OF DETECTORS; SLEEPING AREA AND OWNER DEFINED.



   (a)   At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each
sleeping area.  A sleeping area is defined as the area or areas of the
family living unit in which the bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) are separated by
other use areas (such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or
closets).  They shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the
purpose of this chapter.



   (b)   At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the head
(top) of each stairway leading up to an occupied area in such a manner as to
assure that rising smoke is not obstructed in reaching the detector and that
the detector intercepts rising smoke before it reaches the sleeping area.



   (c)   Owner is defined as the person who holds legal title to the
premises.  However, should a land contract be in existence and recorded with
the Ionia County Register of Deeds, or should an affidavit or memorandum as
to the existence of a land contract be recorded with the Ionia County
Register of Deeds, then the land contract purchaser shall be considered the
owner for purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.03  USE OF FIRE DETECTION SYSTEMS AS ALTERNATIVE.



   As an alternative to self-contained smoke detectors, an approved fire
detection system may be installed and maintained.  Each fire detection
system must be individually approved and a permit issued therefor by the Fire
Chief or his or her designee. 



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.04  APPROVAL OF EQUIPMENT BY FIRE CHIEF.



   (a)   All devices, combinations of devices and equipment required
herein must be installed in conformance with this chapter.  The Fire Chief
shall prepare a list of approved smoke detector devices and a list of
approved fire extinguisher devices and equipment, which list may be
subsequently amended by the Fire Chief as necessary.  Such approval shall be
permanent unless the Fire Chief subsequently finds that the equipment is
hazardous or unreliable, in which case the Fire Chief may suspend or revoke
approval.  The Fire Chief may, in such case, determine whether replacement
of an existing installation shall be required.  The list of approved smoke
detectors and/or fire extinguishers shall be kept at the office of the City
Clerk for the City of Ionia and at the office of the Fire Chief for the City
of Ionia and shall be made available upon request to any person if request is
made by mail or person at either office.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.05  INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS.



   (a)   As used in this section, "new" means constructed or built
after the effective date of this chapter.



   (b)   In new rental units or apartment buildings, at least one smoke
detector in each apartment or dwelling unit shall be wired directly (hard
wired) to the building's power supply.  Other smoke detectors required
hereunder may be alarms which meet the requirements of Section 1456.10.



   (c)   In existing rental units and/or apartment buildings, smoke
detectors may be hard wired or may be battery operated or powered by electric
plug if the same comply with Section 1456.10.



   (d)   In new hotels or motels, smoke detectors in hallways,
stairways, common areas and storage areas must be wired directly (hard wired)
to the building's power supply. In such individual hotel or motel sleeping
rooms, one smoke detector must be provided, either hard wired or powered in
conformance with Section 1456.10.



   (e)   In existing hotels, motels, boarding rooms or boarding houses,
smoke detectors must be provided in hallways, stairways, common areas and
storage areas.  Such smoke detectors may be wired directly (hard wired) to
the building's power supply or in conformance with Section 1456.10.  In any
existing hotel, motel, boarding house or boarding room in which the building
or any part thereof is renovated in a major renovation project (defined as a
project equal in cost to ten or more of the buildings' State equalized
value), the smoke detectors in the hallways, stairways, common areas and
storage areas shall be hard wired.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.06  CHANGES IN OCCUPANCY.



   (a)   After April 1, 1982, whenever there is a change of occupancy
in a dwelling unit in the City of Ionia, occasioned by or incidental to a
sale, lease or sublease of a rental unit, it shall be the duty of the grantor
thereof (i.e., the seller, lessor or sublessor, as the case may be) to
certify, in writing before occupancy, to the new occupant, that all smoke
detectors as required by this chapter are installed and in proper working
condition.  Failure to comply with this subsection shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor as is provided herein and shall be evidence of the negligence of
or inattention of the grantor.  This subsection shall not, however, render
any lease, contract or sublease void for failure to have certification
required hereby.



   (b)   The occupant of a rental unit shall not remove the battery
from a smoke detector or in any way put a smoke detector out of working
order.  The occupant of a rental unit shall not, upon termination or
expiration of his or her lease or rental contract, take any such detector for
his or her own use.  A landlord, upon a change of occupancy, who discovers
that a smoke detector has been tampered with in any way, or has been taken,
shall report it to the Ionia Fire Chief, upon discovery, and have him or her
witness the damage or missing detector(s).  This will be punishable as a
misdemeanor as is provided herein and shall be evidence of negligence.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.07  INSPECTIONS.



   The Fire Chief or his or her designee may, at any time, inspect any
device or installation which is required by this chapter.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.08  SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS.



   This chapter is intended to be used with and as a supplement to all
construction and fire codes in effect within the City of Ionia.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.09  PLACEMENT OF FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.



   In hotels, motels or residential hotels, all the following regulations
shall apply to the placement of fire extinguishers instead of the requirement
that a fire extinguisher be placed in each room:



   (a)   There shall be a minimum of two extinguishers per floor
located in an accessible hallway area.



   (b)   There shall be a minimum of one extinguisher for each five
rental units.



   (c)   There shall be a placement of a fire extinguisher every fifty
feet per hallway and per floor or story.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.10  USE OF BATTERY-TYPE AND ELECTRIC PLUG-IN DETECTORS.



   (a)   Battery-type smoke detectors may be used if the batteries are
mounted to assure that the following conditions are met:



      (1)   All power requirements are met for at least one year's
life, including weekly testing.



      (2)   A distinctive audible trouble signal is given before the
battery is incapable of operating (from aging, terminal corrosion, etc.) for
alarm purposes.



      (3)   For a unit employing a lock-in alarm feature, automatic
transfer is provided from alarm to a trouble condition.



      (4)   The unit is capable of producing an alarm signal for at
least four minutes at the battery voltage at which a trouble signal is
normally obtained followed by seven days of trouble signal operation.



      (5)   The audible trouble signal is produced at least once
every minute for seven consecutive days.



      (6)   The monitored batteries meeting these specifications are
clearly identified on the unit near the battery compartment.



   (b)   Electric, plug-in smoke detectors may be used and operated
from a wall plug if the plug is fitted with a plug restraining device and if
the wall outlet power supply is not controlled by a switch other than the
main power supply.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.11  RESPONSIBILITY OF CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS.



   Any officer of any corporation or any partner of any partnership found
to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to serve a jail sentence
or pay a fine as provided for in Section 1456.99.



(Ord. 287.  Passed 3-2-82.)



1456.99  PENALTY.



(EDITOR'S NOTE:  See Section 202.99 of these Codified Ordinances for the
general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)



TITLE SIX – Housing



   Chap. 1460.  International Property Maintenance Code.



Chapter 1460
International Property Maintenance Code



1460.01   2012 edition adopted; purpose.



1460.02   File and distribution copies.



1460.03   Enforcement.



1460.04   Conflicts of laws.



1460.05   Amendments.



1460.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Dilapidation of dwellings and nuisances - see CHTR. § 12.02



   State Housing Code - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 et seq.



   Municipal Housing Act - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 et seq.



   Municipal housing commissions - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.653 et seq.



   Adoption, promulgation and publication of rules - see M.C.L.A. §
125.694b



   Board of Tenant Affairs - see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.699 et seq.



   Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects - see M.C.L.A. §§
125.731 et seq.



   Hotels, boarding and lodging houses - see M.C.L.A. §§ 427.1 et seq.



1460.01  2012 EDITION ADOPTED; PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to Section 2.15 of the City Charter, the International
Property Maintenance Code, the 2012 edition, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the official Property
Maintenance Code of the City for establishing minimum legal requirements for
the maintenance of buildings, dwellings, structures and premises as therein
provided.  Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as
if fully set out in this chapter, save and except such portions as may be
hereinafter amended or repealed.



(Ord. 489.  Passed 6-7-11; Ord. 523.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1460.02  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.



   At least one copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, as
adopted in Section 1460.01, is on file with the City Clerk for inspection by
the public.



(Ord. 523.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1460.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized and
directed to administer and enforce the International Property Maintenance
Code within the corporate limits of the City.



(Ord. 523.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1460.04  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.



   (a)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in Section 1460.01,
and a provision of State law, the State law shall control.



   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in Section 1460.01,
and a provision of a local ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the
local provision shall control.



   (c)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in Section 1460.01,
and a provision of any other technical code adopted by the City by reference,
the stricter standard shall control.



(Ord. 523.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1460.05  AMENDMENTS.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in Section
1460.01, is hereby amended as follows:



   (a)   Section 101.1.  Insert:   “City of Ionia, Michigan.”



   (b)   Section 103.5.  Insert:   “Fees. The fees for activities
and services performed by the City in carrying out its responsibilities under
this Code shall be as set forth in Chapter 214 of the Administration Code of
the Codified Ordinances of the City of Ionia (the General Fee Schedule), or
as otherwise provided by Council from time to time.”



   (c)   Section 112.4.  Insert:   “Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00.”



   (d)   Section 302.4.  Insert:   “All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from grass, weeds or undergrowth higher or
longer than six inches subject to the following exceptions:



      (1)   On portions of undeveloped property behind a wooded tree
line.



      (2)   On portions of undeveloped lands more than 25 feet from
a public sidewalk or street open to the public.



      (3)   On portions of undeveloped platted lots more than 25
feet from a public sidewalk or street open to the public and from a
neighboring lot line.”



   (e)   Section 304.14.  Insert:   “During the period from April
15th to November 15th, every door, window and other outside opening required
for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for
human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be
supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch
(16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have
a self-closing device in good working order.”



   (f)   Section 602.3.  Insert:   “...shall supply heat during
the period from November 15 to April 15...”



   (g)   Section 602.4.  Insert:   “...shall be supplied with
heat during the period from November 15 to April 15...”



(Ord. 489.  Passed 6-7-11; Ord. 523.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1460.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any section of this chapter shall be considered a civil
infraction for which fines are established in Section 202.99 of these
Codified Ordinances.



(Ord. 523.  Passed 7-7-15.)



PART SIXTEEN – FIRE PREVENTION CODE



   Chap. 1610.  International Fire Prevention Code.



   Chap. 1612.  Reimbursement Fund for Fire Response.



   Chap. 1614.  Burning.



Chapter 1610
International Fire Prevention Code



1610.01   2012 edition adopted.



1610.02   Purpose.



1610.03   File and distribution copies.



1610.04   Conflicts of laws.



1610.05   Amendments.



1610.06   Limits on storage of hazardous materials.



1610.99   Penalty.



   CROSS REFERENCES



   Fires and fire protection generally - see M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et seq.



   Storage and transportation of explosives - see M.C.L.A. § 29.3a



   Arson - see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.71 et seq.



   Construction or possession of explosive devices - see M.C.L.A. §
750.211a



   Fire prevention fees - see ADM. 214.08



   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF. Ch. 692



   Compliance with fire regulations required for licensing - see B.R. & T.
802.09



   Burning of garbage and rubbish - see S.U. & P.S. 1060.05(a)



1610.01  2012 EDITION ADOPTED.



   Pursuant to Section 2.15 of the City Charter, there is hereby adopted
by and for the City the International Fire Prevention Code, being
particularly the 2012 edition thereof, including Appendix Chapters,
promulgated by International Code Council, Inc., save and except such
portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.



(Ord. 522.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1610.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in
Section 1610.01, is to establish rules and regulations for the control of
buildings, structures and premises as therein provided.



(Ord. 522.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1610.03  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.



   At least one copy of the International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted
in Section 1610.01, is on file with the City Clerk for inspection by the
public.



(Ord. 522.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1610.04  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.



   (a)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01, and a
provision of State law, the State law shall control.



   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01, and a
provision of a local ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the local
provision shall control.



   (c)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01, and a
provision of any other technical code adopted by the City by reference, the
stricter standard shall control.



(Ord. 522.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1610.05  AMENDMENTS.



   The International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01,
is hereby amended as follows:



   Section 101.1.   Insert:   “City of Ionia, Michigan.”



   Section 108.1.   Insert at the end of the Section:



            “The City’s Housing Board of Appeals shall act as
the Board of Appeals established in Section 108.1.”



   Section 109.4.   Shall be revised to read:



            “Persons who shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to the
penalty provided in Section 202.99 of the Codified Ordinances of Ionia.”



   Section 111.4.   Shall be revised to read:



            “Any person who shall continue to work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to the penalty provided in Section 202.99 of the Codified Ordinances
of Ionia.”



(Ord. 522.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1610.06  LIMITS ON STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   The limits referred to in certain sections of the International Fire
Code are hereby established as follows:



   Section 5704.2.9.6.1.   (limits in which the storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in above- ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited):
all areas which are zoned either residential or commercial.



   Section 5706.2.4.4.   (limits in which the storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in above- ground tanks is prohibited): all areas which are
zoned either residential or commercial.



   Section 6104.2.   (limits in which the storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or
congested areas):  all areas which are zoned either residential or
commercial.



(Ord. 522.  Passed 7-7-15.)



1610.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.



   A violation of any section of this chapter shall be considered a civil
infraction for which fines are established in Section 202.99 of these
Codified Ordinances.



(Ord. 522.  Passed 7-7-15.)



CHAPTER 1612
Reimbursement Fund for Fire Response



1612.01   Definitions.



1612.02   Cost summary report.



1612.03   Insurance reimbursement.



1612.04   Property fires.



1612.05   Rescue response.



1612.06   Use of monies.



1612.07   Hardships; no insurance coverage.



1612.08   Alcohol crashes.



1612.09   Hazardous materials.



1612.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings given to them herein:



   (a)   "Costs" shall mean the actual costs incurred by the Department
of Public Safety in responding to a fire incident. Costs shall include, but
not be limited to: firefighter time; foam application; hourly costs for fire
response vehicles; hourly costs for ancillary firefighting equipment; and
administrative charges such as FICA, pension, unemployment, and workmen's
compensation.



   (b)   "Effective firefighting force" shall mean the number of
personnel required under the adopted Standards of Cover for the Department of
Public Safety.



   (c)   "Fire department" shall mean the Ionia Department of Public
Safety



   (d)   "Fire response" shall mean any call for service that requires
response of fire fighting units of the Department of Public Safety.



   (e)   "Rescue" shall mean any call requiring response of the
Incident Response Unit and Jaws of Life Equipment.



   (f)   "Standard of cover" shall mean the adopted protocol and
response strategy based on a comprehensive risk assessment done by and for
the Department of Public Safety.



   (g)   "Total reflex time" shall mean the time computation beginning
with the initial call for service to the time of arrival of fire units.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.02  COST SUMMARY REPORT.



   When responding to calls for service, the Department of Public Safety
shall compile a cost summary report for each and every call based upon the
following costs:



   (a)   Per hour cost of responding vehicles;



   (b)   Per hour cost of responding members of the agency;



   (c)   Cost of hand tools and ancillary equipment based upon national
standards;



   (d)   Cost of fringe benefits such as FICA, unemployment, workmen's
compensation, pension, etc.



   (e)   Depreciation costs of any equipment; and



   (f)   Hourly fees of other costs such as administration, etc.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.03  INSURANCE REIMBURSEMENT.



   Following compilation of all fees and costs for a fire response, such
billing report shall be sent to the insurance agency for the affected
property seeking reimbursement.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.04  PROPERTY FIRES.



   In the case of property fires, the fee for response shall not exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). However, the actual costs for the run shall
become part of the fire response report and shall be used to determine actual
costs for service on a year-to-year basis.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.05  RESCUE RESPONSE.



   In the case of rescue response, the costs incurred shall be billed to
the insurance agency for the party requiring the use of such services.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.06  USE OF MONIES.



   All monies received for fire response shall be credited to the
Department of Public Safety for use in replacing equipment, foam, training,
and other department costs. It shall not be used for General Fund purposes or
miscellaneous expenses.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.07  HARDSHIPS; NO INSURANCE COVERAGE.



   (a)   The City recognizes that hardship cases and lack of or
underinsurance shall occur in responding to fires and calls for services. In
most cases, these hardships shall be directly attributable to the
unavailability of insurance coverage for losses.



   (b)   In such cases, the fire victim shall fill out a form available
at City Hall, attesting that he/she/they have no insurance and that paying a
response fee would pose a considerable and unmanageable hardship on them
given the financial loss they have incurred as a result of the incident.



   (c)   The Director shall verify that the party does not have
insurance and may issue a waiver of billing in such cases. In all cases of a
waiver, the costs shall be tallied for the yearly cost report but the pursuit
of billing shall end with the presentation to the property owner.



   (d)   All hardship costs shall be borne by the municipality in which
the property is located and shall be taken from the General Fund of the unit.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.08  ALCOHOL CRASHES.



   In the case of vehicular accidents in excess of the legal limits for
alcohol, and upon conviction of the alcohol related offense, all associated
costs of the Department of Public Safety shall be billed to the party
involved. In such cases, if the party does not pay the associated costs, they
shall be forwarded to the court having jurisdiction for restitution as part
of any legal settlement.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



1612.09  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   In the case of any call to respond to a hazardous materials call, the
party causing such release shall sign a "Notice of Liability" form that shall
require all associated response costs to be paid. In no case shall a waiver
be granted for hazardous material response. Included in costs are the costs
of the Department of Public Safety, Emergency Management (City and/or
County), mutual aid departments, and any professional agency required to
contain and clear the incident.  Failure to pay the liability may result in
prosecution both criminally and civilly for the response.



(Ord. 03-2004-01.  Passed 7-6-04.)



CHAPTER 1614
Burning



1614.01   Prohibition.



1614.02   Burning of waste products.



1614.03   Recreational fire.



1614.99   Penalty.



1614.01  PROHIBITION.



   Outdoor burning in the City not specifically authorized by this chapter
is prohibited.



(Ord. 505.  Passed 8-6-13.)



1614.02  BURNING OF WASTE PRODUCTS.



   The outdoor burning of trash, leaves, building materials, tires and
petroleum products within the City is prohibited.



(Ord. 505.  Passed 8-6-13.)



1614.03  RECREATIONAL FIRE.



   These regulations apply to recreational fires in the City:



   (a)   Cooking fires, camp fires and recreational fires are
permitted.  All such fires must be contained within in area four feet or
less in diameter and three feet or less in height in a fire pit, in an above
ground commercially manufactured fire receptacle or in a masonry fireplace
made for outdoor burning.



   (b)   No burning is allowed from 1:00 am to 6:00 am.



   (c)   Except for the use of receptacles or fireplaces described in
division (a), any burning shall occur at least 25 feet from an existing
structure and property line and shall be at the rear of any property, away
from any street and sidewalk.  In the event the dimensions of a lot are such
that they will not permit compliance with this requirement, then the burning
shall occur as close to the center of the property as is practicable behind
the dwelling, an equal distance from the property line and the building.



   (d)   All burning shall occur under the supervision of an adult who
shall remain present at the fire and shall at all times be responsible for
controlling the fire and insuring that neither life nor property is
endangered.



   (e)   No burning shall be permitted nor be allowed to continue where
wind conditions exceed ten miles per hour or in any case where wind
conditions create or are likely to create a nuisance or endanger persons or
the property of anyone.



   (f)   A fire which endangers or becomes offensive to other persons
or harmful to their property is a nuisance and shall promptly be extinguished.



(Ord. 505.  Passed 8-6-13.)



1614.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any section of this chapter shall be considered a civil
infraction for which fines are established in Section 202.99 of these
Codified Ordinances.



(Ord. 505.  Passed 8-6-13.)


