CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF IRON MOUNTAIN, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
IRON MOUNTAIN, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Edward Koerschner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ann Roberts 
Bill Wiegele 
Richard Rahoi 
James Petroff 
William Calcari 
City Council 
____________ 
James A. Urbany 
City Manager 
____________ 
John Mouw 
Gerald Pirkola 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lou Ann Hagen 
City Clerk-Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Paul, Supervising Editor, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Lou Ann Hagen, City Clerk-Treasurer, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan. 1996. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE OF 7-1-96 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Iron Mountain, Michigan" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 4, 1995, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 4, 1995, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective July 31, 1996. 
    Passed and adopted by the city council this 1st day of July, 1996. 
/s/  John C. O'Donnell      
Mayor 
/s/  Lou Ann Hagen      
Clerk-Treasurer 
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the council of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan, held on the 1st day of July, 1996. 
/s/  Lou Ann Hagen      
Clerk-Treasurer 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. Date Include/Omit Supp. No.  7-16-09 Include 28  2-26-10 Omit 28  4- 5-10 Include 28  4-16-10 Include 28  6-17-10 Include 28  7- 2-10 Include 28 12- 3-10 Include 28  6- 6-11 Include 28 11- 3-09(Char.) Include 29  7- 5-11 Include 29 11- 7-11 Include 29  2- 6-12(1) Include 29  2- 6-12(2) Omit 29  3- 7-12 Omit 29  3-19-12 Include 29  5-21-12(1) Include 29  5-21-12(2) Include 29  6- 4-12 Include 29 11-29-12 Include 29  7-15-13 Include 29  9- 3-13 Include 29 11-18-13(1) Include 30 11-18-13(2) Omit 30  3-17-14 Include 30  5- 5-14 Include 31 10- 1-14 Include 31 10-20-14 Include 31  1- 7-15 Include 32  7-20-15 Include 32 12- 5-16(1) Include 33 12- 5-16(2) Include 33  3- 6-17(1) Include 33  3- 6-17(2) Include 33  3-29-17 Include 33  9-18-17 Include 34 11- 6-17 Include 34 11-20-17(Res.) Include 34 11-20-17 Include 34  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Iron Mountain, as adopted by the electorate on October 22, 1985, and effective on March 3, 1986. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, generally, MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.; power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Iron Mountain, in order to perfect a city government which shall ensure economical and efficient administration of city affairs, provide for the security of persons and property, promote the welfare and the happiness of its people, conserve and utilize public resources, encourage cooperation among cities of the State, and preserve by the proper use thereof, the privilege of local self-government subject to the Constitution and the laws of the state, do ordain and establish this Charter for the City of Iron Mountain, County of Dickinson, State of Michigan. 
CHAPTER I. - BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.1. - Corporate; generally. 
    The body corporate of the City of Iron Mountain shall include all territory constituting the City of Iron Mountain on the effective date of this Charter [March 3, 1986], together with all territories that may be annexed thereto and less any detachments therefrom that may be made in a manner prescribed by law. 
Sec. 1.2. - Wards. 
    The City of Iron Mountain shall consist of three (3) wards, which shall remain so unless changed by Charter amendment. The boundaries of said wards are described as part of the transitional document of this commission and which shall remain in effect until such time as they may be changed by the action of the city clerk and the council in a manner prescribed by law. 
Sec. 1.3. - Map; description. 
    The Clerk of the City of Iron Mountain shall maintain in his/her office for public inspection, a map of and a description of the boundaries of the city and each and every city ward. 
CHAPTER II. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Sec. 2.1. - Enumeration under state law and constitution not exclusive. 
    The City of Iron Mountain, as its limits now are or hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate, and shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. In no case shall any enumeration of particular powers or immunities in this Charter be held to be exclusive. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3), MSA 5.2083(3). 
Sec. 2.2. - Intergovernmental relations. 
    The City of Iron Mountain may join with any municipal corporation or with any agency of government, whether local, state or federal, or with any number of or combination of, by contract or otherwise as may be permitted by law, in the ownership, operation, or performance of, jointly or by one or more in behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately. 
State Law reference- Authority to enter into intergovernmental contracts, MCL 124.1 et seq., MSA 5.4081 et seq. 
Sec. 2.3. - Exercise of power. 
    Where no procedure is set forth in this Charter for the exercise of any power granted to or possessed by the city and its officers, resort may be had to any procedure set forth in any statute of the State of Michigan which was passed for the government of cities, or in any other statute of the State of Michigan. If alternate procedures are to be found in different statutes, then the council shall select that procedure which it deems to be most expeditious and to the best advantage of the city and its inhabitants. Where no procedure for the exercise of any power of the city is set forth, either in this Charter or in any statute of the State of Michigan, the council shall prescribe by ordinance a reasonable procedure for the exercise thereof. 
CHAPTER III. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Qualifications of electors. 
    The residents of the city having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan shall be eligible to vote in the city. 
Sec. 3.2. - Election procedure. 
    The general election laws shall apply to and control all procedures relating to city elections, including qualification of electors, establishment of precincts, verification of petitions, registration of voters, and voting hours. The clerk shall give public notice of each city election in the same manner as is required by law for the giving of public notice of general elections in the state. 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq. 
Sec. 3.3. - Precincts. 
    The Council and City Clerk shall establish and alter the election precincts of the city in accordance with the procedure prescribed by statutes. 
State Law reference- Election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq., MSA 6.1654 et seq. 
Sec. 3.4. - Election commission. 
    An election commission is hereby created. The commission shall consist of the City Clerk, Assessor, and City Attorney. The Clerk shall be chairperson. The commission shall have charge of all activities and exercise all duties required of it by state law and this Charter relating to the administration of elections in the city. The commission shall establish rules and regulations, not inconsistent with state statutes and/or this Charter, for the most efficient administration of city elections. The commission shall establish, and recommend for Council approval, the compensation of election personnel. 
State Law reference- Board of city election commissioners, MCL 168.25, MSA 6.1025. 
Sec. 3.5. - Conduct of elections. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the provisions of the general election laws of the State of Michigan shall apply to elections held under this Charter. All elections provided for by the Charter shall be conducted by the election commission established by law. For the conduct of city elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in cases of doubt or fraud, the council shall adopt by ordinance all regulations which it considers desirable, consistent with law and this Charter, and the election commission may adopt, and if they adopt shall publicize, further regulations consistent with law and this Charter and the regulations of the council. 
Sec. 3.5.[1.] - Regular elections. 
    A regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November each year or on the same date as state and federal elections are held, should such date be changed. 
Sec. 3.6. - Special elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the City Council at least sixty (60) days in advance of such election, or when required by law. Any resolution calling a special city election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
State Law reference- Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639, MSA 6.1631, 6.1639. 
Sec. 3.7. - Elective officers and terms of office. 
    There shall be a city council of seven (7) members; four (4) shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large, and one (1) shall be elected by the qualified voters of each of the three (3) wards. Beginning with the general election commencing in the year 2013, the four (4) councilmen elected at large shall serve for a period of two (2) years beginning at the first regular meeting of the city council following their election. The three (3) councilmen elected from each of the three (3) wards shall serve for a period of four (4) years, beginning at the first regular meeting of the city council following their election. Thereafter, all councilmen shall be elected to four (4) year, staggered terms, beginning at the first regular meeting of the city council following their election. 
(Am'd. by electors, November 7, 2000; am'd. by electors, November 3, 2009) 
Sec. 3.8. - Nominations procedure. 
    The candidates for elective office shall be nominated by petitions, the blanks for which shall be furnished by the Clerk. The candidate may use his own petition blanks, providing they conform substantially with state statutes. Each such petition shall be signed by not less than twenty-five (25) for ward candidacy and not less than fifty (50) for at-large candidacy. Petitions shall contain only signatures of registered electors of the city. Nominating petitions shall be filed at the clerk's office by 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday preceding the August primary election, which will be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in August. 
    Each elector signing shall add his residential street and number and the date of signature. No electors shall sign petitions for more candidates for any office than the number to be elected to such office, and should he do so, the signatures bearing the most recent date shall be invalidated, and if he should sign more than one on the same date, neither shall be validated. No petition shall be left for signatures in any public place unless accompanied by the circulator of the petition. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. 
(Res. of 11-20-17) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for nominations of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b), MSA 5.2073(b). 
Sec. 3.9. - Approval of petitions. 
    The Clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform substantially with the forms provided by him and which contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for the respective elective city offices as set forth in this Charter. The Clerk shall forthwith after the filing of the petitions notify in writing any candidates whose petition is then known not to meet the requirement of this section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements. 
    Withdrawal of a candidate's name from consideration on the ballot must be made in writing and in conformance with the time allowed by statute. 
Sec. 3.10. - Form of ballot. 
    The ballots for all elections under this Charter shall conform to the printing and numbering of ballots as required by statute, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear on any city ballot. 
State Law reference- Arrangement of ballot, MCL 168.706, MSA 6.1706. 
Sec. 3.11. - Canvass of votes. 
    The Board of Canvassers designated by statute as being permitted to cities for canvass of votes on candidates and issues shall canvass the votes of all city elections in accordance with statute. 
State Law reference- Canvass of returns, MCL 168.323, MSA 6.1323. 
Sec. 3.12. - Tie vote. 
    If in any city election there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two (2) or more candidates having received an equal number of votes, then the determination of the election of such candidate by lot will be as provided by state statute. 
State Law reference- Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851, 168.852, MSA 6.1851, 6.1852. 
Sec. 3.13. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office, or upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq., MSA 6.1861 et seq. 
Sec. 3.14. - Recall. 
    Any elective official may be removed from office by the electors of the city in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by the recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by state law. 
CHAPTER IV. - ELECTIVE CITY OFFICERS; CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 4.1. - Elective officers. 
    The legislative power of the city, except as reserved by this Charter, shall be vested in a council consisting of seven (7) councilmen with four (4) being elected at large from the City and three (3) being elected from wards - one (1) from each of the three (3) wards. The Council shall have the power and authority to adopt such ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise of its powers. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Sec. 4.2. - Qualifications. 
    Each elective city official must be a duly registered elector in the city, and shall have been a resident of the city for six (6) months immediately prior to the election at which he is a candidate for office. 
Sec. 4.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An amendment passed November 7, 2000, repealed § 4.3 which pertained to term of office and derived from the original Charter, adopted Oct. 22, 1985. 
Sec. 4.4. - Notice of election. 
    Notice of the election of any officer of the city shall be given him by the Clerk, in writing, within seven (7) days after the canvass of the vote by which he was elected. If within ten (10) days from the date of notice, such officer shall not take, subscribe, and file with the Clerk his oath of office, such neglect shall be deemed a refusal to serve and the office shall thereupon be deemed vacant, unless the council shall, for good cause, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
Sec. 4.5. - Oath of office. 
    Each elective or appointive officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of this office and within the time specified in this Charter, shall take and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed by the state constitution, which shall be filed and kept in the office of the Clerk. 
Sec. 4.6. - Surety bonds. 
    Any city officer may be required to give a bond to be approved by the Council for the faithful performance of the duties of his office in such sum as the Council shall determine, but all officers receiving or disbursing city funds shall be bonded. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. All official bonds shall be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer, except that of the Clerk/Treasurer, which shall be filed with the Chief Accounting Officer or other officer designated by the Council. 
Sec. 4.7. - Vacancy defined. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, a vacancy shall be deemed to exist in any elective office on the day when the officer dies, files his resignation with the City Clerk, is removed from office, moves from the City, is convicted of a felony, or of misconduct in office under the Charter, is judicially declared to be mentally incompetent, or is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the Council, unless excused by the Council for cause to be stated in the record of the Council proceedings. If at any time the membership of the Council is reduced to less than four (4), the remaining members may, by majority action, appoint additional members to raise the membership to four (4). Vacancies which occur shall be advertised and applicants shall apply in writing to the City Clerk. 
Sec. 4.8. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, any vacancy occurring in any elective office shall be filled, by the concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the Council, within thirty (30) days after such vacancy shall have occurred. The person appointed by the Council shall serve until the next general city election. 
(b)  If a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, it shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. In the case of members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term. 
Sec. 4.9. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No Councilman may hold any other city office or city employment while actively fulfilling the term for which he was elected to the Council, and no former Councilman or mayor shall hold any compensated, appointive city office until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected to the Council or to office; it is the intent of this provision that no former Councilman or mayor shall be appointed as City Manager, City Clerk/Treasurer, Chief Accounting Officer, City Assessor, or any other appointive city administrative office until one (1) year after the term to which he was elected has expired. The terms of this provision shall not apply to appointed city boards or commissions. 
(b)  Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the Manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(c)  Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the Council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(d)  No incumbent elective city officers shall become a candidate for any elective city office, except to succeed himself, without first resigning from his then incumbent elective city office. Provided, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to any incumbent elective city officer whose term of office will expire with the election at which he is to be a candidate for another elective city office. No appointive city officer or employee shall seek an elective office of the city unless he resigns from his position with the city. 
(e)  No member of the Council or of any board or commission of the city shall vote on any issue or matter in which he or a member of his family shall have a proprietary or financial interest or as the result of which he may receive or gain a financial benefit. If a question is raised under this section at any Council, board or commission meetings, such specific question shall be resolved before the main question shall be voted on, but the Council, board or commission member concerning whom the question was raised shall not vote on such determination. 
(f)  Unless the Council shall be an affirmative vote of seven (7) members, which vote shall be recorded as part of the official proceedings, determine that the best interests of the city shall be served, the following relatives of any elective or appointive office are disqualified from holding any appointive office or city employment during the term for which said elective or appointive officer was elected or appointed: Spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-sister, or the spouse of any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are appointive officers of employees of the city at the time of the election or appointment of said official or employed by the city at the time of adoption of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.10. - Compensation for councilmen. 
(a)  The Councilmen shall receive ten dollars ($10.00) per meeting up to a maximum of five hundred ($500.00) dollars in total remuneration per year. The mayor shall receive an additional one hundred twenty-five ($125.00) dollars per year. Such compensation shall be paid quarterly, or more often as the Council directs, and shall be the only compensation which may be paid Councilmen for the discharge of any official duties as a Councilman for or on behalf of the city during their tenure in office, except that they may be reimbursed for necessary expenses actually incurred by them on city business. Such reimbursement must be approved by Council. The Council may establish and provide in advance, a per diem rate to meet basic expenses. Whenever timely, requests for travel should be submitted for Council approval in advance. 
(b)  Provisions of this section shall not be subject to review by a compensation commission. 
Sec. 4.11. - Judge qualifications of members. 
    The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and of the grounds of forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require production of evidence. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in one (1) or more newspapers for general circulation in the City at least one (1) week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the Council under this section shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Sec. 4.12. - Organization of the council; mayor and mayor pro tem. 
    The Council at its first meeting following each regular city election shall elect one (1) of its members as mayor and one (1) mayor pro tem by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members, and who shall serve for two (2) years or until their successors are elected. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council, shall speak and vote at such meetings as any other Council member, shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and for purposes of military law, but shall have no administrative duties. The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election of mayor, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Sec. 4.13. - Regular meetings of the council. 
    Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each calendar month at the usual place of holding meetings of the Council. If any time set by resolution of the Council for the holding of a regular meeting of the Council shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held on the next following secular day which is not a holiday or on such other day as may be set by the Council. 
Sec. 4.14. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the Council may be called by the clerk on the written request of the mayor or any two (2) members of the Council or the City Manager upon eighteen (18) hours' written notice to each member of the Council. The written notice shall designate the purpose of such meeting. 
Sec. 4.15. - Business at special meetings. 
    No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. 
Sec. 4.16. - Meetings to be public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and the rules of order of the Council shall provide that the citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such meeting on matters within the jurisdiction of the Council. 
Sec. 4.17. - Quorum and vote required. 
    Four (4) members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business, but in the absence of a quorum, two (2) or more members may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a later date. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or passed except by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the Council. 
Sec. 4.18. - Rules of order. 
    The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a written or printed journal of all its proceedings, which shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" and "No" votes and entered upon the record, except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state in such record. Each member of the council, who shall be recorded as present at any meeting shall be required to vote on all questions decided by the Council at such meeting, unless excused by four (4) of the members present or in any case, where the matter personally affects the member not voting. A member not excused can be considered in violation of this Charter when so determined by the Council. 
Sec. 4.19. - Investigations. 
    The Council or its duly appointed representatives may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence to conduct formal investigation into the conduct of any department, office, or officer of the city and make investigations as to irregularities in municipal affairs. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, paper, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. The council shall give a reasonable time for such action. 
Sec. 4.20. - Printing of council proceedings. 
    The minutes of the Council shall be printed and made available for public inspection within five (5) days after the passage thereof. A synopsis of such minutes, prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Mayor, showing the substance of each separate proceeding of the council shall be a sufficient compliance with the requirements of this section. 
Sec. 4.21. - Depository of city funds. 
    The council shall select annually one (1) or more depositories in which the funds of the city shall be deposited. Additions may be made at the discretion of the Council during the year. 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12, MSA 3.752; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b, MSA 7.86. 
Sec. 4.22. - Licenses. 
    The Council shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked; and may require an exact payment of such reasonable sums for any licenses as it may deem proper. 
Sec. 4.23. - Rights as to property. 
    The Council shall have the power to acquire for the city by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or otherwise, either within or without its corporate limits, and either within or without the County of Dickinson, private property, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, whether herein specifically mentioned or not; and shall have the power to maintain and operate the same to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
Sec. 4.24. - Trusts. 
    The Council may, in its discretion receive and hold any property in trust for cemetery, park, or other municipal purposes. Any trust now existing for the benefit of the City of Iron Mountain shall be continued to full force and in accordance with state statutes (cy pres doctrine). 
Sec. 4.25. - Traffic violations bureau. 
    The Council shall have the power and authority to establish by ordinance a Traffic Violations Bureau, as provided by law, for the handling of such violations of ordinances and regulations of the city, or parts thereof, as prescribed in the ordinance establishing such bureau. The creation of such a bureau shall not operate as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court, should a person so choose. 
Sec. 4.26. - Advisory committees or boards. 
    The mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council may, from time to time, appoint such committees or boards, not to include Councilmen, as are deemed appropriate to advise and consult with them, and with appropriate departments, regarding any municipal activity. Such committees or boards shall be advisory, serve temporarily and without compensation unless otherwise provided by the city council. 
Sec. 4.27. - Further functions and duties of the council. 
    The Council shall determine all matters of policy of the city and adopt ordinances and necessary rules and regulations to make the same effective. Further the Council shall, subject to the limitations of the law, raise revenues and make appropriations for the operation of the City Government, provide for the public peace and health and safety of persons and property. 
CHAPTER V. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 5.1. - Prior legislation. 
    All valid ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Iron Mountain which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and in effect on the effective date of this Charter [March 3, 1986] shall continue in full force and effect. Those provisions of any effective, valid ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 5.2. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the City Council shall be by ordinance which: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter or abolish any city department, office or agency; 
(2)  Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed; 
(3)  Levy taxes, except as otherwise provided in chapter VIII [of this Charter], with respect to the property tax levied by adoption of the budget; 
(4)  Grant, renew or extend a franchise; 
(5)  Regulate the rate charged for its services by a public utility; 
(6)  Authorize the borrowing of money; 
(7)  Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the city; 
(8)  Adopt with or without amendment ordinances proposed under the initiative power; and 
(9)  Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise provided in chapter VI [of this Charter] with respect to repeal of ordinances reconsidered under the referendum power. 
    Acts other than those referred to in this section may be done either by ordinance or by resolution. 
Sec. 5.3. - Ordinances in general. 
(a)  Form. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The City of Iron Mountain hereby ordains...." Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance or part of the city Code shall set out in full the ordinance, sections or subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall indicate matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type and shall indicate new matter by underscoring or by italics. 
(b)  Procedure. An ordinance may be introduced by any member at any regular or special meeting of the Council. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy to each Councilmember and to the Manager, shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the City Clerk and such other public places as the Council may designate, and shall publish the ordinance together with a notice setting out the time and place for a public hearing thereon and for its consideration by the Council. The public hearing shall follow the publication by at least seven days, may be held separately or in connection with a regular or special Council meeting and may be adjourned from time to time; all persons interested shall have an opportunity to be heard. After the hearing the Council may adopt the ordinance with or without amendment or reject it but, if it is amended as to any matter of substance, the Council may not adopt it until the ordinance or its amended sections have been subjected to all the procedures hereinbefore required in the case of a newly introduced ordinance. As soon as practicable after adoption of any ordinance, the Clerk shall have it published again together with a notice of its adoption. 
(c)  Effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, every adopted ordinance shall become effective at the expiration of 30 days after adoption or at any later date specified therein. 
(d)  Publication. As used in this section, the term "publish" means to print in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city: (1) the ordinance or a brief summary thereof, and (2) the places where copies of it have been filed and the times when they are available for public inspection. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Sec. 5.4. - Emergency ordinances. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, may not grant, renew or extend a franchise, may not regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services or may not authorize the borrowing of money except as provided in chapter X [of this Charter]. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least five members shall be required for adoption. After its adoption the ordinances shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance except one made pursuant to subsection 5.4 shall automatically stand repealed as of the 61st day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 5.5. - Codes of technical regulations. 
    The Council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such an adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(a)  The requirements of section 5.3 for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of the code of technical regulations as well as of the adopting ordinance; and 
(b)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations as well as of the adopting ordinance shall be authenticated and recorded by the City Clerk pursuant to subsection 5.6. 
Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 5.6. - Authentication and recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  Authentication and recording. The City Clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council. 
(b)  Codification. Within three years after adoption of this Charter and at least every ten years thereafter, the Council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all city ordinances and resolutions having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the Council by ordinance and shall be published promptly in bound or looseleaf form, together with this Charter and any amendments thereto, pertinent provisions of the constitution and other laws of the State of Michigan, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the Council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the Iron Mountain City Code. Copies of the code shall be furnished to city officers, placed in libraries and public offices for free public reference and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price fixed by the Council. 
(c)  Printing of ordinances and resolutions. The Council shall cause each ordinance and resolution having the force and effect of law and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances, resolutions and Charter amendments shall be distributed or sold to the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the Council. Following publication of the first Iron Mountain City Code and at all times thereafter, the ordinances, resolutions and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for integration therein. The Council shall make such further arrangements as it deems desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to the provisions of the constitution and other laws of the State of Michigan, or the codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
CHAPTER VI. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

Sec. 6.1. - General authority. 
(a)  Initiative. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances to the Council and, if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of city officers or employees. 
(b)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the city shall have [the] power to require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinances and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
Sec. 6.2. - Commencement of proceedings; petitioners' committee; affidavit. 
    Any five qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be considered. 
    Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
Sec. 6.3. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least 15 percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election. 
(b)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing and date of signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within 30 days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
Sec. 6.4. - Procedure after filing. 
(a)  Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty days after the petition is filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the Clerk within two days after receiving the copy of his certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of section 6.03 [of this section], and within five days after it is filed the Clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request council review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the Clerk shall promptly present his certificate to the council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the council. The council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Sec. 6.5. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or 
(3)  The council repeals the ordinance; or 
(4)  Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the city on the ordinance. 
Sec. 6.6. - Action on petitions. 
(a)  Action by council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Section 5.3 [of this Charter] or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within 60 days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within 30 days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the city. 
(b)  Submission to voters. The vote of the city of a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than 30 days and not later than one year from the date of the final council vote thereon. If no regular city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the Council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city by filing with the city clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
Sec. 6.7. - Results of election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
CHAPTER VII. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 

Sec. 7.1. - Administrative officers. 
(a)  The administrative officers of the city shall be a City Manager, Clerk/Treasurer, Chief Accounting Officer, and City Assessor. They shall subscribe to the constitutional oath of office and be citizens of the United States. The Clerk/Treasurer, Chief Accounting Officer, and City Assessor shall be appointed by the Manager and confirmed by the Council. Their compensation shall be set by the Council upon the recommendation of the Manager. 
(b)  The Council may, by ordinance, create additional administrative offices; and may, by resolution, combine or in any other way alter any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city. 
(c)  In addition, the Council may, by resolution, provide administrative services or offices by contractual agreement. 
Sec. 7.2. - City manager. 
(a)  Appointment; qualifications; compensation. The Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his compensation. The City Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the City or State at the time of appointment; however, residency must be established within the city limits within ninety (90) days of Council appointment or upon completion of a probationary period if applicable. 
(b)  [ Vacancy. ] The Council shall appoint a City Manager within one hundred twenty (120) days after any vacancy exists in the position, or they may appoint an acting manager during the period of a vacancy in the office. 
(d)[(c)]  Acting city manager. By letter filed with the City Clerk the Manager shall designate, subject to approval of the Council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of Manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the Manager shall return or his disability shall cease. 
Sec. 7.3. - Removal. 
    The Council may remove the Manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the Manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the Manager. 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the Manager, he may file with the Council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a Council meeting not earlier than fifteen days nor later than thirty days after the request is filed. The Manager may file with the Council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing. 
(3)  The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the Manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested one. 
The Manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the Manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
Sec. 7.3.[7.3.1.] - Powers and duties. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  He shall have the power to suspend from employment any city employee. 
(b)  He shall have the power to permanently remove from employment any city employee that did not require Council confirmation to hire. 
(c)  He shall recommend for Council approval, the permanent removal of a city employee that required Council confirmation to hire. 
(d)  He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or bylaw. 
(e)  He shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(f)  He shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(g)  He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the Council. 
(h)  He shall submit to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(i)  He shall make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(j)  He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such requirements to the Council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(k)  He shall prohibit the use of city-owned properties, facilities, or services except for authorized city operations and agreements with intergovernmental agencies. (It is not the intent of this section to prohibit assistance to, or cooperation with, community oriented, nonprofit, or charitable groups, agencies, projects; however, exceptions to this section must be approved by Council.) 
(l)  He shall provide an annual inventory of all city-owned properties complete with description and documentation for presentation annually to the Council. 
(m)  He shall implement a system of purchasing by approved purchase order. 
(n)  He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the Council. 
Sec. 7.4. - City clerk-treasurer. 
(a)  The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the clerk and clerical officer of the Council and shall keep its journal. He shall keep a record of all actions of the Council at its regular and special meetings. He shall certify all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council. 
(b)  The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the power to administer all oaths required by law and by the ordinances of the city. He shall be the custodian of the city seal, and shall affix the same to documents required to be sealed. He shall be the custodian of all papers, the treasurer's bond, documents, and records pertaining to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided by this chapter. He shall give the proper officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts, or agreements to which the city is a part and he shall notify the Council of the failure of any officer or employee required to take an oath of office or furnish any bond required by law. 
(c)  The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the city, the clerk's bond, and all evidences of value or indebtedness belonging to or held in trust by the city. He shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine, and shall report the same to the City Manager and Council. 
(d)  The Clerk-Treasurer shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district, and city taxes and monies as are provided by law. 
(e)  The Clerk-Treasurer may recommend for appointment and removal his deputy or deputies subject to approval by the Manager and Council. 
(f)  He shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as may [be] required of him by law, the ordinances and resolutions of the Council, or by [the] City Manager. 
Sec. 7.5. - City assessor. 
    The Assessor shall possess all the power vested in and shall be charged with the duties imposed upon assessing officers by law. He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by law or ordinances of the city. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or the ordinances of the city, or by the City Manager. 
Sec. 7.6. - City attorney. 
(a)  The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Manager and confirmed by the Council, and shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the Council and have his compensation fixed by the Council. 
(b)  The City Attorney shall act as legal advisor of and be responsible to the Council. He shall advise the City Manager concerning legal problems affecting the city administration and any officer or department head of the city in manners relating to his official duties when so requested in writing, and shall file with the clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(c)  [The City Attorney shall] prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent the city in cases before the courts and other tribunals. 
(d)  [The City Attorney shall] prepare or review all ordinances, regulations, deeds, contracts, bonds, and such other instruments as may be required by this Charter or by the Council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(e)  [The City Attorney shall] attend all regular Council meetings, and upon request by the Council, shall attend special meetings. 
(f)  He shall defend all officers and employees in all actions arising out of the performance of their official duties as directed by the Council. 
(g)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, the City Manager, or the Council. 
(h)  Upon the attorney's recommendation, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist the City Attorney. 
Sec. 7.7. - Chief financial officer. 
(a)  The finance officer shall be the general accountant of the city, shall keep the books of account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of the city, and shall keep the Council and City Manager informed as to the financial affairs of the city. The system of accounts of the city shall conform to such uniform systems as may be required by law. 
(b)  He shall balance all the books of account of the city at the end of each calendar month, and he shall make a report thereon, as soon as practical, to the City Manager. He shall, upon direction of the City Manager, examine and audit all books of account kept by any official or department of the city. 
(c)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, the City Manager, or the Council. 
Sec. 7.8. - Additional administrative powers and duties. 
    The Council shall by ordinance establish departments of city government and determine and prescribe the functions and duties of each department. In addition, the Council may combine, or in any other way alter, city departments when deemed to be in the best interests of the city. Upon recommendation of the City Manager, the Council may by ordinance prescribe additional powers and duties and diminish any powers and duties in a manner not inconsistent with this Charter to be exercised and administered by appropriate officials and departments of the city. 
Sec. 7.9. - City planning. 
(a)  There shall be a city planning commission consisting of five (5) members appointed by the Council for terms of three years from among the qualified voters of the city. The first appointed commission under this Charter shall consist of [two] (2) terms of one (1) year each; two (2) of two (2) years each; and one (1) term [of three] (3) years. Members of the commission shall hold no other city office. The commission [shall make] recommendations to the City Manager and the City Council on all matters affecting the physical development of the city, [and] shall be consulted on the comprehensive plan the implementation thereof. The Council shall advertise publicly for candidates for this commission. 
(b)  Responsibilities [of the city planning commission are as follows]: 
(1)  To advise the City Manager on any matter affecting the physical development of the city; 
(2)  To formulate and recommend to the City Manager a comprehensive plan and modifications thereof; 
(3)  To review and make recommendations regarding proposed Council action implementing the comprehensive plan pursuant to section 6.04 [6.4 of this Charter]; 
(4)  And other responsibilities as required by law. 
(Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 7.10. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The Council shall by ordinance establish a board of adjustment, consisting of three (3) members and three (3)-year terms. The first board established under this Charter shall consist of one (1) one-year term; one (1) two-year term; and one (1) three-year term. The Council shall provide standards and procedures for such board to hear and determine appeals from administrative decisions, petitions for variances in the case of peculiar and unusual circumstances which would prevent the reasonable use of land and such other matters as may be required by the Council or by law. The Council shall advertise publicly for candidates for this board. 
Sec. 7.11. - Civil service. 
(a)  Application and purpose. [This section is] applicable to all employees of the city except elected or appointed administrative officers, firemen, and police officer[s]. The purpose of this section is to guarantee equal opportunity of employment by the city of all qualified citizens of the city. Employment shall be determined by a competitive examination, free of any and all discrimination. 
(b)  The commission. Within 60 days after the adoption of this Charter, the Council of the City of Iron Mountain shall have created a Civil Service Commission consisting of five (5) qualified citizens of Iron Mountain who shall be appointed in the following manner: 
a.  Two (2) members appointed by the City Council. 
b.  Two (2) members appointed by the concerned employees of the City. 
c.  One (1) member appointed by the joint action of the City Council and the employees. 
One member of (a)[a.] and one member of (b)[b.] shall be appointed to serve for a period of two (2) years and the remaining members of (a)[a.] and (b)[b.] shall be appointed to serve for a period of one (1) year. The (c)[c.] member of the Commission shall be appointed to serve for a period of three (3) years. All appointments shall be for a period of three (3) years following the expiration of original appointment periods. Time of service shall commence upon the date of the appointment. The five (5) member Commission shall elect one of their members to serve as Commission President. The elected president shall serve in said capacity for a period of one (1) year. No person shall be appointed a member of the Civil Service Commission who is not a citizen of the United States and who has not been a registered voter in Iron Mountain for a minimum of one (1) year immediately preceding appointment. No Commissioner shall hold any other position with the City of Iron Mountain. In the event that any Commissioner of the Civil Service Commission shall cease to be a member thereof, by virtue of death, retirement, removal or any other cause, a new Commissioner shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term of said Commissioner within 15 days after the said Commissioner shall have ceased to be a member of the Commission. Such an appointment shall be made in the same procedure as had been followed in the original appointment. The City Manager may at any time remove any Commissioner for incompetency, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office or any other good cause, which shall be stated in writing and made a part of the records of the Commission, provided, however, that if the City Manager finds it necessary to remove any Commissioner, such removal shall be temporary and shall be in effect for a period of ten (10) days. Within the said ten (10)-day period, the City Manager shall file in the office of the City Clerk, a statement setting forth in full, the reason for such removal and requesting confirmation by the majority of the members of the City Council, of his/her action in so removing said Commissioner. A copy of said statement in writing shall be served upon the Commissioner so removed, simultaneously with its filing with the City Clerk. The Council shall meet in regular or special session for the purpose of hearing and deciding upon the said reasons for removal. They shall confirm or deny the removal of the Commissioner. In the event that the City Manager shall fail to file his written statement of cause for removal within ten (10) days of the removal of the Commissioner, said Commissioner shall resume his position as a member of the Civil Service Commission. The City Clerk shall be "ex officio" Clerk of the Civil Service Commission and shall provide, without extra compensation, all necessary clerical and stenographic services for the Civil Service Commission. 
(c)  Employment and promotion. Appointments to positions in all of the Departments of the City, which are subject to this Civil Service Section, shall be made only according to qualifications to be ascertained by competitive examinations. The City Civil Service Commission shall schedule and carry out competitive examinations for all candidates for employment by the City of Iron Mountain. Candidates who successfully pass such examinations shall be certified on a priority listing for employment beginning with the highest competitive score and terminating with the lowest passing score. Certification shall end on the 3rd anniversary of having passed a competitive examination and any replacement of a candidate on the certified applicant listing shall be determined by a competitive reexamination. All applicants participating in competitive examination to establish certification for employment must have reached his/her 18th birthday before being so certified. Although not required for certification, a prospective employee must pass a physical examination, prior to actual employment, to verify ability to perform the job requirements. The Civil Service Commission shall make rules and regulations providing for examinations for positions in all departments subject to this section and for promotion therein. Due notice of the contents of such rules and regulations and any modification thereof shall be given by mail to appointing officers affected. Such original appointments to any position in any City department covered by this section shall be for a probationary period of six (6) months, provided, however, that at any time during the probationary period the appointee may be discharged for cause. At the close of the probationary period, if the work of the appointee has not been satisfactory to the appointing officer, the appointee shall be notified in writing that he/she will not receive permanent appointment and that his employment has been terminated. If the probationer does not receive such written notice within ten (10) days of probation period expiration, his/her status is that of having received a final appointment. Every position, unless filled by probation, reinstatement, or reduction, shall be filled in the following manner: The appointing officer shall notify the Civil Service Commission of any vacancy which he/she desires to fill and shall request certification of eligible applicants. The Commission shall forthwith certify, from the eligible list, the names of persons who received the highest average at preceding examinations held within three (3) years of such certification. The appointing officer shall therefrom, with sole reference of merit, make the appointment so certified. The term "appointing officer" as used in this section, shall mean the municipal officer in whom the power of appointment of employees to various departments is vested by this Charter. If an applicant, upon certification of qualification by the Commission, is rejected or bypassed by an employing officer, and if such applicant has reason to believe that he/she is being discriminated against, said applicant may appeal his/her nonappointment to the Civil Service Board or Commission. The Commission shall review all factors considered by the appointing officer and shall render a decision on the appointment which decision shall be final. All examinations for employment or promotion shall be practical in character and relate to the competitive capability required by the position being applied for. No questions in any form of application or in any examination shall be framed so as to elicit information concerning the political or religious opinions or affiliations of any applicant; nor shall inquiry be made concerning such opinions and affiliations. No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened, or promised by any individual in any department, against or in favor of an applicant, eligible, or employee, in any department under this section because of his/her political or religious opinions or affiliations. Vacancies in the positions in any department of the City, subject to this section, shall be filled, so far as is practical, by promotion from among persons holding positions in the next lower grade in the same department. Promotions shall be based upon merit to be ascertained by tests provided by the Civil Service Commission, and upon superior qualities of the person promoted as shown by previous service and experience. Provided, however, that no person shall be eligible for promotion until such person has served for a minimum of one (1) year within the department. A person accepting a promotion within a department shall serve a probationary period of six months duration. He/she may be discharged for just cause during such probationary period and such discharge shall terminate any state of employment with the City of Iron Mountain. If at any time during the period of probation, or upon termination of such probationary period, the probationary promotee, in the eyes of the appointing officer, shall fail to perform the work required of him/her in an acceptable manner, the promotee shall be returned to his/her former position of employment. Notice of the return of a promotion candidate to his/her former employment should be explained to the probationary employee by the appointing officer by written statement with a copy of said statement being filed with the Civil Service Commission through the city clerk of Iron Mountain. Such a statement shall be filed by the appointing officer with the employee and Civil Service Commission within 10 days of the decision to take action. Failure on the part of the appointing officer to file such a statement shall result in final appointment of the probationary promotee to the higher position. Upon the return of a probationary promotee to his/her previous position of employment, the appointing officer shall again request a priority certification of promotion listing from the commission for the purpose of appointment to fill the vacant position. Any commissioner or examiner, or any other person, who shall willfully, by him/or her self, or in cooperation with 1 or more persons, defeat, deceive, or obstruct any person in respect to his/her right of examination according to this section or who shall willfully or corruptly, or falsely mark, grade, estimate, or report upon examination or proper standing or any person examined or certified, pursuant to this section, or aid in doing so, or who shall willfully or corruptly furnish to any person any special or secret information, for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospect or chance of appointment of any person so examined or certified, or who shall impersonate any other person in connection with any examination or certification, shall, for each offense be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Whoever makes an appointment to office, or selects a person for employment, contrary to the provisions of this section, or willfully refuses or neglects otherwise to comply with, or conform to, any provisions of this section, or violates any of such provisions, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Suspension and/or termination of employment. Nonunion employees of the city who are suspended or whose employment has been terminated; may, if they have reason to question the just cause for their suspension or termination, request a redetermination of finding from the Civil Service Commission. Said Commission shall make determination and render a decision which is binding. 
(e)  Shortterm seasonal employment. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city through its administrative officers from employing shortterm seasonal employees outside of the terms of this section. 
(f)  [ Civil service employees. ] Police officers and firemen who are employees of the City of Iron Mountain shall be civil service employees under Act No. 78 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1935 (MCL 38.501 et seq., MSA 5.3351 et seq.), as amended. Provisions of Act No. 78 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1935 (MCL 38.501 et seq., MSA 5.3351 et seq.), as amended, shall determine procedure for appointment, suspension, promotion, layoff, or discharge of City firemen and/or policemen. The Council of the City of Iron Mountain shall, within sixty (60) days following the adoption of this Charter, appoint a three (3) member Special Civil Service Commission in keeping with Act No. 78 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1935 (MCL 38.501 et seq., MSA 5.3351 et seq.), as amended. 
CHAPTER VIII. - GENERAL FINANCE 

Sec. 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the last day of June. 
State Law reference- Uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq. 
Sec. 8.2. - Budget procedure. 
    On or before the 1st Monday in April of each year, the Manager shall submit to the Council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. 
Sec. 8.3. - Budget document. 
    The budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year and shall include those items required by the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, Act No. 621 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq.), as amended. Also to be included shall be such other supporting schedules as the Council may deem necessary or the Council may require. 
Sec. 8.4. - Budget hearing. 
    Before its final adoption, a public hearing on the budget proposal shall be held as provided by law. Notice of the time and place of holding such hearings shall be published by the Clerk in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least a week in advance thereof. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public during office hours at the office of the Clerk for a period of not less than one (1) week prior to such public hearing. 
Sec. 8.5. - Adoption of the budget. 
    The Council shall, not later than the last day in May adopt by resolution a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and make appropriations therefor. After consideration of probable other revenues, the Council shall determine and declare the amount of money necessary to be raised by property taxation, which amount shall not be greater than otherwise limited in this Charter or by general law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h), MSA 5.2073(h). 
Sec. 8.6. - Budget control. 
(a)  Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such specific purposes, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. The Council, by resolution, may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one account, department, fund or agency to another, unless prohibited by this Charter. 
(b)  The Council may make additional appropriations during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required by the city, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
(c)  Except in those cases where there is no other logical account to which expenditures can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingency fund (or other similar fund). Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation from the contingency fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account, and the expenditure charged to such account. 
(d)  At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the city manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
(e)  The balance in any general fund budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall, subject to restrictions imposed or permitted by law, revert to the general fund. 
Sec. 8.7. - Independent audit. 
(a)  An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by a certified public accounting firm. The results of such audit shall be made public in such manner as the Council may determine. An annual report of the city business shall be made available to the public in such form as will disclose pertinent facts concerning the activities and finance of the city government. The council shall provide the funds to defray the cost of the annual audit and the report herein required in each annual budget of the city. 
(b)  The audit shall be bid every two years; with the option to be bid more often if the Council so desires. 
CHAPTER IX. - TAXATION 

Sec. 9.1. - Power to tax. 
    The city shall have power to assess, levy and collect taxes, rents, tolls and excises. The subject of ad valorem taxation shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under general law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f), MSA 5.2073(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 
Sec. 9.2. - Tax limits. 
    Exclusive of any levy for the payment of principal of and interest on outstanding general obligation bonds, and exclusive of any other levies authorized by law to be made beyond Charter tax rate limitations, levy of ad valorem taxes for general municipal purposes shall not exceed one and three-quarters percent (13/4 percent), or seventeen and one-half (17.5) mills on the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city. 
Sec. 9.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.7 et seq., MSA 7.7 et seq. 
Sec. 9.4. - Tax day. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by statute, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the 31st day of December, or such other day as may subsequently be required by law, which shall be deemed Tax Day. 
State Law reference- Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2, MSA 7.2; time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq., MSA 7.10 et seq. 
Sec. 9.5. - Assessment roll. 
    The Assessor shall, in accordance with state law, make and certify an assessment roll of all persons and property in the city liable to taxation. 
Sec. 9.6. - Board of review. 
[(a)]  The Board of Review shall consist of three (3) residents who are electors of the city, but not city officers or employees. The Assessor is to be the clerk of the Board of Review and nonvoting. The board shall be entitled to such remuneration as shall be determined by the Council. 
(b)  The board of review appointed under the provisions of this Charter shall be made up of three (3)-year terms. The Council shall appoint a member for a three (3)-year term at the first regular Council meeting in January of each succeeding year; however, the members of the first board shall be appointed to one one (1)-year term, one two (2)-year term, and one three (3)-year term. In the event that a vacancy or vacancies occur during a term, the Council shall appoint a new member to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Sec. 9.7. - Duties and functions of the board of review. 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the board of review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are conferred by law and required of boards of review. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessment, and if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the rolls, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day and no change in the status of any property after that day shall be considered by the board in making its decision. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, other than the Board of Review, shall make or authorize any change upon or addition or correction to the assessment roll. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all the proceedings of the board and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the board. Such proceedings shall be filed in the office of the Clerk. 
Sec. 9.8. - Meeting of the board of review. 
    The board of review shall convene in accordance with statute each year to review and correct the assessment roll and shall remain in session for not less than two (2) days and one evening. It shall choose its own chairman and a majority of its members shall constitute a quorum. On or before the first Monday in April the board of review shall endorse the assessment roll as provided hereafter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i). 
Sec. 9.9. - Notice of meetings. 
    Notice of the time and the sessions of the board of review shall be published by the Assessor at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting. 
Sec. 9.10. - Certification of roll. 
    The board of review shall endorse the assessment roll as provided by statute. Such roll shall be the assessment roll of the city for all tax purposes. 
State Law reference- Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a, MSA 7.30(1). 
Sec. 9.11. - Clerk to certify tax levy. 
    Within three (3) days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by the general ad valorem tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the Council requires or orders to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon said roll against any property or any person in accordance with the provisions of this Charter or any ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 9.12. - City tax roll. 
    The Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll, to be known as the city tax roll, and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged, assessed, or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread thereon the amounts of the general ad valorem city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation of any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by law. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq., MSA 7.87 et seq.; avoidance of fractions, MCL 211.39, MSA 7.80. 
Sec. 9.13. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
    After spreading the taxes the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and shall annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax, charge, or assessment, and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges of such roll, all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by Township Treasurers for the collection of taxes, except he shall not add any collection fee or percentage for collection to such tax bills. 
Sec. 9.14. - Tax lien. 
    On July 1st of each year the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from persons to whom assessed. The amounts and for all interest and charges thereon and all personal taxes shall become a lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims. Encumbrances, and liens to the extent provided by law and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges are paid. 
Sec. 9.15. - Taxes due notification thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due on July 1st of each year. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon persons named in the city tax roll nor make personal demand for payment of taxes, but shall: 
(1)  Publish between June 15th and July 1st notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and of the penalties and fees for the late payment thereof; and 
(2)  Mail a tax bill to each person named in said roll. In cases of multiple ownership of property only one bill need be mailed. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to publish said notice or mail such bills shall not invalidate such taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this chapter in case of late or nonpayment of same. 
Sec. 9.16. - Collection charges on late payment of taxes. 
    No penalty shall be charged for city taxes paid on or before the 10th day of August. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, the tax payment schedule for taxes paid after August 10th, and the amount of penalty. Collection fee, or interest charges, if any, to be paid thereafter in an amount not to exceed the limit allowed by statute. Such charges shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. 
Sec. 9.17. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
    All city taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the 1st day of March, or such date established by statute, following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the county treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returned by Township Treasurers of Township school and county taxes. Such return should be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the Treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and assessments hereinbefore provided; such charges shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. Taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the state, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. 
State Law reference- Return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq., MSA 7.99 et seq. 
Sec. 9.18. - Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax. 
    If any person, firm, or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal property tax assessed to him or them, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal properties of such person, firm or corporation, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue the person, firm, or corporation to whom it is assessed in accordance with the statute. 
State Law reference- Failure or refusal to pay taxes, MCL 211.47, MSA 7.91. 
Sec. 9.19. - County and school taxes. 
    The levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes shall be in conformity with the general laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i). 
Sec. 9.20. - [Tax limitation for the police and firemen retirement system.] 
    [The city shall] prohibit the city from levying any taxes for the Iron Mountain Police and Firemen Retirement System in excess of the required total dollar amount as determined by the actuarian of the retirement system. 
(Amd. of 11-8-06) 
CHAPTER X. - BORROWING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 10.1. - General borrowing. 
    Subject to applicable provisions of law and this Charter, the Council may by ordinance or resolution authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of powers vested in the city and permitted by law and may authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include, but not be limited to, the following types: 
(a)  General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the city for payment of such obligations. 
(b)  Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, but the proceeds of such notes may be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided in Section 8.6 [of this Charter]. 
(c)  In case of fire, flood, windstorm, or other calamity, emergency loans due in not more than five (5) years for the relief of inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property. 
(d)  Special assessment bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessment made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of payment of any combination of such special assessments; such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts alone, or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts, and a general obligation of the city. 
(e)  Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility which the city is authorized by this Charter or by law to acquire or operate. 
(f)  Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the city. 
(g)  Revenue bonds as authorized by law which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement or public utility and do not constitute a general obligation of the city. 
(h)  Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the Motor Vehicle Highway Fund or any other fund of the state or federal government which the city may be permitted by law to pledge for the payment of principal and interest thereof. 
(i)  Budget bonds, which pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the city, in an amount which, in any year together with the taxes levied for the same year, will not exceed the limit of taxation authorized by this Charter. 
(j)  Bond which the city is, by any general law of the state, authorized to issue, now or hereafter, which shall pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the city or be otherwise secured or payable as provided by law. 
Sec. 10.2. - Limits of borrowing authority. 
(a)  The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed the maximum amount permitted by law, provided that in computing such bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded: 
1.  Money borrowed on notes issued in the anticipation of the collection of taxes; 
2.  Special assessment bonds, even though they are a general obligation of the city; 
3.  Mortgage bonds, revenue bonds, bonds in anticipation of state-returned revenues to the extent permitted by law; and 
4.  Any other bonds or indebtedness excluded by law from such limitation. 
The amount of funds accumulated for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of bonded indebtedness. 
(b)  The amount of emergency loans which may be made under the provisions of this Charter may not exceed the maximum amount permitted by law, and such loans may be made even if it causes the indebtedness of the city to exceed the limit of the net bonded indebtedness fixed in this Charter, or by law. 
(c)  No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if such bonds are not sold within the time limited by law, such authorization shall be null and void. 
(d)  The issuance of any bonds not requiring the approval of the electorate shall be subject to applicable requirements of law with reference to public notice in advance of authorization of such issues, filing of petitions for a referendum on such issuance, holding such referendum, and other applicable procedural requirements. 
Sec. 10.3. - Preparation and record of bonds. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which it is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose. Any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter, except that, whenever the proceeds of any bond issue or parts thereof shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the Council may authorize the use of said funds for the retirement of bonds of such issue or for any other purpose permitted by law. All bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the city. The signatures of the mayor and the Clerk, and the seal of the city may be facsimiles in the case of fully-registered bonds. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signature of the mayor and the Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the Clerk or other designated officer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be cancelled. 
Sec. 10.4. - Deferred payment contracts. 
    The city may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment. Each such contract shall not extend over a period greater than, nor shall the total amounts of principal payable under all such contracts exceed a sum permitted by law. All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
CHAPTER XI. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT 

Sec. 11.1. - Special assessments: General powers. 
    The Council shall have the power to determine that the whole or any part of the cost of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon property in a special district and shall so declare by resolution or resolutions shall state that estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost thereof shall be paid by special assessment, and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which assessments shall be levied and whether the assessments shall be based upon special benefits, frontage, area, valuation or other factors permitted by law, or a combination thereof. The Council shall also have the power of reassessment with respect to any such public improvement. 
State Law reference- Powers re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5, MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq. 
Sec. 11.2. - Procedure fixed by ordinance. 
    The Council shall prescribe by ordinance the complete special assessment or reassessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, notice of hearings on necessity and on confirmation of the assessment rolls, and making and confirming of the assessment rolls, correction of errors, the collection of special assessments, and any other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by special assessment. 
Cross reference- See Code of Ordinances, Chapter 54. 
Sec. 11.3. - Implementation of the chapter. 
    The City Council shall have and is hereby given the power to pass ordinances implementing the provisions of this chapter and detailing the procedure relative thereto. 
CHAPTER XII. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 12.1. - General powers respecting utilities. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, transportation, and garbage and refuse disposal facilities, or any of them to the municipality and its inhabitants thereof; and also to sell, deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its corporate limits as authorized by law. 
State Law reference- Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VIII, §§ 24, 25; permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f, MSA 5.2076, 5.2079. 
Sec. 12.2. - Acquisition of private property. 
    Private property may be taken and appropriated either within or without the city, for public use in connection with any acquisition, enlargement, or extension of public utilities, public hospitals, public cemeteries, and for other lawful and necessary public uses. The ownership of such property shall be acquired by city negotiation and purchase, or in any other manner permitted by the general laws of the state for the taking of private property for public use. 
Sec. 12.3. - Control of utilities. 
    The Council may enact such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as may be necessary for the care, protection, preservation, control and operation of any public utilities which the city may, in any manner acquire, own, or operate and all fixtures, appurtenances, apparatus, building, and machinery connected therewith or belonging thereto, and to carry into effect the powers conferred upon the city by the provisions of this Charter and by statute. 
Sec. 12.4. - Rates and charges. 
    The Council shall have the power to establish from time to time, such just and equitable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with water or sewage disposal, with electricity for light, heat, and power and with such other utility services as the city may acquire or provide. 
Sec. 12.5. - Utility charges; collection. 
    The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of all public utility charges made by the city and for such purpose, shall have all the power granted to cities by statute. When any person or persons, or any firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to pay to the city any sums due on utility bills, which are not covered by deposits, the utility service or services upon which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued but only after a thorough examination of the causes and circumstances surrounding the nonpayment. Suit may be instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 12.6. - Water utility fund. 
(a)  [A] separate account shall be established for the explicit purpose of providing and preserving high quality water resources for the citizens of Iron Mountain, and shall be called the Water Utility Fund. When there is a substantial surplus in the Water Utility Fund after providing for the annual payment of installments on bonds, interest, sinking fund, maintenance, expenses of the department, and amount for emergency as would be prudent, the Manager shall notify the Council. The Council shall designate by resolution what should be done with surplus funds. Under no circumstances shall surplus funds in the Water Utility Fund be transferred to any other fund within the city. These funds shall remain within the Water Utility Fund to prepay principal on outstanding bonds, allow a reduction of present water rates as provided under section 12.5 [of this Charter] or be utilized as deemed necessary within the Water Department. Surplus funds may be invested in investments that are either insured by the Federal Government or its agencies or are direct obligations of the Federal Government. The income derived from such investments shall remain within the Water Fund and only be used within the fund. 
(b)  Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, distinct from other city accounts, and in such manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such city ownership or operation, or both, including all assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. These accounts shall show the actual cost to the city of each such public utility, the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements, all expenses of maintenance, the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes, and all operating expenses. They shall show as nearly as possible, the value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or to any other city department. They shall also show a proper allowance, for depreciation and insurance. The Council shall annually cause to be made a report showing the financial results of such city ownership or operation, or both, which report shall give for each utility, the information specified in this section, and such further information as the Council shall deem necessary. 
Sec. 12.7. - Disposal of plants and property. 
    The city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way alien or dispose of the property, easements, income or other equipment, privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may acquire, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been submitted, at a special election held for the purpose in the manner provided in this Charter, to the qualified voters of the city and approved by them by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision, shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The provisions of this section shall not however, apply to the sale or exchange of any articles or equipment of any city-owned utility as are worn out or useless, or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
Sec. 12.8. - Fluoridation prohibited. 
    No fluoride shall be added to the city water supply. 
(Am'd. by electors, November 7, 1989) 
CHAPTER XIII. - FRANCHISES, CONTRACTS AND PERMITS 

Sec. 13.1. - Franchises. 
(a)  No franchise ordinance, which is not revocable at the will of the Council, shall be granted or become operative until the same shall have been referred to the people at a regular or special election and has received the approval of three-fifths ( 3/5 ) of the electors voting thereon at such election or as required by statute. 
(b)  All irrevocable public utility franchises, and all renewals, extensions and amendments thereof, shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted before thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the Council, nor until a full public hearing has been held thereon. No such ordinance shall become effective until it has been submitted to the electors and has been approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. No such ordinances shall be submitted to the electors at a general election to be held less than sixty (60) days after the grantee named therein has filed unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise, and it shall not be submitted to a special election unless the expense of holding the election, as determined by the Council, shall have been paid to the City Treasurer by the grantee. 
(c)  No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted, and no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than thirty (30) years. 
(d)  No such franchise shall be transferable, directly or indirectly, except with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance. 
(e)  Purchase of a franchised utility by the city shall require the approval of three-fifths ( 3/5 ) of the electors voting thereon. 
Sec. 13.2. - Right of regulation. 
    All public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and to require reports annually; 
(e)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(f)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to safety, welfare, and accommodation [of] the public. 
Sec. 13.3. - Rates of franchised utilities. 
    The rates charged by public utilities under the supervision of state regulatory agencies shall be fixed by such agencies. The rates not preempted by the state for public utilities shall be set, after public hearing, by the City Council. 
Sec. 13.4. - Purchase condemnation. 
    The city shall have the right to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the property of any public utility in accordance with the general laws of the state, provided that the price to be paid shall in no event include any value predicated upon the franchise, good will, or prospective profits. 
Sec. 13.5. - Revocable permits. 
    Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the will of the Council, may be granted by the Council by resolution on such terms and conditions as it shall determine, provided that such permits, shall in no event be construed to be franchises or amendments to franchises. 
Sec. 13.6. - Use of street by utility. 
    Every public utility franchise shall be subject to the right of the city to use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places and the space above and beneath them. Every public utility shall pay such part of the cost of improvement of maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use and may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city by the city and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental therefor; provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which shall be final. 
Sec. 13.7. - Contracting authority of council. 
    The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the city is vested in the Council, and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the law. All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, shall be authorized by the Council, and shall be signed on behalf of the city by the mayor and the Clerk. 
Sec. 13.8. - Purchase and sale of personal property. 
(a)  [ Procedures. ] The Council shall establish by ordinance the procedures for the purchase of personal property on behalf of the city. Procedures shall be established to regulate the following: 
(1)  The dollar amount limits within which purchases of property may be made without the necessity of securing competitive bids; and 
(2)  The dollar amount limit within which such purchases may be made without prior Council approval shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000). Said amount may be reviewed annually and adjusted by Council action if deemed appropriate. 
Cross reference- Dollar limits changed, § 2-278. 
(b)  Purchase and sale of real property. No real property shall be purchased, acquired, sold or given away by the city whether within or without its corporate limits except upon the affirmative vote of five-sevenths of all the Councilmen elect after a public hearing called for the purpose of considering such proposal to purchase, acquire, sell or give away real property. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper published, mechanically printed and circulating within the city, once in each week for three (3) consecutive weeks, the last publication to be not more than three (3) days before said hearing. Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the City Council from leasing any real property owned by the city and not needed for municipal purposes for a period not longer than ten (10) years and upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the Councilmen elect, nor prohibit the use of such real property for purposes beneficial to the City. Provided further that no park or cemetery, as legally described upon adoption of this Charter, may be sold by the city unless approved by three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
Sec. 13.9. - Limitations on contractual powers. 
(a)  The Council shall only have power to enter into contracts which, by the terms thereof, will be fully executed within a period of ten (10) years, unless such contract shall first receive the approval of the majority of the qualified electors voting thereon at a regular or special election. This qualification shall not apply to any contract for services with a public utility, or one or more other governmental units, nor to contracts for debt secured by bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the city by law. 
(b)  Except as provided by ordinance authorized in this Charter, each contract for construction of public improvements or for the purchase or sale of personal property, shall be let after opportunity for competition. 
(c)  All sealed bids shall be opened at a Council meeting and read aloud in public by the City Manager or his authorized representative at the time designated in the notice or letting, and shall be reported by him to the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reject any or all bids if deemed advisable. If, after ample opportunity for competitive bidding, no bids are received, or such bids as are received are not satisfactory to the Council, the Council may either endeavor to obtain new competitive bids or authorize the City Manager, or other proper officials of the city, to negotiate or contract on the open market. 
(d)  Bid specifications shall contain no discriminatory language or description that would restrict, or in any way prohibit, participation by qualified or eligible bidders. 
Sec. 13.10. - Official interest in contracts. 
    No person holding any elective or appointive office of the city shall take any official action on any city contract in which he shall have a direct personal interest in the profits to be derived therefrom or be a bondsman or surety on any contractor bond given to the city. The provisions for handling this shall be in accordance with Act No. 317 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 15.321 et seq., MSA 4.1700(51) et seq.), as amended. Any officer violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office and upon conviction shall forfeit his office. 
CHAPTER XIV. - MUNICIPAL RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES 

Sec. 14.1. - Rights; liabilities; remedies. 
    All rights and properties of any kind and description which were vested in the City of Iron Mountain at the time of the adoption of this Charter [March 3, 1986] shall continue, and no rights or liabilities either in favor of or against the City at the time of the adoption of this Charter [March 3, 1986], and no suit or prosecution of any kind shall be in any manner affected by the adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or progress as if no such change had been made, and all debts and liabilities of the City and all taxes levied and uncollected at the time of the adoption of this Charter [March 3, 1986] shall be collected the same as if such change had not been made; provided that, when a different remedy is given in this Charter, which can be made applicable to any rights existing at the time of the adoption of this Charter, the same shall be deemed cumulative to the remedies before provided, and may be used accordingly. 
Sec. 14.2. - Liability for damages. 
    The city shall not be liable for unliquidated damages for injuries to persons or property unless the persons claiming such damages, or someone in his or their behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the Clerk. Such claim shall be verified by the claimant or claimants, or some person having knowledge of the facts, who shall specify the time and place, the nature and extent of the injury sustained, the manner in which it occurred, the specific grounds upon which the claim of liability on the part of the city shall be asserted, the names and addresses of all known witnesses, the name of the attending physician, if any, and an itemized statement of the amount claimed. Upon filing such claim, the city shall investigate the same and may require the claimant to produce all witnesses for examination under oath. No action shall be maintained in any case unless the same be brought within the statutory period stated by the general laws of the state after such injury or damages shall have been received. 
Sec. 14.3. - Statements of city officers. 
    No officer of the city shall have [the] power to make any representation or recital of fact in any franchise, contract, document, or agreement which is contrary to any public record of the city. Any such representation shall be void and of no effect as against the city. 
CHAPTER XV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 15.1. - Public records. 
    All public records of the city shall be available to the public during normal business hours, except any of a personal nature on personnel which may be protected by statute or decency, and shall be in the English language. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 
Sec. 15.2. - Headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered to be a part of this Charter. 
Sec. 15.3. - Definitions and interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of this Charter: 
(a)  The word "state" shall mean the State of Michigan; 
(b)  The word "city" shall mean the City of Iron Mountain; 
(c)  The word "council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Iron Mountain; 
(d)  The word "officer" shall include, but shall not be limited to the mayor, the members of the Council, and, as herein provided, the administrative officers, deputy administrative officers, and members of city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this Charter; 
(e)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships and associations, as well as to individuals; 
(f)  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include printing, engraving, stencil, duplicating, lithographing, typewriting, photostating, or any similar method; 
(g)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include handwritten script, printing, typewriting, and teletype and telegraphic communications; 
(h)  The words "publish" or "published" shall include publication of any matter, required to be published, in the manner provided by law, or where there is no applicable law, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city, qualified by law for publication of legal notices or in accordance with this Charter; 
(i)  The words "public utility" shall include all common carriers in the public streets; water, sewage disposal, electric light and power, gas, telephone and telegraph lines and systems, cable television, garbage and refuse collection and disposal and reduction plants, transportation, and such other and different enterprises as the Council may determine or designate; 
(j)  All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter [March 3, 1986], but shall extend to and include the time of happening of any event or requirement to which any provision of this Charter is applied; 
(k)  The singular shall include the plural, and [the] plural shall include the singular, [and] the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter; 
(l)  All references to statutes shall be considered to be references to such statutes as amended. 
Sec. 15.4. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by statute. Should two (2) or more amendments, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Sec. 15.5. - Effect of illegality of any part of Charter. 
    Should any provision or section, or portion hereof, of this Charter be held by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of this Charter as a whole or any remaining portion of such provision or section. 
CHAPTER XVI. - SCHEDULE 

Sec. 16.1. - Election to adopt Charter. 
    This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the territory comprising the City of Iron Mountain at the regular city election to be held on Tuesday, October 22, 1985. If at said election, a majority of the electors voting thereon shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, then the clerk shall perform all other acts required by law and this Chapter to carry this Charter into effect. 
Sec. 16.2. - Form of ballot. 
    The form of the question of submission of this Charter shall be as follows: "Shall the proposed Charter of the City of Iron Mountain, State of Michigan, drafted by the Charter Commission elected October 2, 1984, be adopted?" 
YES ____________ 
NO ____________ 
Sec. 16.3. - Effective date of Charter. 
    If the canvass of the vote on the adoption of this Charter shows that it has been adopted, it shall take effect and become law as the Charter of the City of Iron Mountain, State of Michigan, for all purposes on Monday, March 3, 1986, at 12:01 a.m., local time. 
Sec. 16.4. - Primary election. 
    If necessary, a primary election shall be held between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Tuesday, December 17, 1985. 
Sec. 16.5. - First general election of officers. 
(a)  A special election to elect the first City Council shall be held on Tuesday, February 11, 1986, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. The seven (7) candidates elected, four (4) at large and three (3) from wards, shall have terms beginning at 12:01 a.m., March 3, 1986, and extend until December 31, 1987 at 12:01 a.m. Thereafter, the elections for City Council and their terms of office shall be in accordance with and at the times set forth in this Charter. 
(b)  Where applicable and appropriate this election shall be conducted in compliance with the provisions of Chapter III of this Charter. 
Sec. 16.6. - Ward boundaries of this Charter. 
(a)  Ward I shall be boundaried as follows: North by the North City Limits; East by the East City Limits; West by the West City Limits; South along the centerline of Houghteling Street as extended from the East to the West City Limits. 
(b)  Ward II shall be boundaried as follows: On the North by the South boundary of Ward I; East by the East City Limits; West by the West City Limits; South along the centerline of "C" Street as extended from the East to the West City Limits. 
(c)  Ward III shall be boundaried as follows: On the North by the South boundary of Ward II; East by the East City Limits; West by the West City Limits; South by the South City Limits. 
(d)  Future Councils shall define ward boundaries in conformance with state statutes. 
Sec. 16.7. - First meeting of the city council. 
    The first Council of the City of Iron Mountain shall assemble at 7:00 p.m., local time, on Monday, March 3, 1986 in the City Hall Council Room. The meeting shall be called to order by the Chairman of the Charter Commission who shall introduce the Council to the public and call the meeting to order. The Chairman shall preside for the election of the Mayor from among the Council and then turn the meeting over to the Mayor, and the Council shall proceed with the business before it. 
Sec. 16.8. - Officers and employees. 
(a)  Rights and privileges preserved. Nothing in this Charter except as otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are city officers or employees at the time of its adoption [March 3, 1986]. 
(b)  Continuance of office or employment. Except as specifically provided by this Charter, if at the time this Charter takes full effect [March 3, 1986] a city administrative officer or employee holds any office or position which is or can be abolished by or under this Charter, he shall continue in such office or position until the taking effect of some specific provision under this Charter directing that he vacate the office or provision [position]. 
(c)  Personnel system. An employee holding a city position at the time this Charter takes full effect [March 3, 1986], who was serving in that same or a comparable position at the time of its adoption [March 3, 1986], shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same position but in all other respects shall be subject to the personnel system provided for in Section 4.02 [4.2 of this Charter]. 
Sec. 16.9. - Continuation of contracts and obligations. 
    All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by the city department, office or agency appropriate under this Charter. 
Sec. 16.10. - State and municipal laws. 
    All city ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective [March 3, 1986] are repealed to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto. To the extent that the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan permit, all laws relating to or affecting this city or its agencies, officers or employees which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective [March 3, 1986] are superseded to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto. 
Sec. 16.11. - Council action. 
    In all cases involving the transition of the City of Iron Mountain, which are not covered by this transitional schedule [this chapter], the Council shall supply the necessary details and procedures and may adopt such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be required. 
Sec. 16.12. - Duties. 
    The City Engineer shall perform the duties of City Manager until a City Manager is selected by the Council. 
Sec. 16.13. - Terms abolished. 
    All elective terms of Councilmen, including the office of Mayor, that were not filled by way of the general election on Tuesday, February 11, 1986 shall be abolished at 6:50 p.m., local time on March 3, 1986. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a meeting held on Tuesday, June 18, 1985, the Charter Commission elected on October 2, 1984, to draft a City Charter for the City of Iron Mountain, adopted the following resolution: 
"Resolved, that the proposed Charter for the City of Iron Mountain be approved by the Charter Commission. The city clerk is hereby instructed to transmit the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan in accordance with Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, for his approval." 
The vote on the adoption of the resolution was as follows: 
Ayes: 6 Allen, Barnes, Betti, Borga, Esveldt, Fuse 
Nays: 1 O'Donnell 
Absent: 2 Ewig, Elmer 
/s/ _____
Lou Ann Ebidon, City Clerk  
    Attested to by the following Commissioners: 
Richard Allen, Chairman _____John C. O'Donnell, Vice-Chairman _____Phyllis Ewig, Secretary _____Terry Barnes _____Archie Betti _____Victor Borga _____John D. Elmer _____Robert Esveldt _____Alfonse Fuse _____ 
    I hereby certify that this is a true copy of the signatures appended hereto: 
/s/ _____
Lou Ann Ebidon, City Clerk  
    I hereby certify that the above Commissioners were those duly elected to the Iron Mountain Charter Commission on October 2, 1984. 
/s/ _____
Lou Ann Ebidon, City Clerk  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter 10-22-85 1.1-15.5 1.1-15.5 11- 7-89 12.8 12.8 11- 7-00 3.7       Rpld 4.3 11- 8-06 9.20 11- 3-09 3.7  6- 6-11 7.9 11-20-17(Res.) 3.8  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan" or the "Iron Mountain City Code." 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan, adopted October 22, 1985, and shall include any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" shall denote the municipality of Iron Mountain, Michigan. 
    City council. The words "city council" or "council" shall mean the governing body of the City of Iron Mountain. 
    Code. The expressions "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions, or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Dickinson in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
    General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated, respectively, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Municipal civil infraction. The term "municipal civil infraction" means an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other ordinances, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses, and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.), as amended. The municipal civil infraction is not a lessor included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and the words in the plural shall include the singular, where appropriate unless otherwise necessary. 
    Officer, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, department, board, commission, or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, department or other city agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, department or agency shall mean and include such officer, department or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever," as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes any street, alley, park, public building, or any place or structure which customarily opens to the public or where the public wants to assemble. 
    Shall/may. Whenever the word "shall" appears in this Code it shall be considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided. "May" is permissive. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Application to territorial boundaries only. 
    All provisions of this Code are limited in application to the territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although such provisions may not be so limited specifically. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines and headings. 
    Headings and catchlines used in this Code other than the chapter, article, division, and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-6. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-7. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references, history notes and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-8. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-9. - Rule of severability. 
    Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible, subsection of this Code is hereby declared to be severable, and the invalidity of any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection, shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division, section or subsection of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-11. - References to offices. 
    Reference to a public office shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the City of Iron Mountain, exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance levying taxes. 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating money. 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money. 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing utility rates. 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons. 
(7)  Any ordinance authorizing public improvements. 
(8)  Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property. 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory. 
(10)  Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use. 
(11)  Any ordinance regarding lease of city property. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees. 
(15)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets. 
(16)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning. 
(17)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i. 
Sec. 1-14. - Notice. 
(a)  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving such notice at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given is required or is to occur. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by the officer to remove the notice. 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty. 
(a)  Misdemeanors. Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in this Code or ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by the court or an ordinance. 
(b)  Municipal civil infractions. The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any cost, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.), as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, the expression "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision committed by a person within any six-month period (unless some other is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance); or for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance where a particular municipal civil infraction violation occurs, the increased fine for repeat offense should be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $150.00 nor more than $250.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs. 
c.  A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
d.  Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
e.  In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(14), § 1-112) 
Sec. 1-16. - Responsibility for violations. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do such act. 
Sec. 1-17. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired, subject to subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iron Mountain, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired, subject to subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Any ordinance which repeals or amends this Code shall set out in full the sections or subsections to be repealed or amended and shall indicate matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type and shall indicate new matter by underscoring or by italics. 
Sec. 1-18. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Iron Mountain to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-19. - Responsibility for commission of acts prohibited by Code. 
    Every person concerned with the commission of an act prohibited by this Code, whether he directly commits the act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids, or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and, on conviction, shall be punished as if he had directly committed such act. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(14), § 1-111) 
Sec. 1-20. - Errors and omissions. 
    If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the provisions effected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of words when other words were clearly intended to express such intent, such spellings shall be corrected and such words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No such alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(14), § 1-108) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 18; cemetery, ch. 22; community development, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; municipal civil infractions, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 46; special assessments, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 66; vegetation, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENCY 

Sec. 2-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Full-time means any employee of the city who regularly works at least 40 hours per week and is subject to the provisions of this division. Any employee who works less than 40 hours per week on a regular basis shall be deemed for purposes of this division to be a part-time employee and not subject to the provisions of this division. 
    Residency means a customary place of domicile where an individual physically resides for at least nine months of each calendar year. 
(Ord. of 9-8-92, §§ 2-1201, 2-1202) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-42. - Requirement. 
    All full-time employees of the city shall reside within a ten-mile radius of the city hall and within the state during their term of employment. 
(Ord. of 9-8-92, § 2-1200) 
Sec. 2-43. - New employees. 
    All individuals who become employees of the city shall be required to satisfy this residency requirement by becoming domiciled within the state and a ten-mile radius of the city hall within six months from the date of hire. 
(Ord. of 9-8-92, § 2-1203) 
Sec. 2-44. - Failure to comply with residency requirement. 
    Any full-time employee of the city who fails to become or remain a resident within the geographic area defined in section 2-42, as required by this division shall be given a written notice of termination of employment as soon as practicable by the city manager. Failure to comply with this division within 60 days of the date of this notice shall result in immediate termination of employment by the city. Failure of the city manager to provide notice shall not, under any circumstances, constitute a waiver of the residency requirement. 
(Ord. of 9-8-92, § 2-1204) 
Secs. 2-45-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPUTY CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-61. - Authority of division. 
    This division is adopted pursuant to chapter VII, section 7.1(B) of the Charter for the city authorizing the city council to create by ordinance additional administrative offices when deemed necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2000) 
Sec. 2-62. - Purpose of division. 
    It is the intention of the city council not to fill any existing or future vacancies in either the position of chief of police or the chief of the fire department which will mean that the general supervisory requirements of both departments will be the responsibility of the city manager. It is recognized by the city council that the city manager will not have sufficient time or available personnel as is required for such administrative purposes and that it is necessary to provide for the position of deputy city manager as an additional administrative position. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2001) 
Sec. 2-63. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    The city manager with the advice and concurrence of the city council shall appoint a deputy city manager for a term to be established at the time of appointment and shall fix his compensation at that same time and thereafter as may be deemed necessary. The deputy city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of appointment; however, residency must be established within the city limits no later than 90 days after council approval or upon completion of a probationary period, if applicable. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2002) 
Sec. 2-64. - Removal. 
    The city manager may remove the deputy city manager from office with the advice and concurrence of the city council in accordance with procedures established for removal of the city manager if it is deemed necessary or desirable to proceed, therefor, prior to the expiration of any presently existing term for hire. The city shall not be required under any circumstances whatsoever to renew, extend or modify any term for hire as may have been previously established. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2003) 
Sec. 2-65. - Powers and duties. 
    The deputy city manager shall have only those powers and duties as may be specifically assigned by the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2004) 
Sec. 2-66. - Nature of office. 
    The purpose of this division is to create an additional administrative office which shall not be subject to the civil service requirements as contained in the city Charter or established by the law of the state. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2005) 
Secs. 2-67-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-86. - Office established. 
    There is hereby established the administrative office of director of public works. 
(Ord. of 3-18-91, § 2-1401) 
Sec. 2-87. - Appointment. 
    The director of public works shall be appointed by the city manager with the consent and approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-18-91, § 2-1402) 
Sec. 2-88. - Duties. 
    The director of public works shall work under the control and direction of the city manager, performing those necessary administrative and technical functions required in supervising the departmental operations associated with general public works, water, cemetery, motor pool, and recreation. The director of public works shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by the city manager or the council. 
(Ord. of 3-18-91, § 2-1403) 
Sec. 2-89. - Public works department established; functions and duties. 
    There is hereby established a department of public works. This department shall encompass all city operational functions associated with water utilities, motor pool, sanitation (to include storm and sanitary sewer system, and solid waste), transportation (to include streets and sidewalks), recreation, and cemetery. The functions and duties of the department shall be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 3-18-91, § 2-1404) 
Secs. 2-90-2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERSONNEL 

Sec. 2-106. - Minimum employment standards adopted. 
    The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers, as established and adopted by the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council, in accordance with Act No. 203 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall be a citizen of the United States. 
(2)  The applicant shall have reached the minimum age of 18 years. 
(3)  The applicant shall have graduated from high school or the equivalent. The equivalent is defined as having attained a passing score on the general education development test indicating high school graduation level. 
(4)  Applicants shall be fingerprinted with a search of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record. 
(5)  The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony offense. 
(6)  The applicant shall have good moral character as determined by a favorable report following a comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment records, home environment, personal traits and integrity. Consideration will be given to any and all law violations, including traffic and conservation law convictions as indicating a lack of good character. 
(7)  He shall possess acceptable physical, emotional and mental fitness, as established by a licensed physician, following examination to determine whether the applicant is free from any physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect his performance of duty as a police officer. 
(8)  The trainee shall possess normal hearing and normal color vision. He shall be free from any impediments of the senses. He must possess normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye, correctable to 20/20. The trainee must be physically sound; well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards and in possession of his extremities. He shall be free from any physical defects, chronic diseases, organic diseases, organic or functional conditions, or mental instabilities which may tend to impair efficient performance of duty to which might endanger the lives of others or himself if he lacks these qualifications. 
(9)  A declaration of the applicant's medical history shall become a part of the background investigation. The information shall be available to the examining physician. 
(10)  An oral interview shall be held by the hiring authority or his representative to determine the applicant's acceptability for a police officer position and to assess appearance, background and ability to communicate. 
(11)  Recruitment and employment practices and standards shall be in compliance with existing state statutes governing this activity. 
(Code 1982, § 2-701) 
Sec. 2-107. - Notice of standards to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this division in the manner required by law. 
(Code 1982, § 2-702) 
Sec. 2-108. - Conflicting regulations or administrative rules. 
    The standards of the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council are recognized as minimum standards, and higher standards are recommended by the training council when qualified applicants are available. Any portion of any ordained regulations or administrative rules not meeting such minimum standards are hereby superceded. Any portion of any ordained regulations which meet the minimum standards or exceed those standards shall remain in effect. 
(Code 1982, § 2-703) 
Secs. 2-109, 2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE AND FIRE SERVICES 

Sec. 2-111. - Purpose. 
    The intent of this division is to create a new administrative department in the City of Iron Mountain for the purpose of overseeing the police and fire departments in the City of Iron Mountain. The city currently has chiefs in each respective department. In an effort to more economically and efficiently manage and control the departments, the city council has determined it is in the best interest for the health, safety and welfare of the city to create an administrative department that can consolidate the positions and still maintain the high level of services currently provided by each of its respective departments. 
(Ord. of 5-5-14) 
Sec. 2-112. - Establishment of the department of police and fire services. 
(a)  There shall be established in the City of Iron Mountain the administrative department entitled department of police and fire services. 
(b)  The department is created to manage and oversee all functions and duties and responsibilities of both the police and fire departments in the City of Iron Mountain. 
(Ord. of 5-5-14) 
Sec. 2-113. - Director of the department of police and fire services. 
(a)  The department of police and fire services shall be managed by a director of police and fire services. He/she shall manage, direct, and control both the police and fire departments of the City of Iron Mountain and shall further be responsible for all law enforcement and fire protection services within the City of Iron Mountain. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the director of police and fire services shall be directed by the city manager and may be modified from time to time as is necessary for the efficient operation of both departments. The director of police and fire services shall report to the city manager and shall be directly under the manager's direction and control as any other administrative department/office within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-5-14) 
Sec. 2-114. - Appointment of the director of police and fire services. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the sole responsibility to appoint the director of police and fire services, provided that the director shall be a civil service employee under Act 78 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1935 (MCL 38.501 et seq.), as amended. Provisions of Act 78, as amended, shall determine the procedure for appointment, suspension, promotion, layoff or discharge for the director of police and fire services. 
(b)  In the event the director of police and fire services is unable to perform his/her duties due to disability, sickness, or any other cause, the city manager may designate and appoint for that period of time another member of the police or fire department to act as the director provided the acting director meets the qualifications specified in this division. 
(Ord. of 5-5-14) 
Secs. 2-115-2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-126. - Ward boundaries. 
(a)  Ward I shall be boundaried as follows: North by the North City Limits; East by the East City Limits; West by the West City Limits; South along the centerline of Walker Street extended to the centerline of Foster Street, thence South on Foster Street to the centerline of Fairbanks Street, thence East along Fairbanks Street to the centerline of Kent Street, thence East along Kent Street to US-2, thence due East to the East City Limits. 
(b)  Ward II shall be boundaried as follows: On the North by the South boundary of Ward I; East by the East City Limits; West by the West City Limits; South along the centerline of "C" Street as extended from the East to the West City Limits. 
(c)  Ward III shall be boundaried as follows: On the North by the South boundary of Ward II; East by the East City Limits; West by the West City Limits; South by the South City Limits. 
(d)  Future Councils shall define ward boundaries in conformance with state statutes. 
(Code 1982, § 2-101; Ord. of 3-4-02) 
Sec. 2-127. - Copies of and public access to reapportionment plan. 
    The city council shall file the reapportionment plan with the city clerk and make copies available at cost to any registered voter of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-128. - Registration of voters to be adjusted to comply with redistricting; city clerk to execute. 
    The city clerk or his deputies shall change the registration of the voters to comply with this redistricting plan and shall notify each registered voter of the ward in which he now resides. 
(Code 1982, § 2-103) 
Sec. 2-129. - Voting mandate for councilmembers; exception. 
    No councilmember shall vote on any question in which he shall have a direct personal interest, but on all other questions he shall vote unless excused therefrom by a vote of two-thirds of the councilmembers elect. 
(Code 1982, § 2-201) 
Sec. 2-130. - Refusal of councilmember to vote; penalty. 
    When any councilmember shall refuse to vote, such persons shall, unless excused as provided in section 2-129, automatically forfeit his active membership in the council. He shall not be allowed any compensation for future attendance, and he shall also be deprived of the rights of the floor by the mayor until such time as he shall vote upon the question which caused his suspension as an active member of the council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-202) 
Sec. 2-131. - Invalid voting. 
    A vote cast by any councilmember on any matter subsequent to his refusal to vote, as provided in section 2-129, shall be void and of no effect until such member shall reinstate himself as provided in section 2-132. 
(Code 1982, § 2-203) 
Sec. 2-132. - Restoration of voting rights and obligations. 
    Any councilmember refusing to vote as provided in section 2-129, may reinstate himself into good standing in the city council by presenting a petition requesting the permission of the council to state his vote on the original question. 
(Code 1982, § 2-204) 
Secs. 2-133-2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MEETINGS OF MUNICIPAL BODIES 

Sec. 2-151. - Purpose of article. 
    This article shall require certain meetings of certain municipal bodies to be open to the public; to confer rights and impose duties; to provide for enforcement; to provide for invalidation of municipal decisions under certain circumstances; and to provide penalties for violation of this article. It is vital in a democratic society that public business is performed in an open and public manner so that citizens are advised of the performance of public officials and of the deliberations resulting in decisions which constitute public policy. Toward this end, this article is enacted and shall be liberally construed. 
(Code 1982, § 2-601) 
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Decision means any determination, action, vote, or disposition upon a motion, proposal, resolution, order, ordinance, or measure on which a vote by members of a municipal body is required and by which a municipal body effectuates or formulates public policy. 
    Executive session means any meeting or part of a meeting of a municipal body which is closed to the public. 
    Meeting means the convening of a municipal body in order to make a decision or to deliberate toward a decision on any matter but does not mean an onsite inspection of a project or program. 
    Municipal body means any entity deriving its authority from the city including, but not limited to, authorities, boards, commissions, committees, subcommittees or council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-602) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-153. - Public access to municipal functions; exceptions. 
(a)  All meetings of a municipal body shall be open to the public and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  All decisions of a municipal body shall be made at a meeting open to the public except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(c)  All deliberations of a municipal body shall be made at a meeting open to the public except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(d)  A person shall not be excluded from a public meeting except for a breach of the peace actually committed at the meeting. 
(e)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to a municipal body while deliberating upon or making a decision in a proceeding which involves a determination of the legal rights, duties, or privileges of a named party after any required hearing has been held. 
(Code 1982, § 2-603) 
Sec. 2-154. - Public notice; contents and placement. 
    When this article requires a public notice to be posted, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  A public notice shall always contain the name of the municipal body to which the notice applies and the name, business address and telephone number of its clerk or spokesperson. 
(2)  A public notice for a municipal body shall always be posted at the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 2-604) 
Sec. 2-155. - Municipal meetings; public notice requisites. 
(a)  A meeting of a municipal body shall not be held unless public notice is given as provided in this section by a person designated by the municipal body. This subsection shall not apply to an emergency meeting. 
(b)  For regular meetings of a municipal body, there shall be posted within ten days after the first meeting of the municipal body in each calendar or fiscal year a public notice stating the dates, times, and places of its regular meetings. 
(c)  In the event of any change in the schedule of regular meetings of a municipal body, there shall be posted within three days after the meeting at which the change is made, a public notice stating the new dates, times, and places of its regular meeting. 
(d)  For a special meeting or a rescheduled regular meeting of a municipal body, a public notice stating the date, time and place of the meeting shall be posted at least 18 hours before the meeting. 
(e)  A meeting of a municipal body which is recessed for more than 25 hours shall be reconvened only after public notice, which is equivalent to that required for a special meeting under subsection (d) of this section has been posted. 
(f)  Notice which is mailed or published pursuant to the requirements of any law, charter, ordinance, or this article, and which specifically notifies the public that a decision on the subject described in the notice will be made or considered at a meeting of the municipal body shall be deemed to satisfy the notice requirements of this section with regard to any decision on that subject made at that meeting. 
(Code 1982, § 2-605) 
Sec. 2-156. - Additional public access and notice procedures. 
(a)  Upon the written request of any individual, organization, firm or corporation, and upon the requesting party's payment of a yearly fee of not more than $5.00 or the reasonable estimated cost for printing and postage of such notices, a municipal body shall send to the requesting party a copy of any notice required to be posted pursuant to section 2-155(b) and (e). 
(b)  A municipal body shall be responsible for maintaining a telephone number during the business hours set by the municipal body at which any individual can receive information about its meetings. 
(c)  Upon written request, a municipal body shall, at the same time a public notice of a meeting is posted pursuant to section 2-155, provide a copy of the public notice of that meeting to any newspaper published in the city and to any radio and television station located in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-606) 
Sec. 2-157. - Emergency municipal meetings. 
(a)  In the event of a severe emergency threat to the health, welfare or safety of the public, the presiding officer of a municipal body or other person designated by state constitution, statute, charter, ordinance, or resolution may call an emergency meeting of that body. The emergency meeting shall be held if, in the judgment of the majority of the members serving on the public body, delay would be detrimental to efforts to lessen or respond to the threat. 
(b)  If an emergency meeting is called, the person calling the meeting shall make a good faith effort to give whatever public notice is possible. 
(Code 1982, § 2-607) 
Sec. 2-158. - Executive sessions of municipal body. 
(a)  During a regular, special, or emergency meeting a public body, by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members present, but not less than a majority of members serving on the municipal body, and after the purpose or purposes set forth in section 2-159 have been specifically identified, may hold an executive session on the same day or schedule an executive session to be held at a later specified date. An executive session shall be limited solely to the purposes so identified. 
(b)  A roll call vote shall be required to call an executive session. The roll call vote and the purpose or purposes for calling the executive session shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting at which the vote is taken. 
(Code 1982, § 2-608) 
Sec. 2-159. - Municipal executive session requisites. 
(a)  A municipal body may meet in executive session only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Consider the employment or appointment of a public officer, employee, staff member, or individual agent, except the filling of a vacancy of an elective office. 
(2)  Consider the dismissal, suspension or disciplining of, or to hear complaints to charges brought against a public officer, employee, staff member, or individual agent, unless the person requests an open hearing. 
(3)  Conduct strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining or potential or pending litigation. 
(4)  Negotiate the purchase or disposition of real property, including fixtures. 
(5)  Consider records which are specifically exempt by law from public inspection. 
(b)  During an emergency meeting, a municipal body may hold an executive session, pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 2-158, upon a reasonable determination that a serious and imminent threat to the public peace exists and that public discussion of the threat will directly contribute to the severity of the emergency or seriously impair efforts to restore the public peace. 
(Code 1982, § 2-609) 
Sec. 2-160. - Mandatory meeting minutes; public access. 
(a)  Each municipal body shall keep minutes of each meeting showing the date, time, place, members present, members absent, any decisions made at a meeting open to the public, and the purposes for which an executive session is held. The minutes shall include all roll call votes taken at the meeting. 
(b)  Minutes shall be public records open to public inspection and shall be available at the address designated on posted public notice pursuant to section 2-154. 
(c)  Proposed minutes shall be available for public inspection within seven business days after the meeting to which the minutes refer. Approved minutes shall be available for public inspection not later than seven business days after the meeting at which the minutes are approved by the public body. 
(Code 1982, § 2-610) 
Sec. 2-161. - Judicial remedies and limitations. 
(a)  Decisions of a governing body shall be presumed to have been adopted in compliance with the requirements of this article. The city attorney on behalf of the people of the city or any person in his individual capacity may commence a civil action in the circuit court to challenge the validity of a decision of a municipal body made in violation of this article. 
(b)  A decision made by a municipal body may be invalidated if the municipal body has not complied with the requirements of section 2-153(a) and (b) in making the decision or if failure to give notice in accordance with section 2-155 has interfered with substantial compliance with section 2-153(a) and (b) and the court finds that the noncompliance or failure has impaired the rights of the public under this article. 
(c)  The circuit court shall not have jurisdiction to invalidate a decision of a municipal body for a violation of this article unless an action is commenced pursuant to this section within the following specified period of time: 
(1)  Within 60 days after the decision was made by the municipal body except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(2)  If the decision involves the approval of contracts, the receipt or acceptance of bids, the making of assessments, the procedures pertaining to the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, or the submission of a borrowing proposal to the electors, within 30 days after that decision. 
(d)  In any case where an action has been initiated to invalidate any decision of a municipal body on the ground that it was not taken in conformity with the requirements of this article, the municipal body may, without being deemed to make any admission contrary to its interest, reenact the disputed decision in conformity with the provisions of this article. The action may be made retroactive to the date on which the disputed decision was made by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members serving on the municipal body. A decision reenacted in this matter shall not be declared invalid by reason of any deficiency in the procedure used for its initial enactment. 
(Code 1982, § 2-611) 
Sec. 2-162. - Enforcement of municipal compliance. 
    If a municipal body is not complying with the provisions of this article, the city attorney or any persons denied rights conferred by this article may commence a civil action to compel compliance with this article or to enjoin further noncompliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 2-612) 
Sec. 2-163. - Violation of article a misdemeanor. 
    Any individual who intentionally violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 2-613) 
Secs. 2-164-2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-181-2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-196. - Purpose of commission. 
    A local officers compensation commission is hereby created for the purpose of determining the salaries of all local elected officials for the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-401) 
Sec. 2-197. - Structure; appointment procedures; vacancies. 
    This commission shall consist of five members who are registered electors of this city and shall be appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation by the city council. The terms of office shall be five years except for the initial appointment of members which shall require staggered terms of one, two, three, four, and five years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies on the board shall be filled immediately by appointment of the mayor and confirmation of the city council. No city employees or members of their immediate family or any individual serving in a governmental office shall be eligible for appointment. 
(Code 1982, § 2-402) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c. 
Sec. 2-198. - Salary determinations of local officials; city council veto powers. 
    The commission shall determine the salaries of all local elected officials, which determination shall be the salaries unless the city council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of all the council elect, rejects such salaries within 30 days of the filing of the commission report with the city clerk. In the case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. 
(Code 1982, § 2-403) 
Sec. 2-199. - Meeting schedule; infrastructure; salaries of local officials fixed by majority vote; compensation. 
    The commission shall meet for not more than 15 days in every odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. The commission shall elect a chairman from its members and shall fix such salaries by majority vote of all commission members. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation but shall be entitled to receive expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1982, § 2-404) 
Secs. 2-200-2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-216. - Statutory authority of division. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 125.651 et seq.), as amended, a housing commission is hereby created in and for the city to be known as the public housing commission. The commission shall have and exercise all of the rights, powers, functions, duties and authority accorded by law. 
(Code 1982, § 2-501) 
Sec. 2-217. - Purposes of commission. 
    The purposes of the commission are as follows: 
(1)  Remedy unsanitary and unsafe inhabited dwelling accommodations which exist in the city. 
(2)  Remedy a shortage of safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations in the city. 
(3)  Make housing available to persons who lack the amount of income which is necessary to enable them, without financial assistance, to live in decent, safe and sanitary dwellings without overcrowding. 
(4)  Institute and establish public and senior citizen housing projects within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-502) 
Sec. 2-218. - Structure and functions. 
    The mayor is hereby directed to appoint the members of the public housing commission. The public housing commission of the city shall hold an organizational meeting and appoint officers, and thereafter shall hold such meetings and perform such functions as may be necessary for the conduct of its business and as provided by law in order to implement and effectuate the purpose of instituting and establishing public and senior citizen housing projects in the city, in accordance with all or any of the stated purposes in section 2-217. 
(Code 1982, § 2-503) 
Sec. 2-219. - Employees. 
    The public housing commission shall select and appoint such employees as it shall deem necessary for the proper exercise of its powers, functions and duties, and shall pay such employees such compensation as the commission shall, with the approval of the mayor, fix and determine. 
(Code 1982, § 2-504) 
Secs. 2-220-2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-236-2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY LAND TRANSFER 

Sec. 2-251. - Costs allocation. 
    The costs incurred in all preparations, procedures and transactions to transfer any interest of the city in any real estate shall be borne by the transferee of such interest. Such costs, not limited by exclusion, shall include advertising, description, and surveying expenses. 
(Code 1982, § 2-901) 
Sec. 2-252. - Legal advertising costs. 
    If a transaction shall require legal advertising, the prospective transferee shall deposit $50.00 with the clerk before such legal advertising is commenced, with the balance of the legal advertising expense paid upon completion of the advertising. 
(Code 1982, § 2-902) 
Sec. 2-253. - Cost reimbursement; conditions and procedure. 
    All expenses paid by a requesting party who is not the successful bidder shall be reimbursed to the requesting party by the successful bidder before the transaction is concluded. If the requesting party is not the successful bidder due to city action, then requirements of this division shall not apply and the city shall reimburse the requestor for expenses incurred under this division. 
(Code 1982, § 2-903) 
Sec. 2-254. - Specific use transfers. 
    All transfers which are requested by the transferee for specific use purposes shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Simple design plans shall be submitted to the city engineer prior to the conclusion of the transfer. 
(2)  All construction, if the construction is required by the transferor as a condition of transfer, shall be commenced within one year of the transfer and completed within two years of the transfer. The date of transfer shall be the date of the instrument. 
(Code 1982, § 2-904) 
Sec. 2-255. - Advance payment. 
    Twenty percent of the bid price shall accompany all bids for the sale of city-owned land. 
(Code 1982, § 2-905) 
Sec. 2-256. - Closing procedures and requirements. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall not execute any instrument that purports to transfer any interest of the city in any real estate unless such instrument is approved as to the terms thereof by the land, lease and sales committee. Such approval shall be in writing, signed by the chairman of such committee and such writing attached to the instrument to be executed. 
(Code 1982, § 2-906) 
Sec. 2-257. - Due date of full payment; forfeiture; extension. 
    Thirty days after purchaser receives written notice from the city clerk that the deed to the property is ready, he must pay the total amount of the purchase price. If payment is not made within the 30-day period, the purchaser will forfeit the 20 percent down payment. Payment can be extended, subject to review by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-907) 
Secs. 2-258-2-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-276. - Dollar limitations. 
    The dollar amount limit within which purchases may be made without the necessity of securing competitive bids and without prior council approval shall be $5,000.00, pursuant to section 13.8(a)(2), (b) of the City of Iron Mountain Charter. 
(Ord. of 9-2-86, § 1; Ord. of 9-15-97; Ord. of 12-3-10) 
Sec. 2-277. - Emergency purchases. 
    The dollar limit shall be suspended in cases where an emergency exists which affects public health and safety or which would significantly restrict the necessary operation of the city. In those instances, the city manager shall have an unlimited power of purchase. 
(Ord. of 9-2-86, § 2) 
Sec. 2-278. - Amendment of Charter limitation. 
(a)  Section 2-276 shall amend section 13.8(a)(2) of the Charter for the city where the dollar limits, as stated for such purposes, is set at $1,000.00 as follows: 
(1)  The dollar amount limits within which purchases of property may be made without the necessity of securing competitive bids; and 
(2)  The dollar amount limit within which such purchases may be made without prior council approval shall be $1,000.00. Such amount may be reviewed annually and adjusted by council action if deemed appropriate. 
(b)  The stated figure of $1,500.00 may be reviewed annually and adjusted by council action if deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. of 9-2-86, § 3) 
Sec. 2-279. - Exemption from sealed competitive bid requirement. 
    Any contract[s] other than the exceptions specified in section 2-280 that are under $20,000 may be exempt from the sealed competitive bid requirement at the discretion of the city council. Any contract awarded without competitive bidding shall be in accordance with the procedures specified in the purchasing policy of the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-2-98) 
Sec. 2-280. - Sealed competitive bid requirement. 
    All contracts of $20,000 or more shall be let only after sealed competitive bidding, except for (1) professional services; (2) emergency repairs; (3) maintenance services; (4) utilities; (5) sole source service contracts. 
(Ord. of 11-2-98) 
Secs. 2-281-2-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAXATION 

Sec. 2-286. - Due date of municipal taxes. 
    All municipal taxes on real property which are required to be paid on or before August 10 shall be collected without a collection fee or interest charges. 
(Ord. of 5-4-87, § A) 
Sec. 2-287. - Late penalty; constitutes charge and lien. 
    To all taxes paid thereafter, a penalty of four percent shall be added which penalty shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the tax is applied. 
(Ord. of 5-4-87, § B) 
Sec. 2-288. - Collection of penalty. 
    This penalty shall be collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which it is added. 
(Ord. of 5-4-87, § C) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; noise, § 30-26 et seq.; municipal civil infractions, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fowl means live guineas, pea fowls, pheasants, excepting pigeons. 
    Livestock means horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, lambs, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros, goats, kids, and swine, and fur bearing animals being raised in captivity. 
    Poultry means live chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5-1201) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished according to the provisions of section 1-15. In addition, if the owner or owners of such land has failed to comply with the notification by the chief of police within the period specified, the director of public works shall assign employees to enter upon the premises for the purpose of correcting the violations of section 6-3. The director of public works shall keep accurate accounts of expenses incurred in rectifying the violations of section 6-3 with respect to each of the premises entered upon therefor and make a sworn statement of the account and deliver the same to the city clerk. The city clerk shall audit such account and certify the same to the city assessor. Such accounts audited and allowed shall be levied on the lands on which the expenditures were made, and the same shall become a lien upon the land and shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes are collected and, when collected, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5-1207) 
Sec. 6-3. - Prohibited acts; permissive custody; conditions; limitations. 
    Live poultry, fowl (except pigeons), and livestock shall not be kept, harbored, bred, or maintained in the city. Pigeons are permissible with notice to and approval by the chief of police and subject to full compliance with the limitations and restrictions set forth in this section: 
(1)  The owner or lessee or occupant of any premises shall not keep, harbor, breed, or maintain any pigeons within 20 feet of any human dwelling. 
(2)  Pigeons must be kept free from odors and free from fly breeding. 
(3)  All pigeon droppings shall be removed from the pens at least twice weekly and placed in covered garbage cans for removal. 
(4)  Pigeons must be confined in a loft, fly-pen, coop, or aviary which shall be dry, well ventilated, and with windows so placed as to admit sunlight. 
(5)  All such lofts, fly-pens, coops, or aviaries shall be kept whitewashed or painted on both the inside and outside and shall be cleaned at least twice a week between April 1 and October 1 and at least once a week from October 1 to April 1. 
(6)  The loft, fly-pen, or coop for keeping pigeons shall be elevated at least two feet above the ground or other foundation, upon post legs or pillars of concrete or iron, or if other material is used, then the same shall be completely surrounded or covered by smooth, jointless, galvanized sheet metal. 
(7)  The entire floor and sides of such loft, fly-pen or coop for at least two feet extending upwards from the bottom of the floor shall be covered or protected by galvanized iron, or its equivalent, concrete, or 18 gauge wire mesh of not more than one-half-inch dimension. 
(8)  All food used for pigeons shall be kept in suitable containers with tightfitting covers so as to be inaccessible to rats. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5-1202) 
Sec. 6-4. - Homing or performing pigeons-Release from custody. 
    All pigeons must be kept confined in the coop, loft, fly-pen, or aviary, except as follows: 
(1)  For periods not to exceed 11/2 hours each morning and evening, homing and air performing pigeons may be liberated for racing, providing they are in the air continuously during this period and return to their lofts immediately following such exercises or occasions. 
(2)  From June 1 to August 10, young homing and young high flying pigeons may be allowed at liberty during the daylight hours providing they are under control of the owner or his agent and on the property of such owner or agent. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5-1203) 
Sec. 6-5. - Same-Capture or killing. 
    No person, except the owner or his agent shall catch, kill, maim, capture, or detain any homing or high flying pigeon which, at the time of its capture or detention, has upon its leg a seamless numbered band as issued by any national pigeon organization or by the United States Army or Marine Corps, or which has upon its leg a band bearing the name or initials of the owner. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5-1204) 
Sec. 6-6. - Facility construction; permit requirement. 
    No loft, coop, or aviary shall be constructed in the city without obtaining a permit for the construction of same from the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5-1205) 
Sec. 6-7. - Procedural notice. 
    When notified by the chief of police of the presence of any pigeons in violation of section 6-3, the owner of the premises in question shall rectify and cure the problem that exists so that a violation of section 6-3 no longer is taking place. The owner shall rectify the problem within 15 days from receipt of written notification by the chief of police, certified mail, or date of personal service, of the violation. 
(Ord. of 6-7-93, § 5-1206) 
Sec. 6-8. - Loose dogs and cats prohibited. 
(a)  Intent . The purpose of this section is to provide for the safety, health, and welfare of the residents of the City of Iron Mountain. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, possesses, cares for, or has in their custody or control a dog or cat to permit the dog or cat to be running loose upon the public streets, walks, other public places within the city, or off of the owner or custodian's property. This includes other private property not owned or controlled by the person in the care, custody or control of the dog or cat. 
(c)  Penalty . A violation of subsection (a) is a civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 1-7-15) 
Secs. 6-9-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CATS 

Sec. 6-26. - Purpose of article; violation to constitute misdemeanor. 
    The following article governs the number of cats that may be kept by any person in the city. Provisions are made for the impoundment and disposal of sick or abandoned cats under prescribed conditions. Violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1301) 
Sec. 6-27. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, shelter, keep or harbor more than three cats over four months of age at any one time in one residential building and garage, or in any business building or any other building, or on a residential, business or other lot in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to cats that are being kept by a veterinarian or in a veterinary hospital or by an established commercial pet shop. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show or exhibit, at any reasonable times, any cats which he is harboring, sheltering or keeping in his possession or custody to any duly authorized member of the police department or the health officer of the city, his duly authorized assistants or employees, or the county animal control officer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to own, possess, shelter, keep, harbor or maintain any cats under such conditions or in such a manner as to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor, menace to health or other like conditions. It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person having the possession, care, custody, or control of cats to permit any cat to run at large upon the public streets, walks, parks or other public places within the city, unless such cat shall be restrained by a leash or by personally accompanying such cat. It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the possession, care, custody or control of cats to permit any cat to go upon any private property within the city without the permission of the owner or occupant of such private property. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1302) 
Sec. 6-28. - Enforcement; impoundment; disposition. 
    It shall be the duty of the authorities listed in section 6-27 to seize, receive possession of, and impound any cat found anywhere in the city contrary to the provisions of this article. All impoundment processes and ultimate disposition of any such cats, or litters of cats, shall be through and under the jurisdiction of the departmental offices of the county animal control officer. Owners or other claimants seeking to repossess or otherwise claim an impounded cat, partial or whole litters of cats, shall be liable for costs of care and maintenance of the same, and shall render payment of any assessed costs to the county animal control officer or his designated custodial facility. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1303) 
Secs. 6-29-6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS 

Sec. 6-46. - Barking, yelping or howling. 
    No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog which by loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling shall cause a serious annoyance to or disturb the peace of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(12), § 7-401) 
Sec. 6-47. - Enforcement of article. 
    It shall be the duty of the city police department to investigate, administer, and enforce this article. If, after investigation, the chief of police, or his authorized representative, determines that a person is in violation of this article, he is authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or municipal civil infraction citation to the alleged violator. Service of the civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with chapter 38. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(12), § 7-402) 
Sec. 6-48. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The penalty for the first offense shall be $50.00 and, for the first repeat offense, $250.00. Repeat offense shall be determined as defined in chapter 38. For any second or subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be no more than $500.00. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(12), § 7-403) 
Sec. 6-49. - Sanitation. 
(a)  No owner or custodian of any dog shall allow such dog to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area or private property other than that of the owner, unless such owner or custodian shall immediately remove and dispose of all feces deposited by such dog in any manner permitted by law. 
(b)  All persons having in their custody or control a dog in any public park, grounds, school grounds, public street, alley, sidewalk or any other public grounds, or any private property within the city other than the premises of the owner or person having custody of such dog or other dog, shall have in their immediate possession the means for picking up the defecation of a dog. 
(c)  No person owning, harboring or keeping a dog within the city shall permit any waste matter from the dog to collect and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, or to abutting property owners. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction as specified in section 6-48 above, provided, however, violation of subsection (b) of this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction with a fine of ten dollars. Fines may be adjusted at the sole discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-17-10) 
Secs. 6-50-6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITION OF THE FEEDING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS, BIRDS AND WATERFOWL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 21, 2005, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 6-71-6-74, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Dec. 4, 1995(1), §§ 5-2102-5-2104. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 46. 

Sec. 6-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certain animals, birds and waterfowl means deer, moose, bear, coyote, fox, wolf, raccoon, ducks, geese, swans, seagulls, crows, turkeys and pigeons who reside or otherwise spend time in this area on either a temporary or permanent basis, both wild, domestic, or held in captivity. 
    Deer means any ruminant animal of the family of Cervidae having deciduous antlers, usually in the male only. 
    Feed or feeding means: 
(1)  The intentional act of furnishing of, or otherwise making available, any human food, pet food, hay, forage product or supplement, or other substance which is likely to be consumed by certain animals, birds and waterfowl; or 
(2)  To give or supply food to and/or providing items of nourishment which are likely to attract certain animals, birds and waterfowl. 
    Natural unintentional feeding means food or other substances consumed by certain animals, birds and waterfowl produced by, or existing in nature; not items that are artificial or brought to or transferred to a particular place from another location. 
(Ord. of 2-21-05) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-72. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to prevent such conduct that may attract and concentrate certain animals, birds and waterfowl within the city limits of the city as it has been determined that the presence of certain animals, birds and waterfowl especially in large numbers, poses a public health nuisance by, contaminating drinking water supplies, beaches, swimming facilities and the private property of residents of this city. It has also been determined that the congregation of certain animals, birds and waterfowl create a hazard to motorists. 
(Ord. of 2-21-05) 
Sec. 6-73. - Feeding or encouraging prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally, keep, maintain or cause to be fed or provide or make available food or other substance for the consumption by certain animals, birds and waterfowl as described by this article within the city, either on private property or on public property, excepting that feeding activity further described in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  No person shall create or foster any condition, or allow any condition to exist or continue, which results in a congregation, congestion or other grouping of certain animals, birds and waterfowl as described by this article. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to feeding activities supervised and conducted by the city in conjunction with its city park, or by the city in the conduct of management practices for the control of certain animals, birds and waterfowl as defined by this article. This section shall not apply to a person engaged in the feeding of songbirds so long as the food and manner of feeding is not attracting certain animals, birds and waterfowl as described in this article. This section shall not apply to natural conditions which result in unintentional feeding such as the cultivation of a lawn, garden or landscaping, nor shall it apply to natural, unintentional feeding as described in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-21-05) 
Sec. 6-74. - Enforcement; penalty; civil infraction; nuisance. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The penalty for the first offense shall be $50.00 and for the first repeat offense $150.00. Repeat offense shall be determined as defined in section 1-15. For any second or subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be no more than $500.00. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city or his authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  If, after investigation, the chief of police or his authorized representative determines that a violation of this article exists, he shall be authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or a municipal civil infraction citation to any person that is responsible for violating the provisions of this article. Service of said civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with section 38-3 et seq. 
(d)  Permitting a violation of this article on private premises is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and enjoined. The enforcement of this article by abatement of any nuisance by the enforcing officer or by application to any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement by judicial decree or writ shall not preclude enforcement of this article by the issuance of a municipal civil infraction and the imposition of fine and costs herein provided. 
(Ord. of 2-21-05) 
Secs. 6-75-6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION OF VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-101. - Definitions. 
    Dog officer means any person employed or elected by the people of the state, or by any municipality, county or township, whose duty it is to preserve peace or to make arrests or to enforce the law, and includes conservation officers and members of the state police and the Dickinson County Animal Control officers. 
    Impounded means taken into the custody of the public pound of Dickinson County. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing or harboring or having the care or custody of a dog. 
    Person means a natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, firm, partnership or trust. 
    Unconfined means any dog which is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner of the dog. The pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot. All such pens or structures must be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
    Vicious dog shall include the following: 
(1)  Any dog with a known vicious propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(2)  Any dog which because of its vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans, and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this chapter. 
(3)  Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic animal. 
(4)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
Notwithstanding the definition of a vicious dog above, no dog may be declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. If a minor is under the age of seven years of age at the time the damage or injury was sustained, it shall be rebuttably presumed that such minor was not committing a trespass or other tort or teasing, tormenting or abusing the dog. 
No dog may be declared vicious if an injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog. No dog may be declared vicious if the dog was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. The burden of proof thereon shall be upon the owner or keeper of the dog. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 1) 
Sec. 6-102. - Confinement. 
    The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to be unconfined. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 2) 
Sec. 6-103. - Leash and muzzle required. 
    The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash, and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or animal. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 3) 
Sec. 6-104. - Owner to display warning signs. 
    The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on his premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious dog on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 4) 
Sec. 6-105. - Dog fighting prohibited. 
    No person, firm, corporation, organization or department shall possess or harbor or maintain care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dog fighting or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog to attack human being or domestic animals. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 5) 
Sec. 6-106. - Action for damages; destruction of offending vicious dog. 
    If any vicious dog shall, when unprovoked, kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding any domestic animal, belonging to or in the possession of any person, or shall, when unprovoked, attack, assault, bite or otherwise injure any human being or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within the enclosure of the owner or keeper of such vicious dog, or while otherwise, on or off the property of the owner or keeper whether or not such vicious dog was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether the vicious dog escaped without fault of the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of such dog shall be liable to the person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damage sustained, to be recovered in a civil action, with costs of suit. It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a vicious dog in violation of this chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner or keeper of such vicious dog knew that such vicious dog possessed the propensity to cause such damage or that the vicious dog had a vicious nature. Upon such attack or assault, the dog officer in the city or town where the attack or assault occurred is hereby empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious dog, if, based on all the facts and circumstances of the attack, the dog officer determines that the vicious dog poses a continued threat to the health and safety or welfare of the citizens of the City of Iron Mountain. If the attack causes serious personal injury to the victim, the dog officer shall confiscate and destroy such vicious dog. It shall be presumed to be a serious injury if the attack results in the victim requiring medical treatment caused by the vicious dog attack. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 6; Ord. of 11-18-13(1)) 
Sec. 6-107. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to K-9 or other dogs owned by any police department or any law enforcement agency of the State of Michigan, or the United States or a branch of the armed services of the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 7) 
Sec. 6-108. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  If any vicious dog shall, when unprovoked, kills, wounds causing serious injury or assists in killing or wounding causing serious injury to any animal described in section 6-106 of this article, the owner or keeper of said dog shall pay a $200.00 fine which may be adjusted from time to time by the city council, and the dog officer is empowered to confiscated and, after expiration of a ten-day waiting period exclusive of Sundays and holidays shall destroy said vicious dog. 
(b)  If any vicious dog shall, when unprovoked, attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure or kill a human being, and the dog officer determines that the vicious dog poses a continued threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens as set forth in section 6-106, the owner or keeper shall pay a $500.00 fine which may be adjusted from time to time by the city council. The dog officer is empowered to require the dog be quarantined and, after expiration of a ten-day waiting period exclusive of Sundays and holidays, shall destroy said vicious dog. At any time during the ten days, the owner may, at its expense, destroy the dog. If the owner does not destroy the dog within the ten-day waiting period, the dog officer shall confiscate the dog and have it humanely destroyed at the owner's expense. 
(c)  If the owner or keeper of a dog impounded for an alleged violation of subsections (a) or (b) above, shall believe that no violations have occurred, such owner or keeper may petition the district court which has jurisdiction to order that the impounded dog be returned to the owner or keeper and should not be destroyed. The impounded dog shall not be returned to the owner or be destroyed pending resolution of such owner's or keeper's petition if the petition shall have been filed within ten days of impoundment of such dog and notice shall have been served within ten days of the filing of the petition upon the dog officer or keeper of the dog pound. The hearing shall be conducted within seven days from serving of the notice, unless continued to a later date by the court. The decision of the district court may be appealed to the circuit court by any aggrieved party within 48 hours of the decision. The dog shall remain impounded pending the appeal. A hearing de novo, without a jury, shall be conducted within seven days of the appeal, unless adjourned to a later date by the court. The decision of the circuit court shall be final and conclusive upon all the parties thereto. However, the dog officer or any law enforcement officer shall have the right to declare a dog to be vicious for any actions of the dog subsequent to the date of the violation. If the court shall find that there shall not have been a violation of subsections (a) or (b), such dog may be released to the custody of the owner or keeper upon payment to the pound keeper or dog officer of the expense of keeping such dog. All issues herein shall be decided by the preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 8; Ord. of 11-18-13(1)) 
Sec. 6-109. - Liability of parents for damages caused by dog owned by minor. 
    In the event that the owner or keeper of the vicious dog is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be liable for all injuries, property damage, and fines sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by said vicious dog. 
(Ord. of 12-19-05, § 9) 
Chapter 8 - RENTAL HOUSING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted July 21, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as chapter 8, §§ 8-6.50-8-6.64. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 8-1-8-15. The original section numbers are included in the history notes. The Rental Housing Code was formerly contained in §§ 10-76-10-89 of this Code. 

Sec. 8-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  [Purpose.] The City of Iron Mountain recognizes a compelling interest in establishing standards for the maintenance of sanitary and safe residential rental structures and for improving rental properties within the city. Such standards are an important factor supportive of the general health, safety and welfare of all of its citizens of the City of Iron Mountain. The chapter is designed to promote the continuing maintenance and quality of safe rental properties and to enhance and maintain property values throughout the City of Iron Mountain. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  This code shall apply to any structures or part thereof, which is let or available for occupancy by persons pursuant to an oral or written rental or lease arrangement or other valuable consideration; or to any occupant therein. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, single-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, rooming houses, housekeeping units, rooming units. 
(2)  This chapter does not apply to hotel/motels (where the average overnight stay is less than 30 days), jails, nursing homes, school dormitories, hospitals, nor federally licensed and inspected properties. Nor does it apply to facilities offering healthcare of any kind provided by legal not-for-profit agencies that are inspected, certified and/or licensed by the State of Michigan. 
(3)  This chapter shall be enforced by the director of planning and development or his/her authorized representatives. The director may utilize additional personnel to assist with the enforcement including individuals with specialized technical training or experience necessary to evaluate the condition of rental properties and determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.50) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. In the interpretation of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Approved shall mean accepted by the building inspection officer or his authorized representative as a result of their experience or investigation, or by reason of tests, or acceptable to a recognized testing laboratory, designated by the building inspection officer. 
    Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly below grade and having less than half of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Building shall mean any structure, framework or housing, public or private, and includes tanks and/or receptacles for the storage of materials or commodities. 
    Building inspection officer shall mean the legally designated building inspection authority of the City of Iron Mountain or his authorized representative. 
    Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly below grade and having half or more than half of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Dwelling shall mean any house, building, structure, trailer or vehicle, or portion thereof, which is occupied or intended for occupancy in whole or in part as the home, residence, living, or sleeping place of one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. A house trailer shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, as well as all other ordinances of the City of Iron Mountain, except that house trailers or other vehicles duly licensed as a vehicle, may be occupied or used as a dwelling for reasonable periods or lengths of time, without otherwise being subject to the provisions of the act for dwellings, when located in a park, provided that such parking sites are equipped with adequate electric, water, safety and sanitary facilities. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling, having one kitchen sink and bathroom, forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room shall mean a room used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or connecting corridors, closets, and storage space. 
    Human habitation shall mean the use of any room, rooming unit, dwelling, dwelling unit, apartment unit, building or premises for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes by one or more persons. 
    Infestation shall mean the presence of any insects, rodents, or other pests within or around a dwelling, building, or premises. 
    Occupant shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit. 
    Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner shall mean any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or premises with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit or rooming unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association, or partnership. 
    Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
    Premises shall mean any lot or piece of land inclusive of the buildings and shall include parking lots or other places or enclosures however owned or occupied. 
    Rental structure shall mean any dwelling that contains, at a single property address, one or more dwelling units intended for rental. 
    Rooming house or lodging house (hereinafter referred to as rooming house) shall mean a dwelling having one kitchen and used for the purpose of providing prepared meals or lodging or both prepared meals and lodging for compensation of any kind, computed by day, week, or month. 
    Rooming unit shall mean a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage; and the said term shall include but not be restricted to paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, dust, animal and human feces, and the residue from the burning of combustible materials. 
    Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator. 
(b)  Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "building", "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "premises", are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof". The singular of any word shall also mean the plural. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.51) 
Sec. 8-3. - Registration. 
(a)  [Requirements.] All rental structures regulated by this chapter are required to be registered pursuant to this chapter and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All existing rental structures shall be registered by property address within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter; 
(2)  All newly constructed rental structures shall be registered prior to any use or occupancy as a rental structure; 
(3)  All existing nonrental structures which are legally converted to rental structures shall be registered, prior to the date on which the property is first occupied for rental purposes; 
(4)  A new owner or purchaser shall register a rental structure which is sold, transferred or conveyed from previous owners within 30 days of the date of the sale/closing. New owners of rental structures are responsible for the completion of the registration process; 
(5)  A certificate of registration shall not be issued to rental structures with outstanding previously billed property taxes; current or past due special assessment installments; water or sewer bills outstanding; charges against the property for mowing, cleanup, weed or debris removal, or similar charges made by the City; or fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort arising from provisions or enforcement of the rental code. 
(6)  Registration is one-time only for an owner of a rental structure. A rental structure registered under this chapter must be reregistered only when the rental structure changes ownership as described in subsection 8-3(a)(4). 
(b)  Registration forms 
(1)  Registration application forms shall be made in such form and in accordance with such instruction as may be provided by the director of the department of community development or his authorized designees. It is the property owner's responsibility to obtain and submit the registration form in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.52) 
Sec. 8-4. - Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. 
(a)  Requirements. No owner or operator shall let, rent or hire to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(b)  Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to water and sewage system. 
(c)  Water closet, lavatory, and bath. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet, a lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower. The water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower unit must be properly installed and maintained in working order and must be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. They must be capable of performing the functions for which they are designed. They must be properly connected to a water and sewage system. They must be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(d)  Shared sanitary facilities. Except for section 8-8 (rooming houses), shared sanitary facilities are not allowed under this chapter. Provided further that the provisions of this section shall in no way supersede or alter the requirements of the building code pertaining to new structures or conversions of old structures. 
(e)  Water connections. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of subsections (b), (c) and (d) shall be connected with both hot and cold water lines. 
(f)  Water heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C) such that each required sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower is capable of performing the function for which they were respectively designed. 
(g)  Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. 
    In the event the director of planning and development or other city official finds that the area is not clean, safe or sanitary, the tenant shall be deemed responsible for cleaning the area. In the event an enforcement action is taken against the tenant for noncompliance, the city shall also notify the owner/operator of the action. 
    In the event the tenant does not comply with the required remedial action, the owner/operator shall be given the opportunity to retake legal control of the property and remedy the situation. If, within a reasonable time of the owner/operator retaking legal control of the property, the required remedial action has still not been complied with, the owner/operator shall be held responsible. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.53) 
Sec. 8-5. - Minimum standards for light, ventilation, and heating. 
(a)  Requirements. No owner or operator shall let, rent, or hire to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(b)  Windows. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be one window of at least five and seven-tenths square feet. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room. Every window and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight. The City will not require apartment units, houses, etc. to be retrofitted to meet the minimum window square footage or total floor area requirement. These two requirements will be met when the unit, building, house, etc., is to be rehabilitated to a cost greater than 50 percent of the current value. 
(c)  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened for adequate ventilation, except where there is supplied some other device or method affording adequate ventilation and approved by the building inspection officer. 
(d)  Bathroom lights and ventilation. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in subsections (b) and (c), except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with an operational ventilation system approved by the building inspection officer. 
(e)  Heating Facilities. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and working condition such that they are capable of safely heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68°F (20°C). 
(f)  Electrical outlets. Every room shall contain at least two electrical convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one lighting fixture. Additional convenience outlets shall be provided such that each electrical device and appliance located within each room can be plugged in and operated. Cords to appliances and devices shall not be run through doorways, under rugs or stapled to wood base boards, door casings, or through holes in partitions or floors. All installations and repairs of electrical outlets are to be made in a manner that conforms to the electrical codes in force in the City of Iron Mountain at the time of inspection. Dwellings and dwelling units already in existence will not have to be retrofitted to meet this requirement. 
(g)  Lighting public halls and stairways. Every public hall and stairway in every dwelling containing four or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Adequate lighting for public halls consists of one constantly shining electrical lighting fixture for every 100 feet of hall length. Adequate lighting for stairways consists of a proper number of constantly shining electrical lighting fixtures to enable each riser and landing to be visible. Every public hall and stairway in structures of four or more dwelling units, shall have emergency lighting and exit signs. 
(h)  Screens, basement or cellar windows. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.54) 
Sec. 8-6. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Requirements. No owner or operator shall let, rent, or hire to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Roofs and drainage: The roof shall be sound and weathertight, without defects that would cause leakage. All roof gutters and downspouts if installed shall be free from obstructions and without holes or damage that would compromise their ability to perform the task for which they were designed. All roof gutters and downspouts must be securely attached to the building. No storm drainage shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  House and unit numbers: Each building shall have the street number displayed in four-inch Arabic numbers in a position easily observed and readable from the street. Additionally, each unit that is assigned a unit, room or apartment number or letter shall be clearly marked on the entrance door to the unit, room or apartment. 
(3)  Handrails and guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers and every open portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade shall have guards. 
(4)  Exterior walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface-coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(5)  Foundation walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent entry from rodents. 
(6)  Exterior openings; maintenance: Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be weathertight, watertight, and rodent-proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(7)  Plumbing fixtures; maintenance: Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. 
(8)  Floor surfaces: Every water closet compartment, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be water resistant and/or so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(9)  Supplied facilities; maintenance: Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter, shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition. 
(10)  Public areas: Every owner and occupant of a dwelling containing one or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.55) 
Sec. 8-7. - Minimum space, use, and location requirements. 
(a)  Requirements. No owner or operator shall let, rent, or hire to another for occupancy and dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(b)  Cooking, sleeping in same room. Where more than two persons occupy any dwelling unit, food shall not be prepared or cooked in any room used for sleeping purposes. Shall not apply to studio apartments or efficiency units. 
(c)  Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room on the main floor, shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet. The ceiling height of any room in a top floor or attic, shall be not less than six feet six inches over not less than one-third of the floor area of any room. The city will not require units to be retrofitted to comply with these requirements. Units will comply with these requirements at the time of rehabilitation or remodeling. 
(d)  Cellar and/or basement. No cellar and/or basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness; 
(2)  The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as required in subsection 8-5(b); 
(3)  Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and 
(4)  Openable window area in each room is provided as required under subsection 8-5(c), except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the building inspection officer. 
(5)  There is at least one means of egress directly to the outside. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.56) 
Sec. 8-8. - Minimum standards and requirements for rooming houses. 
(a)  Requirements. No owner or operator shall own or operate a rooming house or shall let or hire to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this chapter. 
(b)  Minimum basic facilities. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, connected to a water and sewer system and in compliance with section 8-4, must be supplied for each eight persons residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family whenever they share the use of the said facilities. Provided that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. If the structure has only one facility, it shall not be located in a basement. Any rooming house where food is served shall comply with the Dickinson County Health Department Codes. 
(c)  Minimum space. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 20 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof. 
(d)  Means of egress. Every rooming unit shall have two remote means of egress, one of which may be a window that conforms to this chapter. Every rooming unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress leading to an open space at ground level and this open space shall lead to a public street or alley as required by the laws of the State of Michigan and the City of Iron Mountain. 
(e)  Responsibility for maintenance. The owner and occupant of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(f)  Maximum occupancy. Every rooming house registration shall contain the name(s) and address(es) of the owner and operator, the type of accommodation for which issued, the maximum number of rooms which may be rented, together with the maximum number of persons that may occupy such premises at one time. No person shall rent a greater number of rooms than is specified in his or her registration filed with the city clerk, nor shall accommodations be rented to a greater number of persons that is specified therein. 
(g)  Register. Every rooming house operator shall provide and maintain a register of the name and home address of any person other than members of the family of the owner or operator as listed in the registration filed with the city clerk, occupying said premises or any part thereof. Said register shall be maintained in said premises and shall be submitted upon demand to any official or police officer of the City of Iron Mountain or to any police officer of the State of Michigan. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to inscribe in such register or to give for the purpose of being inscribed in such register, any false information. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.57) 
Sec. 8-9. - Fire safety. 
(a)  Scope of responsibility. The owner of a rental dwelling unit shall provide and the renter shall maintain fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with the requirements of this section, other ordinances, and state law. No person shall rent to another for occupancy any premises which do not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Egress. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, or to a yard, court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade. If there is only one means of egress from above the second story, then an alternate exit must be provided through the use of fire escape stairs or an approved fire ladder. 
(c)  Direct exit. Every dwelling unit or room shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. 
(d)  Locked doors. All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily openable from the inside without the use of keys. Exits from dwelling units shall not lead through other such units or through toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
(e)  Fire escapes. All required fire escapes shall be provided and maintained in working condition and shall be structurally sound. 
(f)  Emergency escapes. 
(1)  Windows or doors. Every sleeping room shall have a safe means of emergency escape to the outside consisting of an emergency escape window or door. 
(2)  Maintenance. Emergency escape windows and doors shall be maintained operational and available to occupants of sleeping rooms in residential uses. 
(3)  Security. Bars, grilles, grates, or similar devices are permitted to be placed over a required emergency escape window provided that such devices must be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(g)  Accumulation and storage. 
(1)  Waste materials. Waste, refuse, or other materials shall not obstruct stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes or other means of egress. 
(2)  Flammable and explosive matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils, and cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse, such as waste paper, boxes, and rags shall not be accumulated or stored on residential rental premises except in reasonable quantities consistent with normal usage. 
(3)  Flammable liquids. A rental dwelling unit shall not be located within a structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing, or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43.33 degrees Centigrade) or lower. 
(4)  Required storage area. A locked storage area, with a minimum size of 30 square feet, shall be provided on site for the storage of personal belongings of a tenant. In structures of two or more rental units, separate, locked storage facilities shall be provided outside the normal living space. 
In efficiency apartment units and buildings, a locked storage area shall be provided, but may vary in size depending on available space. In the event that interior and/or exterior space is not available, the owner shall petition the code enforcement official to waive this requirement and approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All newly constructed units and those converted shall comply with the provisions of this section from the date of adoption. 
(h)  Fire protection systems. 
(1)  Generally. All fire protection systems and equipment shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times. 
(2)  Fire alarms. Fire alarms and detecting systems shall be maintained and shall be suitable for their respective purposes. 
(3)  Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers, if provided, shall be visible, accessible, and maintained in a safe operating condition with inspection tags attached. 
(4)  Smoke detectors required. At least one working smoke detector on each level of the unit, including the basement. If any member of the family is hearing impaired, the smoke detector must have an alarm designed for hearing impaired persons. In addition, in multiple floor dwellings, there shall be one detector on each floor. All detectors shall be installed in an approved location. All detectors shall be in working order at the time of occupancy by a renter. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.58) 
Sec. 8-10. - Inspection of the premises. 
(a)  Periodic inspection. The director of Community development or his/her authorized representative is hereby authorized to, and shall inspect all rental dwellings on a periodic basis of once every three years; upon completion of the registration and receipt of the fee, the director of community development or his/her authorized representative shall schedule a compliance inspection within three years of registration. Efforts shall be made to schedule each compliance inspection at a reasonable time with respect to the inspector's and the owner's and operator's convenience. City will attempt to give vacant units priority. 
(b)  Satisfactory inspection. Upon satisfactory completion of the compliance inspection, and upon receipt of the fee for said inspection, the director of community development or his/her authorized representative will issue a certificate of compliance to the owner, operator or occupant of the premises. A certificate of compliance will be valid for a period of three years. Subsequent periodic inspections shall be conducted in accordance with this section. Satisfactory completion means that every applicable requirement found in this chapter has been adhered to and complied with. Only total compliance will be considered satisfactory completion. 
(c)  Unsatisfactory inspection/notification of noncompliance/reinspection. 
(1)  If the director of planning and development determines that a dwelling unit does not comply with this code, he/she will notify the property owner, in writing, of all areas of noncompliance, steps that must be undertaken by the owner and/or operator to remedy the defects, and the time frame to remedy all areas of noncompliance. 
(2)  The director of planning and development must indicate in the notice of noncompliance, whether the conditions are such that the rental dwelling unit must be vacated, or whether steps to bring the unit up to code may continue while the unit continues to be occupied by tenants. 
(3)  Notice of violations of the code shall be mailed by registered first class mail to the owners and/or operators of the property and by first class mail to the tenants within seven (7) business days subsequent to the inspection. The notice of violation shall state the right to appeal and the instructions for making such appeal. Failure to remedy the violation within the time specified in the notice, and the owner fails to appeal within the time specified herein shall be deemed a violation of the code. 
(4)  If a dwelling unit fails to pass the periodic inspection, a subsequent reinspection will be required and an additional fee may be paid for the reinspection before the director of planning will issue a certificate of compliance. 
(d)  Nonperiodic inspections. Any rental unit may be subject to nonperiodic inspection if any of the following occur: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a complaint of an owner, operator, occupant or citizen who has reasonable cause to believe that the premises are in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a report or a referral from a police department, fire department, community development department, public or private school or other public agency that the rental property is not in compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  Upon reasonable belief that a rental structure is not registered with the City of Iron Mountain as required by this chapter; 
(4)  Upon evidence of a violation observed by, or brought to the attention of, the director of planning and development. 
a.  The director of planning and development is empowered to enter at any and all reasonable times upon and into any premises, building or structure for the purpose of examining and inspecting same. If the owner fails to permit an inspection, the director may seek a warrant as provided in subection 8-11(b). 
b.  If a dwelling unit is required to undergo a nonperiodic inspection pursuant to any of the items in paragraph (b) above, the inspection will be based on the same criteria as periodic inspections, and failure to pass will lead to the director of planning and development nullifying any previously issued certificates of compliance. The director of planning and development will also establish clear requirements of what must be undertaken by the owner or operator, and what time frame, in order to schedule a reinspection and, when warranted, reissue the certificate of compliance. In addition, a director of planning and development must indicate whether the conditions are such that the rental unit must be vacated, or whether steps to bring the unit up to code may continue while the unit continues to be rented by tenants. 
1.  If the rental unit that undergoes a nonperiodic inspection passes the inspection, there will be no fee for this inspection; 
2.  If the rental unit that undergoes a nonperiodic inspection fails to pass the inspection, there will be a fee for the nonperiodic inspection, as well as fees for reinspections required to establish compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  Fees. The city shall charge a nonrefundable fee for registration and inspections. Fees as set forth in the City of Iron Mountain fee schedule shall be paid at the time of registration and at the time of the periodic inspection. Any fee under this act shall be set by resolution of the city council and be based on the administrative cost associated with enforcement of the chapter. The fee for inspection covers the initial inspection. If any subsequent reinspections are required, the city council shall establish by resolution a reinspection fee. 
(f)  Payment. Any fee for required registration, inspection or reinspections, including the administrative service fee, shall be paid by the owner or party in interest whose name appears on the city's real property tax assessment records and/or the person or entity that registered the property. 
(1)  Notification to add to a tax roll. In the event of nonpayment of the required fee, the taxpayer of record shall be notified of the amount of unpaid fees by first class mail at the address shown on the city assessor's records. If he/she fails to pay the amount owed within 30 days after mailing of the notice, the city assessor shall add the amount to the next tax roll of the city and it shall be collected as provided by law for the collection of city taxes, plus ten percent administrative fee for processing the tax information required. 
(2)  Lien on property. Any unpaid fees or costs assessed under this chapter shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the city assessor for placement on the real property tax assessment records. Any fees and costs shall be collected as allowed by law. This provision does not limit any other remedies available to the city for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.59) 
Sec. 8-11. - Certificate of compliance required. 
(a)  No owner or operator shall lease or rent a rental dwelling unit, unless there is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the director of planning and development and the name of the owners. The certificate shall be issued after registration and inspection by the director of planning and development to determine that each rental dwelling unit complies with the provisions of the codes and ordinances of the City of Iron Mountain. The only exception to this requirement is during the first certification period during which all rental dwelling units will be inspected over a three-year period. 
(1)  A director of planning and development must inspect the premises before the certificate of compliance is initially issued. Upon failure of the building inspector to conduct an inspection prior to occupancy, the owner or operator may rent the property until the director of planning and development has conducted an inspection and the owner or operator will not be deemed in violation during that time. If, however, the inspector's inability to inspect the premises is due to the owner's or operator's action, failure to act, or inability to arrange the inspection after reasonable notice of the intent to inspect, the owner or operator shall not rent the property without a current certificate of compliance as required. 
(2)  Between 30 and 60 days before the expiration date of the certificate of compliance, the city will arrange with the owner or operator for an inspection date and time and indicate the amount due for the next periodic compliance inspection; said notice shall be by first class mail to the address as provided by the owner and/or operator. The inspector shall attempt to inspect the premises before the certificate of compliance expires. Upon failure of the inspector to conduct an inspection prior to expiration of the certificate of compliance, the owner or operator may rent the property until the inspector has conducted an inspection, and the owners and operators will not be deemed in violation during that time. If, however, the inspector's inability to inspect is due to the owner's or operator's action, failure to act or refusal to permit an inspection after reasonable notice of the intent to inspect, the owners or operators shall not rent the property without a current certificate of compliance as required. If the tenants are utilizing the dwelling unit, the inspector is authorized to require vacation of the dwelling unit. A certificate of compliance shall expire three years from the date of issue. 
(b)  Warrants. 
(1)  Nonemergency. In a nonemergency situation, if a registered owner, registered agent or occupant demands a warrant for inspection of the premises, the director of planning and development shall obtain a warrant for inspection from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Preparation of warrant. The director of planning and development shall prepare the warrant, stating the address of the structure to be inspected, the nature of the inspection, as defined in this code or other applicable codes or statutes, and the reason for the inspection. 
(3)  Warrant shall be issued. If the court finds the warrant is in proper form and in accordance with this code, it shall be issued forthwith. 
(4)  Emergency. In the event of an emergency, no warrant shall be required. 
(5)  [Provisions.] Tenant shall notify the landlord of any problems first before contacting the city. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.60) 
Sec. 8-12. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeal procedure. Any owner or operator affected by any notice of violation which has been issued under this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city rental code appeal board which will consist of the five members of the City of Iron Mountain Zoning Board of Appeals and three members of the Dickinson County Landlords Association. The affected person shall file a written appeal to the director of planning and development requesting the hearing. The appeal shall include the name, address and telephone number of the appellant and a brief statement of the grounds of the hearing. An application for appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City of Iron Mountain fee schedule to cover the city's cost of handling said appeal. The appeal shall be filed within 21 days after the day the notice of violation is served. Failure to file a written notice of appeal within the 21-day period shall be deemed a waiver of the person's right to a hearing or to otherwise contest the notice of the violation. Upon timely receipt of an appeal, the director of planning and development shall set a time for a hearing before the city rental code appeals board and shall give the appellant written notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing. 
(b)  Hearings. Hearings shall be commenced within a reasonable time after an appeal has been filed. At such hearings, the appellant shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn. The director of planning and development shall be given an opportunity to provide information relative to and in support of charging the violation. 
(c)  Decisions and powers of the city rental code appeals board. 
(1)  After a hearing, the city rental code appeal board may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice of violation depending upon its findings. In rendering these determinations, the powers of the city rental code appeal board shall be strictly limited to making interpretations of the provisions of this chapter, to the applicability of its specific provisions to the specific case being heard, and to granting exemptions to the provisions of this chapter. In granting exemptions, the board shall be allowed to grant an exemption if it clearly appears that, by reason of special condition, undue hardship would result from strict application of any section of the chapter. However, no exemption shall be granted if the same would result in either the purpose or intent of this chapter, or of any particular sections at issue, being nullified. In reviewing a request for an exemption, the board shall consider the following to determine whether an exemption would be appropriate: 
a.  Whether there are exceptional or extraordinary conditions applying to the property that do not apply to other similar properties; 
b.  Whether the exceptional or extraordinary conditions resulted from the action of the property owner; 
c.  Whether there exists alternative or equivalent methods or materials that would allow the purpose and intent of the particular sections at issue to be satisfied; 
d.  Whether the granting of an exemption would result in a substantial detriment to the property; and 
e.  Whether the exemption requested is the minimum exemption possible that would still allow the purpose and intent of the particular sections at issue should be met. 
(2)  The board may permit an exemption for mandatory provisions in such a manner that public safety shall be secured, substantial justice done and the spirit and intent of the provisions of this chapter are upheld. In no case shall this board grant an exemption which would lessen the safety, health and welfare requirements of this chapter. Any exemptions granted shall be for this chapter and shall not, and cannot, waive the requirements and provisions of any other ordinance or law. All decisions rendered under this chapter shall be in writing and shall be final. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. Failure of the appellant or his/her representative to appear and state his or her case at the hearing, shall have the same effect as if no appeal was filed and the board shall proceed to deny the appeal and affirm the notice of violation. 
(3)  The city rental code appeal board shall meet in a fixed place and all meetings shall be opened to the public. The board shall keep a record of its proceedings, showing the actions of the board and the vote of each member upon each question considered. These records shall be considered public records. 
(4)  Appeal from the board decision. The decision of the city rental code appeal board shall be final. However, a party aggrieved by the order or decision may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by state statutes and court rules. 
(5)  Severability. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, said portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion of this chapter and such holding shall not hold the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.61) 
Sec. 8-13. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director of planning and development is hereby empowered to promulgate such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter subject, however, to the approval of the city council. When the rules and regulations made hereunder have been adopted and promulgated by the director of planning and development and approved by the city council, they shall be deemed to be as complete and binding a part of this chapter as if the same were herein specifically set forth; and the violation of any of said regulations so adopted shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection by interested parties at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.62) 
Sec. 8-14. - Penalty. 
(a)  In the event that the owner or operator does not correct a violation of any provisions of this chapter, the director of planning and development may revoke any existing certificate of compliance and may bring an action to seek the enforcement of this chapter by an appropriate legal remedy. Any structure not in compliance with this chapter is deemed a nuisance per se. 
(b)  An owner of a rental structure who fails to register or who fails to obtain a certificate of compliance for each rental dwelling unit shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. An owner who fails to comply with any other parts of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  Upon first inspection by the city, the landlord (property owner) will be notified of any infractions. The code enforcement officer shall provide the landlord a reasonable amount of time to correct any noted defect(s). Upon reinspection at the appropriate time, if the infraction(s) has not been rectified, the landlord will be subject to citation. The first citation shall be $100.00 and $150.00 for any subsequent citations, up to a maximum of $500.00 per violation. 
(d)  An owner may be charged with more than one violation of the provisions of this chapter in a single complaint or a municipal civil infraction, provided that each violation and so charged relate to the same property. 
(e)  Each day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate punishable offense. Except that after a third violation or failure to repair or eliminate eminently dangerous or life-threatening situations may be cited as misdemeanors at the discretion of the director of planning and development. 
(f)  If a violation of this chapter occurs, only one citation per violation will be issued, regardless of the number of owners of the offending property. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.63) 
Sec. 8-15. - Severability clause. 
    In the event that any provision(s) of this chapter shall be determined by future judicial decision to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 7-21-08, § 8-6.64) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The county acts as the construction code commission for the city. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Transferring of responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the construction code commission to the county. 
(a)  Agency designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Dickinson County Construction Code Commission of the County of Dickinson is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Iron Mountain under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The County of Dickinson assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said act throughout the corporate limits of the City of Iron Mountain. 
(b)  Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Iron Mountain. 
(c)  Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled "Dickinson County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated 12/4/12 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26043C, 0402C, 0403C, 0404C, 0406C, 0407C, 0408C, 0409C, 0412C, and 0416C dated 12/4/12 are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "flood hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. of 9-20-99, § 01; Ord. of 11-29-12, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 10-2. - Transferring of responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing code to the county. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 9(7) of the State Construction Code Act of 1972, as amended, the City of Iron Mountain hereby transfers responsibility for the administration and enforcement of its Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Code provisions to the County of Dickinson. 
(Ord. of 4-17-00, § 01) 
Sec. 10-3. - International Property Maintenance Code; adopted. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer of the City of Iron Mountain, being marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code" as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the City of Iron Mountain, in the State of Michigan; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any. 
(Ord. of 8-2-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Aug. 2, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as section 31-1. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as section 10-3. 
Secs. 10-4-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous building means any building or structure which has any of the following defects or has any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city, it shall be considered that such dwelling does not meet the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of this article or any building code of the city for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location. 
(3)  Whenever any portion or member of appurtenance is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by this article or the building code of the county. 
(5)  Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion of such building, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way. 
(6)  Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants or criminals, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or illegal acts. 
(8)  Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the health officer, or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within. 
(9)  Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at the doors or windows, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
    Enforcing agency means the fire chief for the city. 
    Health officer means the county sanitarian. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, §§ 5-301, 5-302) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-27. - Unlawful maintenance. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or other interested party to keep or maintain any dwelling or part of a dwelling which is a dangerous building. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-301) 
Sec. 10-28. - Notice of unsafe or dangerous condition; contents; hearing officer; service. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition. 
(b)  Such notice shall be directed to the owner of or party in interest in the building in whose name the property appears on the last city tax assessment records. 
(c)  The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the condition of the building or structure, at which time and place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor, to serve at his pleasure. The enforcing agency shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the hearing officer. 
(e)  All notices shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom they are directed personally, or in lieu of personal service, may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy of the notice shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-304) 
Sec. 10-29. - Hearing; testimony; order; noncompliance, notice, lien and collection. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. The hearing officer shall render his decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(b)  If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner to comply therewith. 
(c)  If the owner or other interested party fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall file a report of his findings and a copy of his order with the city council, and request that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, or other interested party in the manner prescribed in section 10-28. 
(d)  The city council shall fix a date for hearing, reviewing the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner or other interested party in the manner prescribed in section 10-28 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner or other interested party shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the building should not be demolished or otherwise made safe and the city council shall either approve, disapprove, or modify the order for the demolition or making safe of the building or structure. 
(e)  The cost of the demolition or making the building safe shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer of the city who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. 
(f)  The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last city tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If he fails to pay the same within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of such cost, the assessor shall add the same to the next tax roll of the city, and the same shall be collected in the same manner, in all respects as provided by law, for the collection of taxes by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-305) 
Sec. 10-30. - Appeals. 
    An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council under section 10-29 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-306) 
Secs. 10-31-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATE NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-51. - Purpose. 
    In the interest of public safety, all homes, buildings and other structures shall clearly display, at a location that provides for unobstructed view from the street, the identifying building name and/or house number as recorded in the city assessor's office. Such building identification shall conform to the following conditions as prescribed. 
(Ord. of 12-1-03) 
Sec. 10-52. - Street numbers required. 
    The owners and occupants of all buildings in the city shall cause the correct street numbers to be placed on their property. All buildings and structures shall bear a distinctive street number on the front of the building at or near the front entrance. The numbers shall be no less than three inches high and be visible from the roadway. When the main building or structure is more than 90 feet back from the road, or the view of the structure is blocked, the house number shall be on a sign attached to a fence, post, mailbox or other structure within ten feet of the driveway facing the street. 
(Ord. of 12-1-03) 
Sec. 10-53. - Penalties for violation. 
    A person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00, and every day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separated offense. Procedures to enforce this article may be commenced not sooner than 45 days after adoption of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-1-03) 
Secs. 10-54-10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 10-76-10-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Due to the addition of Chapter 8, Rental Housing Code, by an ordinance adopted July 21, 2008, this article has been repealed at the direction of the city. The former article pertained to Rental Housing Code and derived from Ord. of 8-16-06. 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 14-26. - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall display any goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of sale or trade or for the purpose of attracting or inviting sale or trade or offer thereof to or from the general public upon any of the sidewalks, streets or public places of the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city council. The use of the term "person" in this article shall include and be construed to include individually any person, firm, association of individuals or corporation. 
(Code 1982, § 6-101) 
Sec. 14-27. - Same-Procedures. 
    Application for such permit shall be made to the city council at the city clerk's office, and the application for a permit shall provide space for designating the manner and type of display proposed by the applicant. The duration of such permit shall be for one year, and thereafter, upon application to the council, may be renewed on a year-to-year basis. Permits may be issued by the council to merchants associations, business organizations or trade groups for city-wide sales promotional events and activities for any lesser period of time, including one day. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by payment of a fee of $1.00. 
(Code 1982, § 6-102) 
Sec. 14-28. - Same-Limitations. 
    No permit shall be issued in any event for any period of time if such display would encroach upon or would require pedestrians to walk upon state highway department rights-of-way without prior written approval of the state highway department stating the period of time authorized. No permit shall be issued if such display would create an offensive, hazardous, disorderly or unsightly condition or if such display would otherwise create or constitute a nuisance or danger to pedestrians or the public. 
(Code 1982, § 6-103) 
Sec. 14-29. - Procedure for application by those currently displaying goods and wares without permits. 
    Persons presently displaying goods, wares or merchandise, which would be in violation of the provisions of this article, shall be given written notice by the city clerk of the manner of violation and opportunity within the ten days next succeeding the receipt of the written notice to apply to the city clerk's office for a permit as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-104) 
Sec. 14-30. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Persons operating any such display of goods, wares or merchandise as regulated by section 14-26 without first having obtained a permit therefor shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this article and shall, upon conviction, be punished according to the provisions of section 1-15. 
(Code 1982, § 6-105) 
Secs. 14-31-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SECONDHAND DEALERS, JUNK DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand or junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq.; precious metal and gem dealer act, MCL 445.481 et seq. 

Sec. 14-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Secondhand dealer or junk dealer means any person whose business is in whole or in part that of purchasing, selling, exchanging or receiving secondhand articles of any kind, iron, tool, steel, aluminum, copper, brass, lead, lighting and plumbing fixtures or the business of dismantling automobiles. 
(Code 1982, § 6-202) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-57. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Every person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, according to the provisions of section 1-15. In the instance of a conviction of any person for violation of this article, the license of such person shall be deemed to have been summarily revoked, and such person shall not be permitted to carry on the designated business, within this city, for a period of one year after such conviction. 
(Code 1982, § 6-207) 
Sec. 14-58. - License required. 
    No person shall carry on the business of a dealer in secondhand goods or junk within the city without first having obtained from the city a license in accordance with the provisions of this article which may authorize any such person to carry on either or both such designated types of businesses. 
(Code 1982, § 6-201) 
Sec. 14-59. - Licensing procedures. 
    A person desiring a license under this article shall submit an application in writing to the city clerk for the review and approval of the zoning administrator, and the approval of the city council. The application shall specify the particular place, room, building or enclosure in this city where such person shall carry on such secondhand or junk dealership, and no person receiving such license shall carry on any such business in any place other than as designated in the license application. If the license application is approved, the city clerk shall issue a license upon receipt of a license fee of $25.00, such license designating the name of the licensee and the place where the business is authorized to be conducted. Such license shall expire one year from date of issue unless sooner revoked for cause and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1982, § 6-203) 
Sec. 14-60. - Business site identity; records; inspection. 
    A secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall post in a conspicuous place in or upon the premises of his shop, store, or other place of business, a sign stating his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon. Any such secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall keep a separate ledger book, open to inspection by the city police department, county sheriff's department and the members of the state police, in which book shall be written, in the English language, at the time of the purchase or exchange of such secondhand or junk articles, a description of such articles; the name, age, and street address of the person from whom the same was purchased and received; and the day and hour when such purchase or exchange was made. Each entry shall be numbered consecutively commencing with number one. A record shall also be kept of all sales of merchandise. Said record shall include: The date the item(s) was sold, a description of the item(s) sold, the name, address, telephone number, if applicable, of the purchaser. Said record shall be kept on the premises for a period of two years after the date of said purchase(s). 
(Code 1982, § 6-204; Ord. of 10-7-96) 
Sec. 14-61. - Prerequisites for resale or disposition. 
    Such secondhand or junk articles purchased or exchanged as provided in this article shall be retained by the purchasing secondhand dealer or junk dealer for at least 15 days before disposing of them, in an accessible place in the building, room or enclosure where such articles are purchased and received. A tag shall be attached to such articles in some visible and convenient place, with the number written thereon to correspond with the entry number in such book. Such purchaser shall prepare and deliver on Monday of each week to the chief of police of the city before 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy from such book, containing a description of each article purchased or received during the preceding week; the hour and day when the purchase was made; and the name, age and street address of the person from whom it was purchased. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the person inscribing his name thereto; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to old rags, wastepaper and household goods. 
(Code 1982, § 6-205) 
Sec. 14-62. - Restricted business hours and minor clientele. 
    No person shall purchase or receive by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise any article mentioned in this article from any person between the hours of 8:00 p.m., Central Standard Time and 7:00 a.m., Central Standard Time, nor from any person who is, at the time, intoxicated, or from an habitual drunkard or from any person known by the secondhand dealer or junk dealer to be a thief or any associate of thieves or receiver of stolen property, or from any person he has reason to suspect as being such or from any minor under the age of 18 years, provided that such purchase or receiving from a minor under the age of 18 years shall be permitted if such minor presents to the junk dealer a written permit from the chief of police of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-206) 
Secs. 14-63-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, ITINERANT VENDORS, AND AUCTIONS 

Sec. 14-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hawker and peddler means and includes any person who shall go about from place to place within the city, in any manner whatsoever, or who shall from any cart, stand, vehicle or other device in or upon any street, highway, sidewalk or in or upon any open place sell or offer for sale or solicit orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, refreshments or any kind of property or thing whatsoever to any person. 
    Itinerant vendor means and includes all persons, both principal and agent, who engage in a temporary or transient business in the city, selling goods, wares and merchandise, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business hires, leases, or occupies any room, building, structure, motor vehicle or railroad car for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this article by reason of association temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of the business of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Code 1982, § 6-302(A), (B)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-82. - Exceptions to article. 
    This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of business. 
(2)  Local merchants or their employees in taking orders for goods in stock at their places of business or at the houses of their customers. 
(3)  Persons selling goods or other products produced, manufactured or made by himself. 
(4)  Farmers or gardeners selling farm produce. 
(5)  Persons going about from place to place in the city offering goods for sale by sample or otherwise, orders for the goods to be sent to manufacturers outside the state, filled and shipped into the state by such manufacturers, or to persons engaged in interstate commerce. 
(Code 1982, § 6-302) 
Sec. 14-83. - Penalty for violation of article; enforcement. 
    Every person who shall in any manner, in doing or transacting the business of a hawker or peddler, itinerant vendor, any person conducting an auction sale, or auctioneer in selling goods, wares, or merchandise without first having procured and paid for a license as required by this article, or who shall continue such business after the term of the license, shall be liable, upon conviction, to be punished according to the provisions of section 1-15. 
(Code 1982, § 6-308) 
Sec. 14-84. - License-Required. 
    No hawker or peddler shall sell, offer for sale or solicit orders for, by sample or otherwise, any goods, wares, merchandise, refreshments or any kind of property or thing whatsoever, nor shall any auctioneer ply his trade, or itinerant vendor do business within the city without first having paid for and obtained from the city clerk a license to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 6-301) 
Sec. 14-85. - Same-Scope. 
    The chief of police of the city shall designate the location where the licensee shall be permitted to sell or offer for sale his goods, wares or merchandise having regard to the traffic and the safety of the life or limb of the people of the city and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 6-303) 
Sec. 14-86. - Auctions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Down-hill selling means the first offering of any article at a high price and then offering the article at successive lower prices until a buyer is secured. 
    Selling at auction means the offering for sale or selling of personal property to the highest bidder excepting sales authorized by law; or offering for sale or selling of such property by the method known as down-hill selling. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. No personal property shall be sold at auction, or exposed for sale, by any auctioneer on any street, avenue, alley or in any public place in the city. No bellman or crier, nor any drum or fife, or other instrument of music, nor any show signal, or means of attracting the attention of the public, other than a sign or flag shall be employed, or suffered or permitted to be used in connection with any auction sale, at or near any place of such sale, or at or near any auction room. 
(Code 1982, § 6-304) 
Sec. 14-87. - Express auction violations. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person operating a public auction by virtue of a license issued as provided in this article, to permit or allow any person to remain in or upon the premises wherein the public auction is being conducted to engage in the practice of boosting or capping or assist or take part in the practice of any fraud of any kind, nature or description, or to misrepresent the quality or description of any article or thing offered to be sold. 
(b)  It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any auctioneer or person being present when any personal property is offered for sale to knowingly, or with intent to induce any person to purchase the same, or any part thereof, make any false representations or statement as to the ownership of or the character or quality of the property offered for sale or as to the poverty or circumstances of the owner or pretended owner of such property. If such false representation is made by such auctioneer, or by any other person with such auctioneer's knowledge and consent or connivance, the license of such auctioneer shall be revoked. 
(c)  It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person who sells or attempts to sell by auction, or whoever advertises for sale any goods, wares or merchandise to falsely represent or pretend that such goods, wares or merchandise are, in whole or in part, a bankrupt or insolvent stock, damaged goods, or goods saved from fire, or makes any false statement as to the previous history or character of such goods, wares or merchandise. If such false representation is made by such auctioneer or by any person with such auctioneer's knowledge and consent or connivance, the license of such auctioneer shall be revoked. 
(Code 1982, § 6-305) 
Sec. 14-88. - Licensed auction days and hours. 
    No person shall operate a public auction room or sell goods at a public auction, within the meaning of this article, except on weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1982, § 6-306) 
Sec. 14-89. - License fees; term; licensing procedures. 
(a)  Hawkers and peddlers. Every person who shall take out a license as a hawker or peddler under this article shall pay the sum of $10.00 per day for each day or fractional part thereof, for any number of days not exceeding ten days, and any number of days exceeding ten, and not exceeding one year, shall pay the sum of $200.00. 
(b)  Auctions. No person shall hold any auction sale at any place in the city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk therefor, and the fee for such license shall be $15.00 for each day the sale is to be held. It shall also be necessary for the person acting as auctioneer to secure a license from the city clerk and shall pay a fee of $5.00 per day for such license. 
(c)  Itinerant vendors. No person shall engage in the business of an itinerant vendor without first obtaining a license from the city clerk therefor, and the fee for such license shall be $15.00 for each day or fractional part thereof that he shall conduct the business of an itinerant vendor. 
(d)  Expiration; scope of authority; transferral; revocation. All such licenses shall, at the latest, expire on the first Monday in June following their issue, and a license shall not give authority to more than one person to engage in the business of a hawker or peddler, or to conduct a public auction, or to engage in the business of an itinerant vendor, and each license shall state that it is not assignable nor transferable, and that it may be revoked by the common council or mayor at any time upon return to the licensee of the unearned license fee. 
(Code 1982, § 6-307) 
Secs. 14-90-14-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICAB COMPANIES 

Sec. 14-106. - Definitions. 
    Taxicab shall mean any motor vehicle engaged in carrying persons for hire, on call or demand, where seven or fewer passengers are carried, and no regular, specified route is traveled; provided that automobiles used exclusively as hearses, funeral cars, ambulances, hotel buses, sightseeing buses, or motor buses shall not be construed to be within the meaning of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Sec. 14-107. - Taxi company license. 
(a)  License requirement. No person or company shall engage in the business of operating or causing to be operated, any taxicab on the streets of this city without first obtaining a license to operate a taxicab company in the manner provided for in this article. 
(b)  Application for taxicab license. Applications for a license to operate a taxicab company within the city shall be available at the Iron Mountain Police Department. The applicant must fill out the application completely and submit it to the police chief for review. The police chief will establish written guidelines and criteria that must be met by the applicant. Said guidelines and criteria will be submitted to the council for approval. The police chief shall approve or recommend denial of the application no later than 30 days after receipt of the application. Said recommendation shall be provided to the city council and placed on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. The council must approve or deny the application at said meeting, unless, however, the council requests additional information prior to taking action. If this occurs, the council shall request the police chief to obtain the additional information and the matter shall be taken up at the next regularly scheduled council meeting, or a special meeting if the council so desires. 
Application fee shall be set by the city council by resolution, and may be amended or modified. 
(c)  Conditions for denial. An application shall not be approved if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant is in default to the city, including being delinquent in the payment of any taxes, or other city charges; 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a violation of any federal, state or city law concerning public transportation; 
(3)  The applicant has made a false statement in the application procedure or has wilfully submitted an incomplete application. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation; appeal. 
(1)  The license under this section may be suspended or revoked by the police chief at any time in case the licensee fails to operate the taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this article, or if the taxicab shall be used in an illegal business, or in violation of an ordinance of the city or of any state or federal law. 
(2)  Any licensee aggrieved by any ruling or decision of the police chief may appeal by petition to the city council within ten days from the date of revocation or suspension. Such appeal may be brought for hearing at the next regular meeting of the city council, but may then be publicly adjourned by the city council to such other time or place as it may deem necessary or convenient. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(e)  Expiration and renewal. All taxicab company licenses shall expire one year from the date in which it was issued. The license holder, at the expiration of any license year, must reapply for a new license in the same manner as provided in section 14-107(b). 
(f)  Transfers. No taxicab company license or interest therein shall be transferred directly or indirectly without the consent of the city council. Transfers shall be construed and processed as new application for a license. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Sec. 14-108. - Registration of taxicab vehicles. 
(a)  Taxicab registration. No vehicle used as a taxicab shall be operated within the city without a registration certificate issued by the police department. Prior to issuing such certificate, the police chief and/or his authorized representative shall ascertain that: 
(1)  The vehicle is owned or leased by a licensed taxicab company; 
(2)  The vehicle is insured as provided in section 14-108(d); 
(3)  The vehicle has been inspected by a licensed mechanic approved by the police department; 
(4)  The vehicle is marked by having a lighted sign on the roof no smaller than four inches high and 18 inches wide, and a sign on each front door no smaller than 12 inches by 24 inches, both of which indicate the name and telephone number of the taxicab company. 
(b)  Registration fee and renewal procedure. The city council shall set, by resolution, the fee to be charged for issuance of a taxicab registration. Said registration shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and, upon expiration, the registration must be renewed by the police department and all conditions for issuance of a registration must be satisfied. Renewal fee shall be set by the city council, by resolution. 
(c)  Maintenance of taxicabs. All vehicles operated under a taxicab company license shall be kept in safe condition in good repair, in good mechanical order, and in good, clean and sanitary condition. The police department shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined all registered vehicle for purposes of ascertaining that the provisions of this article are being satisfied. 
(d)  Insurance. Before any taxicab is registered, the applicant shall furnish to the police department one or more policies of insurance, prepaid for at least the period of the license, issued by a responsible insurance company, providing indemnity for the insured in the amounts specified herein and agreeing to pay, within the limits of said amounts on behalf of the insured, all sums which the insured shall become obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed upon the insured by law, for damages because of bodily injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom or for damages to property, or both, sustained by any person other than the employees of the insured and caused by accidents and arising out of the ownership, maintenance, and use of said registered taxicab. The minimum amount of insurance coverage as to any one registered taxicab shall be: Personal injury protection; bodily injury, $20,000 per person and $40,000 per occurrence; property damage of $10,000 per occurrence. Every such insurance policy shall contain a clause obligating the insurer to give the police department at least ten days' written notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse, or other termination of such insurance coverage. 
(e)  Revocation of registration. If, after investigation, the police chief determines that any of the requirements for registration of a taxicab are no longer met, he shall, by registered mail and/or personal service upon the taxicab company licensee, revoke said registration for the vehicle that is in noncompliance. 
(f)  Operation of taxicab without proper registration. Operation of a taxicab within the city without proper registration, or after registration has been revoked, shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not less than $500.00 and/or imprisonment for no more than 90 days in jail. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Sec. 14-109. - Qualifications of drivers of registered taxicab vehicles. 
(a)  Requirements for taxicab drivers. A taxicab driver shall be at least 18 years of age, shall possess a current CDL and shall have no mental or physical defect which would render him or her an unsafe driver. The police department will enforce this regulation. The operator of a licensed taxicab company shall send written notice to the police chief before the employment of any person as a driver, and shall provide satisfactory proof that the individual possess all the requirements of this provision. 
(b)  Taxicab company's duty to report. If, at any time, the owner or operator of a licensed taxicab company knows, or should have known, that any of its drivers fail to meet the requirements to operate a taxicab, it shall notify the police department, in writing, that said driver does not meet the requirements to operate a taxicab and will not be permitted to operate a taxicab for that taxicab company. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any individual who operates a taxicab in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days in jail. Any owner or operator of a licensed taxicab company who is in violation of section 14-108 shall be responsible for a civil infraction, penalty for which shall be $50.00 for first offense, $250.00 for first repeat offense, and $500.00 for any subsequent repeat offense. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Sec. 14-110. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Records. A daily manifest shall be maintained for each taxicab upon which are recorded all trips made each day showing time, origin, destination, and fare of each trip. The manifest shall be maintained by the taxicab company licensee and furnished to the police department upon request. All manifests shall be retained for at least three years. 
(b)  Receipts. The driver of any taxicab shall, upon request, give a written receipt for the fare charged to any rider. 
(c)  Lost articles. Every driver of a taxicab shall search the interior of such taxicab at the termination of each trip for any articles of value which may have been left in such taxicab by a passenger. Any article found therein shall immediately be returned to the passenger owning it if the identity of the passenger can be determined. Otherwise, it shall be deposited with the owner of the taxicab company at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty. A report of the finding of such article shall be made by the owner of the taxicab company within 24 hours thereafter to the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Secs. 14-111-14-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- At the direction of the city, the Sign Ordinance of 7-15-13 has been codified as Article VI of Chapter 14. 

DIVISION 1. - INTENT AND PURPOSES 

Sec. 14-131. - Intent. 
    The City of Iron Mountain City Council hereby ordains this chapter to fairly regulate and control the time, placement, manner, and maintenance of signs within the City of Iron Mountain and to provide penalties for violations of such regulations. The provisions herein contained are intended to promote the general welfare and protect the health and safety of the general public. 
    These regulations take into consideration the total available communications network in the community including, but not limited to, cable and broadcast television and radio; electronic mail and information services; newspapers; magazines; direct mailing, trade publications and catalogs; telephone solicitation, door-to-door solicitation; artworks and artistic performances; and public demonstrations, parades, rallies, marches, and pickets. 
    Signs serve a valuable function in way-finding, information dissemination, and commerce, and can be valuable additions to the built environment. Second, however, too many signs, signs that are too large, poorly designed, maintained, located, or too many in number can not only detract from the economic vitality of a community, but can create safety hazards and undermine the aesthetic integrity of a community. Third, appropriate local planning and regulation that is consistent with statutory and case law is essential in balancing the legitimate rights and interests of both public and private parties in sign regulation. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-132. - Purposes. 
    The city council enacts these sign regulations for the following purposes: 
(1)  To fairly balance the rights of individuals to erect signs and the rights of the general public; 
(2)  To promote signs that enhance the scenic views and landscape quality of the community; 
(3)  To protect property values by preventing structures that have a blighting effect on the existing aesthetic character of the city; 
(4)  To encourage placement of signs that is consistent with the community's cultural, historical, and natural features; 
(5)  To control the number of signs reasonably necessary to identify a community service, institution, business and its products and/or services; 
(6)  To maintain signs within a reasonable scale and character relative to the buildings to which they relate; 
(7)  To protect neighboring properties and residential areas from lighting trespass, to reduce and direct lighting to maintain the visibility of the Upper Peninsula night sky, and to avoid encroachment of commercial visual character into residential neighborhoods; 
(8)  To prevent visual and physical hazards, obstructions, and distractions to motorists and pedestrians for purposes of public safety; 
(9)  To prevent placement of signs that will conceal or obscure adjacent businesses or the signs of adjacent businesses where possible; 
(10)  To prevent confusion between advertising signs and traffic-control signs and devices; 
(11)  To regulate erection and maintenance of signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies, disrepair, decay, or abandonment; 
(12)  To promote principal economic bases of the community such as a historical and four season recreational and tourism destination; 
(13)  To prevent aesthetic nuisances and visual blight; 
(14)  To further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(15)  To discourage the display of nonconforming signs. 
(16)  To encourage a special emphasis and a unifying theme of the downtown. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-133-14-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 14-151. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Abandoned conforming sign means a sign pertaining to a business, lessor, owner, product, or activity that has not been available upon the premises where such sign is displayed for a period of one year or longer. 
    Abandoned nonconforming sign means a sign pertaining to a business, lessor, owner, product, or activity that has not been available upon the premises where such sign is displayed for a period of 30 days or longer. 
    Accessory sign means an on-premise sign that is on an accessory structure. 
    Accessory structure means a structure that is incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal structure of a lot or parcel, such as a shed, garage, refrigeration cooler and/or freezer, or gas pump. Accessory structures do not include natural features, fences, lamps, lamp posts, or freestanding signs. 
    Address sign means a sign identifying a numerical designation commonly used to indicate the location of a building on a street or right-of-way. 
    Attended sign means a non-commercial sign that is hand-held or carried by a person such as a placard, picket, or poster. (Figure 1) 

    Awning means a fabric-covered, rigid framework shelter attached to a building. Awnings may be fixed or retractable. Marquee awnings are those that are supported by ground posts and extend over the entrance to a building. 
    Awning sign means a sign that is part of or attached to the surface of an awning. 
    Banner means a sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material, excepting national, state, or municipal flags. 
    Billboard: off-premises advertising sign means a sign which contains a message or advertises an establishment, product, service, space or activity not available on the lot on which the sign is located. For purposes of this article, a movable freestanding sign in a commercial Zone District is not considered a billboard or off-premises advertising sign. 
    Canopy means a horizontal, roof-like shelter or structure, usually attached to a building that may be suspended, cantilevered, or pole-supported, including but not limited to structures over building entrances, drive-through windows or lanes, and fuel pumps at service stations. 
    Canopy sign means a sign that is part of or attached to the surface of a canopy. 
    Changeable-message area means that portion of a sign that displays characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. The changeable-message area shall be in a subordinate location to the fixed-message area and shall not have a white or yellow background. Phosphorescent signs shall not be permitted. (Figure 2) 

    Commercial sign means any sign that identifies, advertises, or directs attention to a business or is intended to induce the purchase of goods, property, or services. 
    Community banner means a temporary banner erected over a city or M-DOT right-of-way, with approval by the city, identifying an event sponsored by a non-profit association or corporation for a charitable, educational, or public purpose. (Figure 3) 

    Community event means a charitable, educational, or public event. 
    Community-service sign means a temporary or permanent sign that identifies non-profit associations or corporations, including service clubs. 
    Construction sign means a temporary, freestanding or wall sign erected on property to advise the public of the design, construction, location, management, financing, and/or leasing of a building or buildings under construction or renovation. 
    Directional sign means a sign that directs one to the location of, or route to, a use or occupancy. 
    Directory sign means a sign that displays the names and locations of at least five businesses, as well as the locations of related customer-convenience services and facilities. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms connected together with principal kitchen and bathroom facilities designed as a unit for use by only one family or one functional family for living and sleeping purposes, constituting a separate independent housekeeping unit, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which might be in the same structure. 
    Electronic message sign means a sign which is of a commercial nature which also is an electrical sign displaying changeable information by use of electronic or mechanical indication. The electronic message of these signs shall not scroll or move in any direction, and shall not change more than once in every six seconds and shall not be in any video format. This sign shall only be a freestanding, wall, marquee, canopy or awning sign. Since a commercial electronic message sign is also considered a freestanding, wall, marquee, canopy or awning sign, it must also comply with the restrictions for such signs. 
    Electronic message sign means a non-commercial, electrical sign displaying only time-temperature, "open," "closed" and/or hours of operation, that does not exceed 12 square feet in area. This sign shall only be a freestanding, wall, marquee, canopy or awning sign. 

    Exterior-business sign means a sign located outside a building. 
    Externally illuminated sign means a sign that is illuminated by a light source that is outside the face of the sign. 
    Fixed-message area means that portion of a permitted sign that is used for a permanent message, such as the name of a business or organization, or its principal service or product. (Figure 5) 

    Flag means an official governmental emblem displayed on fabric or other material generally mounted to a pole. 
    Flashing sign means any lighted or electrical sign which gives out light or varying intensities of light in sudden intermittent bursts. Non-commercial, electronic message signs, such as time-and-temperature signs, are not considered flashing signs for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Freestanding or ground sign means a non-portable sign supported by permanent uprights or supports in the ground, not attached to any building or structure. (Figure 5) 
    Graphics includes, but is not limited to, any mosaic, mural, painting, or graphic-art technique constructed, molded, painted, etched, or otherwise placed onto a building or structure. 
    Ground-floor wall area . For purposes of this chapter, the ground-floor wall area is the width of the wall multiplied by an assumed standard ground-floor height of 12 feet. (Figure 6) 

    Height means the vertical distance of a sign measured from the average finished grade level within ten feet of the horizontal limits of the sign structure to the top of the sign structure, including any framework. (Figure 5) 
    Historic sign means a sign located on a building or site that is determined by the city's planning commission to be of historic merit and significance and is an integral element to the historic character of the building or site. Particular consideration shall be given to historic signs on any structure that is: (1) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places with the State of Michigan; (3) certified or preliminarily determined by the State of Michigan as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or (4) designated by the city as a heritage preservation site. See section 14-252, special condition signs. (Figure 7) 

    Home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not involve any alteration of the structure or change the character thereof. 
    Illuminated sign means any sign that has characters, letters, figures, or designs, illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign. 
    Indecent sign means any sign including language or material that, in context, depicts or describes, in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards, sexual or excretory organs or activities. (Source: Federal Communications Commission) 
    Internally-illuminated sign means a sign that is lighted by a source inside the sign face, behind the sign face, or otherwise back-lighting the sign face or message. Individual internally-illuminated letters, commonly known as channel letter signs or dimensional lettering, are permitted. 
    Lot means a place or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one or more buildings, structures or uses, or by other activities permitted thereon. A lot need not be a lot of existing record or otherwise specifically so designated on any public record. 
    Mansard means a roof having two slopes with the lower slope much steeper than the upper slope. The lower slope is oriented on a vertical axis and therefore is visible as a part of the building facade. The mansard cap is a version of this roof that often is applied to only one facade on the building, particularly one-story commercial structures. As defined in the Standard Architectural Dictionary of 1974, fascia roofs and parapet walls shall be regulated as a mansard for purposes of this chapter. 
    Marquee means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached to or made a part of a marquee. 
    Motor vehicle sign means a sign that is on a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer. (Figure 8) 

    Moving sign means a sign that physically moves or has physically moving parts. 
    Neon sign means a sign constructed of thin, visible, molded tubes containing a gas for illumination. (Figure 9) 

    Noncommercial sign means a sign that is not related to or connected with trade or commerce in general. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
    Obscene sign means any sign that meets the following three-pronged test: 
  An average person, applying contemporary community standards, must find that the material, as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; 
  The material must depict or describe, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable law; and 
  The material, taken as a whole, must lack serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. (Source: Federal Communications Commission) 
    Off-premise sign means any sign located on property that displays a message pertaining to a business, service, good, or activity that is not located on the same property as the sign. (Figure 10) 

    On-premise sign means a sign with a message that relates to a business, service, good, activity, or profession lawfully being conducted, sold, or offered on the same premises. 
    Opaque means a level of illumination measured directly on the surface of an interior lit sign that does not exceed three foot candles. 
    Overhanging sign means a fixed-message sign that is affixed to any part of a building (but not as a marquee), where the sign surface is perpendicular to the building wall, and the sign is oriented toward viewing by vehicular traffic. Such signs are distinguished from projecting nameplates based upon restrictions in size and height, and the type of zoning districts in which they are permitted. 
    Pennants, spinners, and streamers means an article of material mounted to a building or suspended from a rope, wire, or string designed to move with the wind in a free-flying manner. (Figure 11) 

    Permanent sign means a sign of a durable material anchored or secured to a building, accessory structure, or the ground, that is not temporary and has a vertical sign face. 
    Planning board means the official board as established by the City of Iron Mountain City Charter. If a city planning commission is established in accordance with state law, then all references in this chapter for planning board shall be considered planning commission. 
    Political-event sign means a temporary, unattended sign pertaining to an official city, school district, county, state, or federal election or referendum, or other sign as defined by law. 
    Portable sign means a sign not permanently affixed, anchored, or secured to the ground or to a structure, including trailered signs, tripods, menu and sandwich board signs. 
    Profane sign means any sign including language that is so grossly offensive to members of the public who actually see it as to amount to a nuisance. (Source: Federal Communications Commission) 
    Projecting nameplate means a fixed-message sign typically indicating the name of a residence or business, perpendicular to the building wall, and oriented toward pedestrians in size and location. (Figure 12) 

    Promotional-event sign means a non-commercial, off-premise sign that is temporarily implanted in a yard or curb lawn area for a community event. (Figure 13) 

    Real estate sign means a temporary sign placed upon property advertising that the particular property is for sale, lease, or rent. 
    Residential-event sign means a non-commercial sign located in a district zoned for residential uses, identifying a permissible event at a residence, such as a garage sale, yard sale, etc. (Figure 14) 

    Roof sign means a sign that is located upon, above, or over the roof of a structure, or in the case of a building with a mansard roof, a sign that is above the deck line of the mansard roof. 
    Sandwich board sign means a two-sided, portable sign, also known as a "tent" sign, that is displayed seasonally and temporarily. See section 14-212(5), sandwich board signs, and section 14-251(6), sandwich boards. 
    Shopping center means a retail/service complex, containing five or more businesses, where buildings are physically connected and the businesses share private access drives and parking. 
    Sign means any writing, pictorial representation, illustration, decoration, emblem, movie, electronic or digital medium, symbol, design, trademark, or figure that is written, printed, painted, projected, constructed, illuminated, or otherwise placed, held, carried, or displayed upon any structure, building, vehicle, trailer, objects, person, or parcel of land that attracts attention to the subject of such land or is used as a means of identification, advertisement, announcement, expression, or decoration and that is visible from a public or private street, frontage road or service drive, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public property. Any noncommercial decoration, yard art, lighting, flag, wording, etc. pertaining to a religious, ethnic or civic holiday is not considered a sign. 
    Sign area means the maximum height multiplied by the maximum width of the sign components including any frame or other material or color or open spaces or voids forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Except for sandwich board signs, both sides of a sign structure may be used for sign purposes, provided the sides have a 180-degree, back-to-back relationship but only one side is to be used for calculating the sign area. Sandwich board signs are not required to have the 180-degree, back-to-back relationship. Only one side is used in calculating the sign area. In the case of a broken sign (a sign with letters individually mounted to a wall), the total surface area shall be measured by multiplying the horizontal distance between the outer edges of the two furthermost letters, symbols, figures, etc., by the maximum vertical height of any letters, symbols, figures, etc., in the sign. (Figures 15 and 16) 


    Signable area means the permitted sign area for a particular sign type calculated in accordance with the standards and formulas of this chapter. (Figure 17) 

    Sign face means the portion of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed. 
    Sign supports or uprights means a non-illuminated structure that is used to brace, support, or hold a freestanding sign. (Figure 15) 
    Subdivision means a planned residential development consisting of eight or more single-family homes. 
    Temporary sign means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
    Tent sign. See sandwich board sign . 
    Trailered sign means a sign mounted on a trailer or other wheeled device. 
    Unattended sign means any sign that is not hand-held or carried by a person. (Figure 18) 

    Wall sign means a sign that is attached, mounted, or painted directly onto a building wall with the sign face parallel to the building wall. (Figure 19) 

    Warning sign means any sign that alerts persons to safety hazards or potential violations, such as no trespassing, keep off fence, or danger. 
    Window area means the area of a window as measured by the perimeter of the window glass, including glass windows in doors. 
    Window sign means a commercial sign that uses window and/or door display area for exterior viewing. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-152. - Zoning references. 
    For purposes of this chapter, "lot," "lot line," "front yard," "zoning district" and similar words shall be as defined in the City of Iron Mountain Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-153. - Illustrations. 
    The illustrations contained herein are for convenience purposes only. In the event that a conflict arises between the meaning of any text and its corresponding illustration, the text shall control. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-154-14-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-171. - Provisions applicable to all districts. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all districts within the city: 
(1)  Pre-existing nonconforming signs. Any sign that conformed with a sign ordinance in effect at the time said sign was displayed, may be maintained, subject to the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(2)  Sign construction and assembly. Projecting nameplates, overhanging signs, and freestanding signs shall have a sign face that is an integrally-framed structure and shall not have multiple, attached separate sign units on the face of the sign supports. The entire sign shall be made of materials that maintain this integral character, rather than an assemblage of different sign types and materials. Changeable-message signs shall be an integral part of the face of any freestanding sign. (Figure 20) 

(3)  Sign installation. No sign shall be placed, displayed, or installed upon property without the consent of the property owner. Wall-mounted signs, overhanging signs, and projecting nameplates shall be thoroughly secured to a building by metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods, or braces and shall comply with building code requirements for wind loads, snow loads, and dead loads. Independently-mounted letters, figures, or similar message elements shall be safely and securely attached to the sign face and building wall. 
(4)  Sign maintenance. Signs shall be maintained at all times in a clearly legible and safe condition and shall be kept in good repair as specified in the City of Iron Mountain International Property Maintenance Code. Lighting for a sign shall be maintained in working order. 
(5)  Illumination of any sign. 
a.  Exterior lighting shall be provided from an external light source attached to the sign or supporting structure and directed only to the face of the sign. Sign light sources shall not exceed 150 watts per sign face and shall be shielded in order to prevent visible glare to passing motorists and shall not be directed so as to trespass or encroach in or upon neighboring properties. (Figure 21) 

b.  Internally illumination shall be steady and stationary in source and intensity. Maximum luminescence levels shall conform to levels defined in Article VII. (Figure 22) 

c.  Neon signs shall be permitted, as provided in section 14-231(6). 
(6)  Address sign. Buildings shall place address signs in compliance with the Code of Ordinances, City of Iron Mountain Chapter 10 Buildings and Building Regulations, Article III and the International Property Maintenance Code (Figure 23). 

At properties that have three or more principal buildings such as apartment complexes and mixed-use commercial developments, an address-directory sign may be required by the city. 

(7)  Sign in or over a right-of-way. Signs in or over a right-of-way shall be prohibited except as may be allowed elsewhere in this chapter, and for the following: 
a.  The placement of any sign that projects no more than 30 inches from the building and overhangs a public right-of-way. 
b.  Permanent freestanding signs projecting over a right-of-way are allowed provided the signs shall have the sign area permitted reduced by one-third and all supports and uprights shall not be located in the right-of-way. (Figure 25) 
c.  Permanent signs, awnings, mansards, canopies, or marquees over a public sidewalk may not project more than five feet from the building to which they are attached and must be a minimum of seven feet, six inches, higher than the sidewalk grade, for projections of 42 inches or more. 
d.  Governmental signs as allowed in section 14-231(1), governmental signs. 
e.  Section 14-252, special condition signs. 
f.  Temporary signs as allowed in section 14-212(1), promotional-event signs, and 14-212(5), sandwich board signs. 

(8)  Obstructions to any door, window, sidewalk, or fire escape. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent or impede ingress or egress from any door, window, sidewalk, or fire escape. 
(9)  Sign constituting a traffic hazard. No sign shall be placed, displayed, or illuminated so as to obstruct or impair driver vision. A sign shall not obstruct the view of any official traffic sign, traffic signal, or traffic marking. Signs that, by reason of their location, shape, size, or color, can be confused with an official traffic sign, signal, or marking, shall not be permitted. Signs which use beacons, spotlights, or searchlights visible from public rights-of-way are prohibited. (Figure 26) 

(10)  Vacant parcels. Land completely void of buildings shall also be completely void of all signs, except for governmental, warning, temporary signs associated with a temporary land use, and real estate signs, all of which must be in compliance with this chapter. 
(11)  Abandoned sign. Abandoned signs shall be removed in accordance with their status as to conformity. Where such signs are nonconforming in size, or height, or other features, they shall be removed as soon as reasonably possible but no later than 90 days. Where the sign is conforming but abandoned they shall be removed after one year. Any abandoned conforming sign or abandoned nonconforming sign or sign structure may be removed by the city at the expense of the property owner. (Figure 27) 

(12)  Sign constituting a public nuisance. If a sign is determined to be a public nuisance in accordance with the City of Iron Mountain Code of Ordinances, it shall be abated in accordance with the procedures provided in said Code of Ordinances. 
(13)  Temporary land uses. Signage for temporary land uses such as Christmas tree sales, greenhouses, or carnivals shall comply with the sign requirements as if such land use is permanent, except that all signs must be removed when such business or activity ceases. 
(14)  Substitution clause. Any street graphic that can be displayed under the provisions of this chapter may contain a non-commercial message. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-172-14-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 14-191. - Signs prohibited. 
    The following exterior signs are prohibited in all districts, except as otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving lights. 
(2)  Phosphorescent or luminescent signs. 
(3)  Any sign which has any visible moving parts, visible revolving parts, or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations by action of normal wind current or by any other means. This section does not prohibit the following: barber poles designated as historic signs, electronic message signs, and signs allowed in accordance with sections 14-211, permitted temporary signs in all districts, 14-212(4), pennants, spinners, streamers, and balloons, and 14-231(2), flags or emblems. 
(4)  Commercial electronic message signs when the message is scrolling or moving in any direction, when it changes more than once in every six seconds, or when it is in any video format. 
(5)  Trailered signs that are placed upon or attached to a trailer or other wheeled device for the sole purpose of advertising or display, having no other functional use. 
(6)  Roof-mounted signs. ( Figure 28 ) 

(7)  Signs painted, posted, or mounted on trees, rocks, or other natural features, fences, fence posts, light poles, benches, flower boxes, and perimeter or privacy walls, and utility poles, equipment and structures. (Figure 29) 

(8)  Any sign or sign structure that the city determines is structurally unsafe, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Illuminated signs that are distractions to motorists by emitting beams or rays of light which are directed at any portion of a roadway and are of such intensity as to impair a driver's vision thereby interfering with the operation of a motor vehicle as well as illuminated signs that interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
b.  Any non-governmental sign resembling a public safety warning or traffic sign. 
c.  Any sign that is in disrepair including but not limited to having to stand with bent or broken sign facing, broken supports, loose appendages or struts which cause the sign to stand more than 15 degrees from the perpendicular sign structure. 
d.  Any part of a sign or a sign support structure become imminently unstable or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe. 
e.  Any sign declared unsafe by the code enforcement officer in accordance with the City of Iron Mountain International Property Maintenance Code. 
(9)  Temporary signs (such as real estate, political event, off premises and residential event signs) shall not be placed in the public right-of-way such as curb lawns. 
(10)  Commercial signs hand held or attached to a person. 
(11)  Inflatable signs. 
(12)  Absence of permit. Any sign for which a permit has not been issued and which is not a permitted sign is prohibited. 
(13)  Indecent, obscene and profane signs. 
(14)  Other temporary or permanent signs not expressly permitted by this chapter. 
(15)  Any construction of new billboards within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-192-14-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TEMPORARY SIGNS 

Sec. 14-211. - Temporary signs not requiring permits. 
    The following non-illuminated, temporary signs are permitted in all districts subject to any other applicable requirements and permits are not required 
(1)  Real estate signs. A real estate sign that is freestanding (Figure 30) in a private yard, or mounted on a private building wall, shall be permitted on the property intended to be rented, leased, and/or sold, provided that the sign is removed within 15 days after the sale, lease, or rental of the property. 

A wall-mounted real estate sign shall be permitted with the area restrictions noted below and only mounted to the ground floor wall of a building. Window signs are permitted as 25 percent or less of the window area, only in lieu of a freestanding sign and limited to one window sign per building wall. 
For the purpose of publicizing a property open house, both on-premise and off-premise signs are permitted to be displayed only during the hours of the open house. Off-premise signs advertising an open house for a specific property shall be limited to two and shall not be displayed, placed, or mounted in public right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, or on public property. 
Real estate signs shall be built and installed in accordance with the following schedule: 
Table 1 REAL ESTATE SIGNS 
Zoning District Maximum Height- 
Freestanding Maximum Sign Area 
(Sq. Ft.) R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1 Four (4) feet Six (6) O-S, B-2, O-R Six (6) feet Twelve (12) I-1, I-2 Eight (8) feet Thirty-two (32)  
(2)  Temporary promotional signs. Three per parcel, one additional sign allowed per 50 feet of frontage, maximum of ten per property, up to five days before event, to be removed at the close of the event. No more than seven days in a 30-day period. Size limits shall conform to Table 1 "Real Estate Signs." No sign shall be placed in a right-of-way. No signs placed off premises. 
(3)  Construction signs. A construction sign for each development project shall be permitted on a construction site. Such a sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the property within 30 days of the final inspection of the building or site by the city. (Figure 31). Such signs shall have a maximum height and area in accordance with the following schedule: 

Table 2 CONSTRUCTION SIGNS 
Type of Construction Maximum Height- 
Freestanding Maximum Sign Area 
(Sq. Ft.) R-1 Four (4) feet Four (4) R-2, R-3 Six (6) feet Thirty-two (32) O-S, B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, O-R Eight (8) feet Fifty (50)  
(4)  Residential-event signs. For publicizing a single event such as a garage sale, yard sale, estate sale, or moving sale, residential-event signs are permitted for a period not to exceed seven days in a 90-day period. Off-premise residential-event signs shall not be displayed, placed, or mounted on public property; however, the city manager may designate a location or locations for the placements of such signs. 
(5)  Political-event signs. Political-event signs are permitted on private property only and shall not exceed eight square feet in area and four feet in height. Political-event signs shall be removed within 15 days following the political event to which the sign pertains. 
(6)  Attended, noncommercial signs. Attended, non-commercial signs such as hand-held political placards and demonstration pickets shall be permitted, subject to all applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
(7)  Motor vehicle and enclosed trailer signs. Allowed when: The sign is incidental to the use, and advertising or identification of a business location is not the primary use, the vehicle or trailer is serviceable, in regular use and movable. 

(8)  Flags or emblems. Permitted only as allowed in Article VI, section 14-231(2). 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-212. - Temporary signs requiring permits. 
    The following non-illuminated, temporary signs are permitted in all districts and a permit in compliance with Article IX. These signs shall be reviewed by administrative review of the zoning administrator, or the city manager's designee: 
(1)  Promotional-event signs. Promotional-event signs that provide directions to a community event in the city, that is sponsored by a unit of government or a non-profit organization, shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 14 days. Such signs for events such as art fairs, circuses, festivals, etc., shall be permitted, not exceeding eight square feet in area and four feet in height. The number of signs, sign area, and sign location shall be approved by city staff prior to installation. Promotional-event signs shall be removed within 48 hours after the event that they identify. (Figure 32) 

(2)  Seasonal and grand opening signs. Seasonal and grand opening signs shall follow promotional event sign review and size requirements. They may be placed one week before opening for a period of 45 days. Off-premises signs shall be wholly within private property with the owner's permission and outside of any clear vision area and not to exceed two in number, one per parcel. Any temporary sign placed on a parcel counts towards the total signage for that parcel. 
(3)  Banners . Banners may be displayed only on a building wall as a part of a sign's permitted message area, for not more than seven days after the event. 
(4)  Pennants, spinners, streamers, and balloons. Pennants, spinners, streamers, and similar temporary-display devices, attached only to the principal building on a site, are permitted if not in the clear vision or required sign setback area for that district. They must be in good condition. (Figure 34) 

(5)  Sandwich board signs. Permitted only as required in section 14-251(6). (Figure 36) 

(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-213-14-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PERMANENT SIGNS 

Sec. 14-231. - Permitted permanent signs. 
    The following are generally considered permanent signs and are permitted in all districts, subject to the restrictions herein contained and shall not require permits for erection: 
(1)  Governmental signs. Governmental signs of a branch of local, state, or federal government, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, or signs required to be maintained or posted by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation. (Figure 37) 

(2)  Flags or emblems. Flags or emblems of governmental, civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organizations, provided that the height of any flagpole shall not exceed 30 feet. Parcels having fewer than 100 feet of primary street-frontage shall be permitted one permanent flagpole, and parcels having more than 100 feet of primary street frontage shall be permitted one permanent flagpole for each 100 feet of primary street frontage, not to exceed a maximum of three flagpoles. Temporary displays for periods not exceeding seven days in any 90-day period may exceed this standard. 
(3)  Commemorative signs. Commemorative signs such as cornerstones, historical markers, memorial plaques or tablets, and the like. (Figure 38) 

(4)  Accessory signs. Signs on accessory structures greater than 100 square feet in floor area such as storage sheds, outbuildings, and warehouses shall not exceed ten percent of the mounting wall. 
(5)  Warning signs. Warning signs such as "No Trespassing," "No Hunting," "Danger," and "Beware of Dog," not exceeding two square feet in area and no more than one sign per 100 feet of property frontage. (Figure 39) 

(6)  Permanent window signs. A business shall be permitted interior signs (including neon) that occupy not more than 25 percent of the total window area of each floor level of said business in the B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2, and O-S districts. The total permanent window signage for a building, or the tenant portion of a building, shall not exceed 24 square feet. Neon signs exceeding 25 percent of the window area shall be reviewed as special condition signs (Section 14-252(a)(7). 
(7)  Directory signs. A business shall be permitted to participate in a directory sign program as they become available. 
a.  They may be located in a commercial zoning district at the intersection of roadways at the end of the block they are located on, or at major intersections at a greater distance if space is available. 
b.  Businesses closest to the property that has frontage on the primary street shall have first choice, and so on by the next distant until the available space is filled. 
c.  The design, size and placement will be determined by the type of available installation locations and upon review of the planning commission. 
d.  They shall be elevated a minimum of seven feet above ground level if located in pedestrian traffic areas or ten feet above the height of the intersection roadway if in the "clear vision area" as defined in City of Iron Mountain Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 74. 
e.  Mounting them on city structures where practical (light poles, etc.) must be approved and installed by the City of Iron Mountain or approved third party contractor, with the cost passed on to the participants at the appropriate rate set by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-232-14-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SIGNS REQUIRING PERMIT 

Sec. 14-251. - On-premise signs. 
    The following on-premise signs may be erected, altered, or relocated in accordance with the regulations of this section and subject to the permit requirements of Article IX. The required permit for such sign shall be reviewed by the city manager, or the city manager's designee. 
(1)  Projecting nameplate signs. One projecting nameplate sign (Figure 40) shall be allowed for each ground-floor use that fronts a public right-of-way or alley and one projecting nameplate sign shall be allowed for each below-ground-floor use that has direct access to a public right-of-way or alley, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The projecting nameplate shall not extend beyond three feet, six inches from the building wall; 
b.  The projecting nameplate shall not be internally illuminated; 

c.  The height and area of projecting nameplates are restricted according to the following schedule: 
PROJECTING NAMEPLATES 
Zoning District Minimum Height Maximum Height Maximum Area R-1, R-2, R-3 7 feet 10 feet 3 square feet O-S, B-1, B-2, CC, I-1, I-2, O-R 7 feet 15 feet 3 square feet  
(2)  Overhanging signs. One overhanging sign per commercial building shall only be permitted in the B-1 or B-2 districts where a lot does not or cannot (due to setback restrictions) have a freestanding sign (Figure 41). Projecting nameplates meeting the area and height requirements of section 14-251 may be substituted for the overhanging sign, provided that there is only one such nameplate per ground-floor use, or per use below ground with direct access to a public right-of-way. 

a.  Height and area of overhanging signs are restricted according to the following schedule: 
Table 4 OVERHANGING SIGNS 
Zoning District Minimum Height Maximum Height Maximum Area B-1, B-2 10 feet 15 feet 12 square feet  
b.  No part of an overhanging sign shall exceed the height of the building facade or extend more than 48 inches in width. 
c.  Such signs shall not be mounted on the corner of a building or be closer than four feet from the corner of the building. 
d.  Signs over 12 square feet can be requested under section 14-252(a)(12), special condition overhanging signs. 
(3)  Wall-mounted signs. Wall-mounted signs shall be permitted in all districts, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Such signs shall be mounted such that no part of the sign is higher than the height of the facade of the building upon which it is mounted. 

b.  Mansards may have only one sign per business, not exceeding one-fourth of the total wall-mounted, signable area and permitted only on the front of the building mansard. (Figure 43) 

c.  Dwelling-unit structures or home occupations shall be limited to one non-illuminated sign not exceeding 300 square inches and mounted flat against the building wall. (Figure 44) 

d.  The wall-mounted sign area for multi-family, non-profit institutional and similar uses located in residential zones shall be limited to ten percent of the front facade and five percent of the side or rear facades. (Figure 45) 

e.  The total area of all wall-mounted signs in commercial districts shall be restricted according to the following schedule: 
Table 5 AREA OF WALL MOUNTED SIGNS 
Zoning District % of Ground Floor Wall Area On Front Facade % of Ground Floor Wall Area Rear 
Facade % of Ground Floor Wall Area On Side Facades B-1, O-R 15 10 5 B-2, O-S 15 10 10 I-1, I-2 20 10 10  
f.  Changeable-message-area signs: 
1.  Changeable-message-area signs (where permitted) are permitted only on those facades that front directly on a public right-of-way or parking area. Changeable-message signs shall not exceed the maximum height of windows or doors on the first-floor facade. (Figure 42). 
2.  Changeable-message-area signs shall be restricted according to the following schedule: 
Table 6 CHANGEABLE MESSAGE AREA 
Zoning District % of Signable Wall Area Other R-1, R-2, R-3 Not Permitted See Permitted O-S, B-1, O-R, I-1, I-2 30% Temporary Signs- 
B-2, Banners  
3.  In the B-1, B-2, O-S, O-R, I-1, and I-2 zoning districts, buildings are permitted a maximum of one six-square-foot, changeable-message-area sign per building entrance to provide upper floor directories and directional information. 
(4)  On-premise, freestanding signs. On-premise, freestanding signs shall be limited to one such sign per lot, except that two freestanding signs shall be allowed per lot which has frontage on two public roads. These two freestanding signs must be placed along separate public road frontages. Placement and setback of such signs shall be determined in accordance with the standards in this article. 
a.  Freestanding signs identifying a multi-family residential complex or subdivision in any district shall be restricted to a maximum area of 12 square feet and a maximum height of six feet. 

b.  The area and height of freestanding signs identifying a business or service are restricted according to the following schedule: 
Table 7 FREESTANDING SIGNS 
Zoning District Maximum Height in Feet Maximum Sign Area in Square Feet* B-1, O-R 8 12 B-2, O-S 10 30 I-1, I-2 10 40 *See Article III, freestanding signs in or over a right-of-way.  
c.  All freestanding signs may have up to 100 percent of the sign face in fixed-message area. Such freestanding signs shall have a maximum changeable-message area in accordance with the following schedule: (Figure 48) 

Table 8 FREESTANDING SIGNS 
Zoning District Maximum % Sign Face in 
Changeable Message B-1, O-S 25 B-2, O-R 25 I-1, I-2 40  
(5)  Directional signs. Directional signs, each not exceeding three square feet in surface area and nor more than four signs per lot, displayed strictly for the direction, safety, or convenience of the public, including signs that identify restrooms, parking-area entrances or exits, visitor parking, restricted parking, clearance, freight entrances or the like. Any additional directional sign(s), not exceeding three square feet in surface area, may be permitted subject to the approval of the sign committee upon showing sufficient need. The maximum height of entrance and exit signs for driveways and/or parking areas shall be three feet. (Figure 49) 

(6)  Sandwich boards. Sandwich board signs shall be permitted in the neighborhood business (B-1) and general business (B-2) districts on private or public property, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  One sandwich board sign is permitted per each ground-floor business, or two per lot of record or one per 25 feet of frontage. All such signs shall be subject to review and approval by the city prior to placement, in accordance with these standards. 
b.  Retail businesses shall be permitted to display sandwich board signs during the business hours of the business displaying the sign. 
c.  Sandwich board signs require a permit, as issued by the city before being displayed. 
d.  Sandwich board signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and three feet in height if folded flat. 
e.  Sandwich board signs shall not obstruct doorways. 
f.  Sandwich board signs on a public right-of-way/sidewalk shall be kept within 36 inches of the building face and within ten feet of the building entrance for the business to which the sign pertains and shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic, violate ADA standards, or impede maintenance and/or snow and ice removal. 
g.  Colors in the DDA zone shall be approved by the sign committee (no neon or reflective). 
h.  Professional appearance; no cardboard or OSB, etc. 
i.  Fastening or weighting of the sign shall be an integral component of the sign itself (no concrete blocks, tires, etc., used to weigh down a sign). 
j.  No off-premises signs allowed in or upon a public right-of-way. Allowed in front of the parent business only. 
(7)  Electronic message sign. A commercial electronic message sign must not exceed: 12 square feet in a 25-39 mph speed zone, 24 square feet in a 40-54 mph speed zone or up to 36 square feet in a 55 mph or higher speed zone by special review as defined in section 14-252 and if more restrictive, none may exceed the maximum allowable square footage for a freestanding, wall, marquee, canopy or awning sign. The characteristics and use shall conform to the State of Michigan Highway Advertising Act brightness, background colors and change rates, as amended. As of the effective date of this chapter, the current regulations are; provided however that all electronic message signs must meet the most current Michigan Highway Advertising Act. 
a.  All EMSs include the means to reduce light intensity at dawn, dusk and during the nighttime hours. 
b.  Signs with flashing or moving lights, motion or rotation are prohibited. 
c.  Changes between static images may occur at a rate of one change per six seconds or longer. 
d.  Maximum luminescence level may not be more than 0.3 footcandles over ambient light levels measured from: 150 feet away from a sign of less than 300 square feet; 200 feet away from a sign 300-378 square feet; 250 feet away from a sign 378-672 square feet; and 350 feet away from signs larger than 672 square feet. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13; Ord. of 12-5-16(2)) 
Sec. 14-252. - Special condition signs. 
(a)  Signs may be permitted by special review, as special condition signs, upon approval by the sign committee, as provided below: 
(1)  Community-service signs with particular consideration given for shared individual signs identifying more than one service club or civic organization. (Figure 50) 

(2)  Off-premise, directional signs of fewer than or equal to three square feet that pertain to a public-service institution such as hospitals, schools, neighborhood, historic buildings or neighborhoods, museums, etc. These are generally to be located in the public right-of-way or on a parcel adjacent to the right-of-way provided written permission of the property owner is provided. 

(3)  Directory signs that do not exceed the maximum restrictions by type of sign for wall-mounted or freestanding signs in the district where the property is located. (Tables 4 and 5). Businesses identified on such signs shall each have an equal portion of the sign area. 
(4)  Historic signs may be maintained, restored, or renovated subject to review of the sign and historic designation. (Figure 52) In addition to the other standards for review of special condition signs, a historic sign must comply with the following: 
a.  Must be at least 50 years old. 
b.  Shall be an appurtenant graphic and not an off-premise sign. 
c.  The sign must be unique and enhances the cultural, historical or aesthetic quality of the city. 
d.  The sign shall be structurally safe and comply with the City of Iron Mountain International Property Maintenance Code. 

(5)  Wall-mounted signs above the first floor of a multiple-story building provided not to exceed one-fourth of the total wall sign area permitted on the first floor. (Figure 53) 

(6)  Marquee, canopy, and awning signs. (Figures 54, 55, and 56) 



(7)  Special condition freestanding signs. Freestanding or pole signs for larger lot frontage parcels in a business district may be allowed with a higher height limit, and larger display area based upon: the frontage available, setback limits and adjacent property characteristics (Table 4). 
Table 4 SPECIAL CONDITION FREESTANDING SIGNS 
Zoning District Maximum Height in Feet Maximum Sign Area in Square Feet* B-1, O-R 30 75 B-2, O-S 30 150 I-1, I-2 30 150 *Minimum frontage 150'. *50 sq. ft. of display per 100' of frontage up to maximum listed sign area. *Minimum height of 10' at bottom edge of sign. *See Article III, freestanding signs in or over a right-of-way.  
(8)  Exterior neon signs. Exceeding three square feet and interior window neon signs exceeding 25 percent of the window area shall be subject to review and approval. 
(9)  A-frame signs. Typically a translucent background four feet by eight feet with adjustable lettering are subject to review. Internally illumination shall be steady and stationary in source and intensity. Maximum luminescence levels shall conform to levels defined in Article VII. These must meet all minimum setback and lot requirements. 
(10)  Unique conditions. May permit greater sign height or area in individual cases where the planning commission, determines that unique site conditions such as unusual site or building size, shape or topography; deep building setbacks, building facades obscured from the street, a nonconforming use; building facade limitations, etc., warrant such an exception. 
(11)  Standards. The size, location, and/or placement of all signs in subsections (a)(1)-(8) shall also be reviewed, in accordance with the standards set forth in Article IX. 
(12)  Special condition overhanging signs. One overhanging sign per commercial building shall only be permitted in the B-1 or B-2 districts. 
a.  Height and area of overhanging signs are restricted according to the following schedule: 
Table 5 SPECIAL CONDITION OVERHANGING SIGNS B-1 and B-2 
Zoning District Area Minimum Height Maximum Height Maximum B-1, B-2 10 feet 10 feet per story 64  
b.  No part of an overhanging sign shall exceed the height of the building facade or extend more than 48 inches over a public right-of-way. No sign shall overhang or be within one foot of a traffic lane. 
c.  Such signs shall not be mounted on the corner of a building or be closer than four feet from the corner of the building. 
d.  Maximum area computed at the rate of one square foot of sign area for every one foot of building frontage up to 64 square feet. 
e.  Signs are not to have an adverse affect on adjacent property view, or substantially restrict adjacent signage visibility. 
(b)  Procedures and considerations for special condition signs. 
(1)  Special condition signs shall be reviewed by the planning commission sign committee consisting of the: city manager, zoning administrator and an appointed member of the planning commission. This committee shall have the authority to adjust requirements of this chapter in the areas of: 
  Size up to a ten percent increase 
  Setback up to 25 percent reduction 
  Approval of materials and composition of sidewalk signs. 
(2)  Any other deviation of the requirements of this chapter, or appeal to the committee's decision shall follow the requirements for appeal and notification of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, and presided over in the manner set by the City of Iron Mountain's Zoning Ordinance. The zoning board of appeals shall be the presiding authority. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-253-14-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 

Sec. 14-271. - Restrictions upon nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Expansion, enlargement, and alteration. Nonconforming signs shall not be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign, or changed in terms of the shape, size, type, height, location or frame of the sign. Non-conformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended. Only face changes with the identical location, shape and dimensions as the existing nonconforming sign are allowed. 
(b)  Re-establishment. All nonconforming signs shall not be re-established or displayed after the activity, business, or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 90 days or longer. All conforming signs shall be removed after the activity, business, or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for one year. 
(c)  Reconstruction/expansion. Should any nonconforming sign or any portion thereof be destroyed by any means, to the extent of 50 percent or more of its value at the time of destruction, excluding the value of foundations and electrical, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Should any building be destroyed by any means, to the extent of 50 percent or more of the appraised replacement costs of the entire building, then all nonconforming signs associated with such building shall be altered or removed to conform with the provisions of this chapter. Should any property have the total gross floor area of all buildings, which are under the same ownership or control, expand by 25 percent or more by means of an addition or a new separate building, then all nonconforming signs shall be altered to conform with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Relocation . Should any sign be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(e)  Vacant parcels. Regardless of the conforming or nonconforming status of any sign, any land completely void of buildings shall also be completely void of all signs, except for governmental, warning, temporary signs associated with a temporary land use, and real estate signs. 
(f)  Maintenance . Nonconforming signs may be maintained in their present shape, size, and materials with ordinary repairs so as to remain in a safe condition and to avoid unsightly deterioration. 
(g)  Relocation of on-site elements. If the owner of a sign or the premises on which a sign is located changes the location of a building, property line, or sign, or changes the use of a building such that any sign on the premises is rendered nonconforming, such sign shall be made to conform to this chapter. 
(h)  Relocation of off-site elements. No person shall be required to remove a sign that was erected in compliance with this chapter if said sign becomes nonconforming due to a change occurring after the effective date of this chapter in the location of buildings or streets where such change is beyond the control of the owner of the sign and the premises on which the sign is located. 
(i)  Temporary sign change-Conformity. The following types of signs shall be removed or altered to conform to this chapter within 90 days from the effective date of this chapter: 
(1)  Tripod, sandwich board, and portable signs; and 
(2)  Temporary signs that do not conform to Article V of this chapter. 
(j)  Nonconforming electronic message sign-Commercial. Within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, all commercial electronic message signs shall be brought into compliance with the requirement of section 14-251(7), On-premise signs-Electronic message sign-Commercial of this chapter that stipulates that the electronic message of such signs shall conform with the Michigan Highway Advertising Act. 
(k)  Condemnation . Upon approval of city council, pursuant to applicable law, the city may acquire by condemnation an interest in privately-owned nonconforming signs for the purpose of removal of such nonconforming signs to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. Just compensation, as defined by applicable law, shall be paid any owners for residual value of a nonconforming sign that is condemned pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Secs. 14-272-14-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-291. - Authority for administration and enforcement. 
(a)  City manager/MDOT authority. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Signs within the right-of-way for M-95 or US-2 may require the approval of the State of Michigan's Department of Transportation (MDOT) and it is the responsibility of the land or business owner and/or contractor to obtain any required approval prior to the placement of any sign in such right-of-way. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, may require evidence of MDOT approval of any sign in such right-of-way prior to the issuance of any permit required under this chapter. Except for special condition (variance) signs to be reviewed by the planning commission, all other signs requiring permits shall be reviewed by the city manager, or the city manager's designee. For sign permits reviewed by the planning commission, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall be responsible for administering permit approvals, obtaining required application changes due to conditional approvals, communication of denied permits and inspections for all such signs. 
(b)  Planning commission authority. All signs and permits regulated under this chapter shall be reviewed by the planning commission on an annual basis. The planning commission shall make recommendations to staff in their application of the regulations, and recommend modifications and amendments to the city council as needed. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-292. - Authority and standards for waiving sign regulations. 
    In reviewing applications for an exception to the sign regulations, the planning commission committee shall review those exceptions prescribed in section 14-252(b). If the requested exception exceeds those limits, it shall than follow the notification and hearing procedure for a variance and the zoning board of appeals shall preside over the requested as prescribed in Chapter 74, the City of Iron Mountain Zoning Ordinance, and consider the following standards as a basis for approving a sign and establishing setback, location, and placement of signs: 
(1)  Relationship of the sign to surrounding properties and rights-of-way: 
a.  Compatibility with adjacent land uses and signs. 
b.  Visibility of neighboring signs or buildings. 
c.  Lighting trespass impacts. 
(2)  Relationship of the sign to features on the site of the sign installation: 
a.  Suitability of the sign and its location relative to particular site characteristics such as yard areas, vegetation, topography, and the like. 
b.  Compatibility of the sign with the size, location, and character of the principal building(s) on-site. 
(3)  Impact of the sign upon the Iron Mountain townscape: 
a.  Impact of the sign upon views of prominent natural features such as hillsides, woodlands, etc. 
b.  Impact of the sign upon views of the City of Iron Mountain skyline and its environs. 
c.  Impact of the sign upon parks and public spaces. 
d.  Impact of the sign upon historic buildings or properties. 
(4)  Appearance and character of the sign: 
a.  Sign-evaluation guidelines prepared by the planning commission as adopted and amended by the planning commission shall be used to evaluate sign appearance and character. 
b.  Facade- and design-review standards shall meet the standards of the planning commission. 
(5)  Impacts of the sign upon public safety: 
a.  Clear vision as defined in City of Iron Mountain Chapter 74, the City of Iron Mountain Zoning Ordinance. 
(6)  Consistent with the intent and purposes of this chapter. The Iron Mountain Planning Commission may delegate decisions in accordance with this chapter to a committee, herein called the sign committee, consisting of no fewer than three members, of which at least one shall be a planning board member. A quorum shall be the majority of the members of the sign committee. Where a petitioner is not satisfied with a decision of the sign committee if so established, it may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-293. - Permitting and procedures for permit review. 
(a)  Permits required. Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, all signs identified in this chapter as requiring a permit must have an approved permit prior to being erected, altered, relocated, or installed. 
(b)  Permits not required. All signs not requiring a permit by this chapter, shall still be regulated as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Servicing and repair. No permit shall be required for ordinary servicing, repainting of existing sign message, or cleaning of a sign. No permit is required for periodic message changes for changeable message signs a permit is required for any sign that includes changes to a sign which requires a new permanent face. 
(d)  Application for sign permit. A completed application for a sign permit shall contain or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Sign-location drawing. Distance measured in feet and inches from the sign in relation to nearby buildings, sidewalks, street curbs, structures, other on-site signs, and property lines shall be shown. 
(2)  Sign-elevation drawing. 
a.  Height of the sign above the ground and support structure(s). 
b.  Area and dimensions of sign surface. 
c.  Lettering of the sign shall be graphically shown to scale as it will appear on the erected sign, shall be in the style of the finished sign, and shall be illustrated to approximate the size and weight of the lettering of the final constructed sign. 
d.  Materials and colors to be used on the sign face and support structures shall be indicated. 
e.  Method of illumination, if any, shall be shown. In the case of internally-illuminated signs, the drawing shall identify which part of the sign is translucent and which part is opaque. 
(3)  Copies of drawings. For a permit without planning committee review, one copy of, and for sign committee review three copies of, drawings as prescribed above, illustrating proposed sign(s) to be erected on the site, shall be submitted with an application for review by the city. In those cases where sign committee review is required, such material shall be submitted, in compliance with requirements of the commission's by-laws. 
(4)  Registered seal. At the discretion of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, the city may require for any sign, for public safety concerns, the application to bear the certificate or seal of a registered architect or engineer as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit. 
(5)  Certificate of insurance. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall require an applicant to obtain a certificate of insurance for all installations of freestanding or overhanging signs. 
(6)  Location staking. With two stakes erected to designate the vertical height and located at the horizontal limits of the sign structure, the proposed location of freestanding signs shall be identified by an applicant prior to review by the city. 
(7)  Graphic illustration. The City of Iron Mountain may require photographs, markings on buildings, mockups, spec sheets, catalogs, or other necessary illustrations in order to evaluate a proposed sign and its impacts. 
(8)  Other information. The city shall require additional information to show full compliance with this and all other applicable laws. The city may require professional review(s) by architects, attorneys, engineers, planners and any other professionals whose expertise, the City of Iron Mountain values to review the application and its associated documents to determine compliance with this chapter. This is provided no qualified city employees are available for such reviews. All expenses associated with such reviews shall be paid by the applicant prior to approval or denial of such permit. 
(9)  Permit fee. A fee must be paid for signs requiring permits, in accordance with the city's schedule of fees and such fee must be submitted at the same time the application is submitted. 
(e)  Expiration of permit. All permits issued for the erection of a sign shall expire within one year after issuance of the permit, unless authorized work commences and continues. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-294. - Interpretation and conflict. 
    The standards and provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted as being the minimum requirements necessary to uphold the purposes of this chapter. Whenever this chapter imposes a higher standard than required by other regulations, ordinances or rules, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. When the provision of any other statute imposes higher standards, the provisions of such statutes shall govern. 
    Where it is alleged by a petitioner that there is an error in interpretation of this chapter by the city manager, the city manager's designee, or the sign committee, then the zoning board of appeals shall review an appeal of such interpretation. The concurring vote of the majority members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any interpretation of the ordinance by the city manager, the city manager's designee, or the sign committee. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Sec. 14-295. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Municipal civil infractions. A violation of any provision in this chapter constitutes a municipal civil infraction. Each day on which a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation. The fine for violations shall be as follows: the first offense shall be $100.00, the first repeat offense shall be $300.00, and the second or subsequent offenses shall be $500.00. 
(b)  Public nuisance and health hazard. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to health and safety shall be deemed a nuisance and enforcement action may be taken by the city for such sign including removal of the sign by the city at the sign owner's expense. 
(c)  Impoundment of illegal temporary signs. Illegal temporary signs that are on display at any time may be impounded by the city, pursuant to the impoundment policy established by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
APPENDIX 
    The following table contained herein is for convenience and illustration purposes only. In the event that a conflict arises between the meaning of any text and the following table, the text shall control. 
SIGN TYPE SIGN REGULATED SPECIFICALLY PERMIT REQUIRED ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW SPECIAL CONDITION SIGN Address Sign Y N Real Estate Sign Y N Construction Sign Y N Residential Event Sign Y N Political Event Sign Y N Window Sign: Temporary Y N Window Sign: Permanent Y N Attended Noncommercial Sign Y N Motor Vehicle Sign Y N Flags or Emblems Y N Promotional Event Sign Y Y Banners Y Y Y Pennants, Spinners, Streamers, Balloons Y Y Y Sandwich Board Signs Y Y Y Government Signs N N Commemorative Signs N N Accessory Signs Y N Warning Signs Y N Projecting Nameplate Signs Y Y Y Overhanging Signs Y Y Y Wall Signs Y Y Y Mansard Sign Y Y Y Dwelling unit/home Occupation Signs Y Y Y Multi-family/non-profit Institutional Signs Y Y Y Changeable Message Sign Y Y Y Freestanding Signs Y Y Y Directional Signs Y Y Y Commercial Electronic Message Board Signs Y Y Y Community-Service Signs Y Y Y Off-premise Directional Signs Y Y Y Directory Signs Y Y Y Y Historic Signs Y Y Y Y Multiple-story Building Signs Y Y Y Marquee, Canopy, Awning Signs Y Y Y Neon Signs Y Y Y Unique Site Condition Signs Y Y Y Freestanding "pole" signs Y Y Y  
(Ord. of 7-15-13) 
Chapter 18 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Title of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Iron Mountain Cable Communications Ordinance. 
Sec. 18-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to provide for: 
(1)  The franchising and regulation of cable television within the city; 
(2)  A cable communications system that will meet the current needs of the city and that can be improved and upgraded to meet future needs; 
(3)  The payment of fees and other valuable consideration to the city for the use of the public ways and for the privilege to construct and operate cable communications systems; 
(4)  The regulation by the city of certain rates to be charged to subscribers for certain cable communications services to the extent such regulation is not lawfully preempted by applicable state or federal statutes, rules or regulations; and 
(5)  Remedies and penalties for violation of this chapter and any franchise granted under this chapter. 
Sec. 18-3. - Applicability of chapter. 
    This chapter is applicable to any application for a cable franchise filed on or after July 1, 1988, and to any such franchise granted thereafter. 
Sec. 18-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Application means a proposal seeking authority to construct and operate a cable television system within the city pursuant to this chapter. It shall include the initial proposal plus all related subsequent amendments and correspondence with the city. 
    Basic service means subscriber cable television services which includes the delivery of local television broadcast signals as required by the FCC, access channels, leased channels and local origination channels, as covered by the regular monthly charge paid by all subscribers to any service tier, excluding premium services, two-way services and FM radio services. 
    Cable communications system or systems means a nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, under common ownership and control, that distributes or is designed to distribute to public subscribers cable television services. 
    Cable television services means the one-way transmission of video programming and associated nonvideo signals to subscribers together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is provided in connection with the video programming. 
    Dedication means those dedications and easements for public roadways and public utilities and other rights-of-way maintained for the benefit of the public and controlled by the city, the terms, conditions, or limitations of which are not inconsistent with the erection, construction, or maintenance of a cable television system, its structures, or equipment. 
    Drop means the cable that connects a subscriber's premises to the nearest feeder line of the cable communications system. 
    Easement means a right to use all public rights-of-way, including public utility easements. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any legally appointed or designated agent or successor. 
    Feeder line means the coaxial or fiber optic cable running from the trunk line to line-extenders and taps for the purpose of interconnection to individual subscribers. 
    Franchise means the nonexclusive right and authority to construct, maintain, and operate a cable communications system through use of the public streets, dedications, public utility easements, other public rights-of-way, or public places in the city pursuant to a contractual agreement executed by the city and a franchisee. 
    Franchisee or grantee refers to an entity authorized to construct and/or operate a cable communications system within the city pursuant to this chapter, including any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the original grantee. 
    Gross revenues means all operating revenue actually received from the cable television system derived directly or indirectly by a franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, and any person in which the franchisee has a financial interest in association with the provisions of cable television services within the city, including, but not limited to, basic service monthly fees, premium service fees, institutional service fees, installation and reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter rentals, studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees, advertising revenues, copyright fees; provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee payable to the state or any other governmental unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of such governmental unit, or any revenues from the provision of cable television services outside the city, or any revenues from sale of capital assets or lease of property for purposes unrelated to cable television. 
    Installation means the connection of the system at the subscriber's premises. 
    Leased channel or leased access channel means any channel, or part of a channel, available for commercial use on a fee basis by persons or entities other than a franchisee. 
    Person means an individual or legal entity, such as a corporation or partnership. 
    Premium service means pay television offered on a per channel or per program basis. 
    Service tier means a specific set of cable subscriber services which are made available as, and only as, a group for purchase by subscribers at a separate rate for the group. 
    Street or public way means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, path, sidewalk, alley, court, or easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel or public utilities and shall include public easements of rights-of-way. 
    Subscriber means a recipient of cable television service or other services provided over a cable television system. 
    Two-way capability means a system designed and constructed to have technical capacity for nonvoice return communications. 
    User means a party utilizing a cable television system's facilities for purposes of production or transmission of material or information to subscribers. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 18-5-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITY 

Sec. 18-31. - Requirement of a franchise. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communications system or part of a cable communications system within the city without a valid franchise obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 18-32. - General franchise characteristics. 
    Any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to: 
(1)  Authorize use of the public ways for installing cables, wires, lines, and other facilities in order to operate a cable communications system, but shall neither expressly or impliedly be deemed to authorize the grantee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent, or to utilize publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners therefor. 
(2)  Be nonexclusive, and shall neither expressly nor impliedly be deemed to preclude the issuance of subsequent franchises to operate one or more other cable communications systems within the city or the ownership or operation of a cable communications system by the city; 
(3)  Convey no property right to the franchisee or right to renewal; and 
(4)  Be subject to revocation at will by the city council unless public approval shall have been obtained for an irrevocable franchise not to exceed 30 years in the manner set forth by chapter XIII of the city Charter. 
Sec. 18-33. - Franchise as a contract. 
    A franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to constitute a contract between the franchisee and the city. The franchisee shall be deemed to have contractually committed itself to comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the franchise documents, and with all rules, orders, regulations, and determinations applicable to the franchise which are issued, promulgated or made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 18-34. - Subject of franchisee to authority. 
    A franchisee shall, at all times during the life of a franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city and to such lawful regulations as the city shall hereafter enact; provided, however, that such regulations by ordinance or otherwise shall be reasonable and not in conflict with any rights granted in this chapter, nor in conflict with the applicable laws or regulations of the state or of the United States or their respective regulatory bodies having jurisdiction. The construction, operation and maintenance of the system shall also be in full compliance with all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted by the United States, the state, or any agency of such governments. 
Secs. 18-35-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 18-61. - Filing. 
    Applications for a cable television franchise will be considered pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  An application may be filed at any time or pursuant to a request for proposals (RFP) issued by the city. 
(2)  The city may request additional information from an applicant for a franchise at any time. 
(3)  All applications to be acceptable for filing must be accompanied by a filing fee of $1,000.00. The city shall apply all filing fees received against all costs associated with its evaluation of any pending applications pursuant to section 18-63. If total costs are less than total filing fees, the city shall refund a portion of the filing fee on a pro rata basis to each applicant. 
Sec. 18-62. - Content. 
    To be acceptable for filing, an application must conform to any applicable RFP and all the information specified therein. Where an application is not filed pursuant to an RFP, it shall contain, at minimum the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the ownership of the applicant, if not a natural person, including the names and addresses of all persons with one percent or more ownership interest and the ultimate controlling natural persons and identification of all officers and directors and any other primary business affiliation of each; provided, however, that when any parent corporation has in excess of 1,000 shareholders and its shares are publicly traded on a national stock exchange, then a list of all holders of five percent or more of the voting stock of such corporation shall be disclosed. 
(2)  An indication of whether the applicant, or any entity controlling the applicant, including any officer of a corporation, or major stockholder thereof, has been adjudged bankrupt, has had a cable franchise revoked, or has been found guilty by any court or administrative agency in the United States of a violation of a security or antitrust law or a felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude. The application shall further identify any such person or entity and fully explain the circumstances. 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable facility including all line extensions to be served from the same head end as may be contemplated within the next five years. 
(4)  A description of the physical facility proposed, including channel capacity (one-way and two-way if any), the area to be served, a summary of technical characteristics, and head end and access facilities. 
(5)  A description of how any construction will be implemented, identification of areas having aboveground or belowground cable facilities, the proposed construction schedule, and a description, where appropriate, of how service will be converted from any existing facility to a new facility. 
(6)  A description of the services to be provided over the system, including identification of television signals (both broadcast and nonbroadcast) to be carried and all nontelevision services to be provided initially. Where service will be offered by tiers, identify the signals and/or services to be included on each tier. 
(7)  The proposed rates to be charged, including rates for each service tier, as appropriate, and charges for installation, converters, and other services. 
(8)  A demonstration that the proposal is designed to be consistent with all federal and state requirements. 
(9)  If requested by the city, pro forma financial projections for each year of the franchise term. The projections shall include a statement of income, balance sheet, statement of sources and uses of funds, and schedule of capital additions. All significant assumptions shall be explained in notes or supporting schedules that accompany the projections. 
(10)  A complete list of all cable communications systems in which the applicant, or a principal or affiliate thereof, holds an equity interest or at any time during the last five years held an equity interest. 
(11)  An affidavit of the applicant or duly authorized offer thereof, certifying, in a form acceptable to the city, the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application and acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments. 
(12)  In the case of an application by an existing franchisee for a renewed franchise, a demonstration that the franchisee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with the applicable law. 
(13)  Other information that the city, or its agents, may request of the applicant. 
Sec. 18-63. - Consideration. 
(a)  The city will consider each application for a franchise where the application is found to be acceptable for filing and in substantial compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any applicable RFP. In evaluating an application, the city will consider, among other things, the applicant's past service record in other communities, the nature of the proposed facilities and services, proposed rates, and whether the proposal would adequately serve the public needs and the overall interests of the citizens of the city. Where the application is for a renewed franchise, the city shall consider whether: 
(1)  The cable operator has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law. 
(2)  The quality of the operator's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices (but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the system) has been reasonable in light of community needs. 
(3)  The operator has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in the operator's proposal. 
(4)  The operator's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. 
(b)  Where the city determines that an applicant's proposal, including the proposed service area, would serve the public interest, it may grant, by ordinance, a franchise to the applicant. The franchise agreement will constitute a contract, freely entered into, between the city and the grantee. Such franchise agreement shall incorporate by reference the relevant provisions of this chapter. Any such franchise must be approved by ordinance of the city council. 
(c)  In the course of considering an application for a renewed franchise, the council shall hold a public hearing in which the public and the franchisee seeking renewal shall be offered an opportunity to speak, offer evidence and question witnesses. Notice of any such public hearing shall, at least ten days before the date of the hearing, be published in a local newspaper of general circulation in the city and be sent by certified mail to each applicant to be considered. A transcript or recording shall be made of such hearing. Based on the record of such hearing and the application, including any negotiations relative thereto, the council shall determine whether to grant a renewed franchise and shall issue a written opinion stating the reasons for its decision. 
(d)  A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not take effect until the applicant pays a grant fee to the city. The grant fee shall be equal to the city's direct costs in the franchising process less the application filing fees received. The city shall provide to the grantee a statement summarizing such costs prior to the execution of the franchise. 
Sec. 18-64. - Acceptance. 
    A franchise and its terms and conditions shall be accepted by a grantee by written instrument, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, and filed with the city within 30 days after the granting of the franchise by the city. In its acceptance, the grantee shall declare that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and accepts all of the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and agrees to abide by same. In accepting a franchise, a grantee shall indicate that it has relied upon its own investigation of all relevant facts, that it was not induced to accept the franchise, and that it accepts all reasonable risks related to the interpretation of the franchise. 
Secs. 18-65-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FRANCHISE CONDITIONS 

Sec. 18-91. - Term. 
    The term of a franchise shall be consistent with the requirements of chapter XIII of the Charter for the city. All franchises granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be revocable at the will of the council unless publicly approved in the manner required by chapter XII of the city Charter. If a franchisee seeks authority to operate a cable system in the city beyond the term of any such franchise as has been publicly approved, it shall file an application for a new franchise not later than 30 months prior to the expiration of this franchise. 
Sec. 18-92. - Restrictions. 
    All franchises granted pursuant to the term of this chapter shall be deemed to include and incorporate by reference the specific conditions set forth in chapter XII of the city Charter. 
Sec. 18-93. - Insurance; bonds; indemnity. 
    Upon the granting of a franchise and following simultaneously with the filing of the acceptance of the franchise and at all times during the term of the franchise, including the time for removal of facilities or management as a trustee, as provided for in this chapter, the franchisee shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and deliver to the city, written evidence of payment of premiums for and duplicate originals of the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees from any and all claims by any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) on account of injury to or death of a person occasioned by the operations of the franchisee under a franchise granted under this chapter, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $2,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. The policy shall be endorsed adding coverage against all claims for personal injury liability offenses. 
(2)  A property damage insurance policy indemnifying, defending, and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) for property damage occasioned by the operations of the franchisee under a franchise granted under this chapter, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $250,000.00 for property damage to the property of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for property damage to the property of two or more for the duration of such emergency or disaster. In the event of any such use by the city, the city shall hold harmless and indemnify the franchisee for any damages or penalties resulting from such use of this service. 
Sec. 18-94. - Fee based on annual gross revenues not charged. 
    The city shall not charge a franchise fee based upon the annual gross revenues of the franchisee. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the city's authority to tax a franchisee, however, as permitted by law. 
Secs. 18-95-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION 

Sec. 18-121. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Any cable system constructed within the city shall meet or exceed all technical standards consistent with this chapter, the franchise agreement, and the franchisee's application. 
(b)  The franchisee shall submit to the city, as the city may request, a copy of all maps and charts of cable locations prepared by or for the franchisee during the duration of this franchise. 
Sec. 18-122. - Construction and installation work. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to inspect all construction and installation work performed by the franchisee subject to this chapter as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with governing ordinances and the franchise. 
(b)  All construction, installation and maintenance must comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the city, the Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction, all state and local regulations, and good and accepted industry practices. 
Sec. 18-123. - Location of structures, lines and equipment. 
(a)  A franchisee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately owned property until approval of the property owner or appropriate governmental authority is obtained. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. However, the location of any pole or wire-holding structure by a franchisee shall not constitute a vested interest, and such poles, structures, or facilities shall be removed, replaced or modified by the franchisee at its own expense whenever the commission or other governmental authority determines that the public interest so necessitates. 
(b)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment installed by the franchisee within the city shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways or places and where they will not interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water or other preexisting utility facility. 
(c)  All such poles and other fixtures in any street or public way shall be placed in accordance with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(d)  In those areas of the city where electric and telephone utility lines have been placed underground, a franchisee shall place its lines and installations underground. In areas where either telephone or electric facilities are aboveground at the time of installation, the franchisee may install its service aboveground, provided that at such time as both of those other facilities are placed underground, the franchisee shall forthwith place its facilities underground, and the cost of such shall be borne by the franchisee, with no special charge being imposed upon any subscriber for such change. In new housing developments a franchisee shall install distribution cables at the same time utility facilities are being installed if reasonably possible. 
(e)  The franchisee shall locate the system head end within the city. 
Sec. 18-124. - Replacement of paving. 
    The franchisee, at its own cost and expense and in the manner approved by the city, shall replace and restore all paving, sidewalks, driveways, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before the work was commenced and shall maintain the restoration in an improved condition for a period of one year. Failure of the franchisee to replace or restore such paving, sidewalk, driveway or street surface within 48 hours after completion of the work shall authorize the city to cause the proper restoration to be made at the franchisee's expense. 
Sec. 18-125. - Alteration of streets by city. 
    If the city shall lawfully decide to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the franchisee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall, in a timely manner as requested by the city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, and other facilities at its own expense. 
Sec. 18-126. - Moving of buildings. 
    A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a valid house moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires or cables to permit the moving of buildings or other large objects. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person making the request, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
Sec. 18-127. - Trimming trees. 
    A franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property or which overhang streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables and other television conductors and fixtures of the franchisee. The city may require all trimming to be done at the franchisee's expense and under the city's supervision and direction. 
Secs. 18-128-18-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SYSTEM OPERATION 

Sec. 18-156. - Provision of service. 
    A franchisee shall provide subscriber service on the following basis: 
(1)  A franchisee shall not deny service, access, or otherwise discriminate against any person, including subscribers and users, on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, or sex. A franchisee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations including, but not limited to, those laws relating to the transmission of obscene materials. 
(2)  In providing service a franchisee shall: 
a.  Operate an office within the Cities of Iron Mountain or Kingsford open during normal business hours Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays. 
b.  Establish a maintenance service capable of promptly locating and correcting system malfunctions. Service trucks shall be equipped for voice communication with the franchisee's dispatcher. In order to permit a rapid response to any system-wide outage, the franchisee shall have service trucks available for emergency duty to repair system outages during nonbusiness hours. 
c.  Make every attempt to respond to customer complaints upon receipt, but in no case later than the next working day. The franchisee, whenever reasonably practicable, shall make system repairs and testing (which would result in any interruption of service to subscribers) at times which will least affect typical subscriber television viewing habits; provided, however, that a franchisee shall not be required to conduct such system repairs and testing during nonbusiness hours. 
d.  In those cases where service is not restored within 24 hours due to unusual circumstances, the reasons for the delay shall be fully documented in a complaint log. If after 24 hours, service is not restored to a subscriber, a franchisee shall, upon subscriber request, provide a refund or credit to such subscriber as set forth in this subsection for such full 24-hour period and subsequent fractions thereof. The refund or credit shall be in the amount of 1/30 the monthly charge for each tier of service and each premium service which is unavailable to the subscriber. 
(3)  As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, a franchisee shall, by appropriate means such as a card or brochure, furnish general subscriber information (including, but not limited to, terms of service, procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address, and local telephone number of the employee or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed) and furnish information concerning the city office responsible for the administration of the franchise, including the address and telephone number of such office. 
Sec. 18-157. - Service area. 
    A franchisee shall offer full cable television service to all areas of the city unless specifically authorized to serve a lesser area. A franchise issued pursuant to this section shall require that all dwelling units within the franchise territory shall be offered service on the same terms and conditions; provided, however, that multiple-family dwelling complexes, apartments or condominiums may be served on a master-billed basis and, further, service to motels, hotels, hospitals and similar businesses or institutions may be offered on terms and conditions different from single resident subscribers. If subsequent to the issuance of a franchise, the city annexes additional territory, a franchisee shall extend its cable television services into the annexed area upon reasonable request of the city. 
Sec. 18-158. - Protection of privacy. 
    Protection of subscriber privacy shall be assured consistent with the provisions of 47 USC 631, or any similar successor provision. 
Sec. 18-159. - Tampering or unauthorized connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a franchise cable television system within the city for the purpose of enabling anyone to receive any television signal or other information transmitted over the cable television system without proper authorization to do so. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the cable system operator, to willfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires or other cable television system equipment, except, however, a subscriber may disconnect a television receiver from the cable system upon termination of service if the operator has not responded within the 30 days to a request for disconnection. 
(c)  Each violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Sec. 18-160. - Action by council majority. 
    Any action of the city council shall require the concurrence of four members. 
Secs. 18-161-18-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RATE REGULATION 

Sec. 18-186. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923. 
    Basic cable service means basic service as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC Rules means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act. 
    Increase in rates means an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. 
All other words and phrases used in this article shall have the same meanings as defined in the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 1, 9-9-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-187. - Purpose and interpretation of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and 
(2)  Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. 
This article shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 2, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-188. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 3, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-189. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this article, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the city clerk. The city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)  In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the manager in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The manager may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47 USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922, 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 4, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-190. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If this article, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 18-189(a), or any request for information pursuant to section 18-189(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or the cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)  Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 5, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-191. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 18-189(a), the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: 
(1)  The filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying; and 
(2)  Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published. 
The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first class mail at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city council, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 6, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-192. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under section 18-189(a) unless the city council (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The city council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 7, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-193. - Public notice of hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 18-192 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 18-189. In addition, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: 
(1)  The date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held; 
(2)  Interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and 
(3)  Copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 8, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-194. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the city council which shall, based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information, include a recommendation for the decision of the city council pursuant to section 18-195. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first class mail not less than 20 days before the city council acts under section 18-195. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 9, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-195. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which, in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the city council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 18-192 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 18-192 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 10, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-196. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR 76.942. Before the city council orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven days' written notice to the cable operator by first class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 11, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-197. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the city council pursuant to section 18-195 or section 18-196 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: 
(1)  Summarize the written decision; and 
(2)  State that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 12, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-198. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 18-189, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings, consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 13, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-199. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this article shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 14, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-200. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this article, the city council may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city council, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 15, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-201. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this article shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 16, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-202. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the city, for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules or regulations promulgated under this article. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules and regulations promulgated under this article, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 17, 9-9-93) 
Sec. 18-203. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between this article and the provisions of any prior ordinance or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with a cable operator, then the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 6-500, § 19, 9-9-93) 
Secs. 18-204-18-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 18-216. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 1) 
Sec. 18-217. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 2) 
Sec. 18-218. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. [2] 
    City means the City of Iron Mountain. 
    City council means the City Council of the City of Iron Mountain or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 3) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
A copy of the Act can be obtained on the internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 

Sec. 18-219. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make 11 copies of the application and distribute a copy to city department heads, and city council members. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. [3] 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 4) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
A copy of the application form as approved by the commission can be obtained on the internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 

Sec. 18-220. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 18-219(b) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. [4] 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 5) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Copies of the permit forms currently approved by the MPSC can be obtained on the internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 

Sec. 18-221. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter 10 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 6) 
Sec. 18-222. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 7) 
Sec. 18-223. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 8) 
Sec. 18-224. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 9) 
Sec. 18-225. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in section 18-219(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 10) 
Sec. 18-226. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 11) 
Sec. 18-227. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 18-226 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 12) 
Sec. 18-228. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 13) 
Sec. 18-229. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 14) 
Sec. 18-230. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 15) 
Sec. 18-231. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 16) 
Sec. 18-232. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in section 18-219(c) of this article; 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 18-219(f) of this article; 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with section 18-219(g) of this article; 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 18-220(a) of this article; 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 18-220(a) of this article; 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 18-220(a) of this article; 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 18-220(b) of this article; 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 18-220(c) of this article; 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 18-220(d) of this article; 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 18-221 of this article; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 18-226 of this article; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 18-229 of this article; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 18-230 of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 17) 
Sec. 18-233. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 18) 
Sec. 18-234. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 19) 
Sec. 18-235. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) for violations under this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 20) 
Sec. 18-236. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to chapter 38 of this Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. of 11-18-02, § 21) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal control and perpetual maintenance of cemetery lots, MCL 128.1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Every person who violates this chapter shall be liable to arrest for such violation and shall be subject, upon conviction, to be punished according to the provisions of section 1-15. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-614) 
Sec. 22-2. - Uses and occupancy-Months and hours. 
    No persons, other than employees of the city during the course of their employment, shall be allowed within the limits of the Iron Mountain Cemetery Park after 5:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m. during the months of November, December, January, February, and March. No persons, other than the employees of the city during the course of their employment, shall be allowed within the limits of the Iron Mountain Cemetery Park after 10:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m. during the months of April, May, June, July, August, September and October. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-601) 
Sec. 22-3. - Same-Exception; permit required. 
    Any variation from the hours of permissible uses and occupation of the cemetery shall only be allowed under a written permit approved by the city council, in advance, and issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-602) 
Sec. 22-4. - Animals. 
    No dog or other animals shall be permitted within the boundaries of the cemetery. This section shall not apply to any legally blind person using a Seeing Eye dog. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-603) 
Sec. 22-5. - Business or commerce. 
    No person shall use the cemetery for business or commercial purposes without proper written consent. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-605) 
Sec. 22-6. - Fires. 
    No person shall build fires other than the cemetery sexton or his representative. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-607) 
Sec. 22-7. - Vehicles. 
    No person, other than city employees, shall operate a self-propelled motor or mechanically driven vehicle on other than designated roads, trails, or parking lots. No person shall operate a snowmobile, ATV, minibike, amphibious vehicle, and/or nonlicensed motorcycle within the confines of Iron Mountain Cemetery Park. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-608) 
Sec. 22-8. - Noise. 
    No person shall use a loudspeaker system, public address system, or sound amplifying equipment of any kind, without proper written permission. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-610) 
Sec. 22-9. - Fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge firearms, firecrackers, rockets, or any other fireworks within the cemetery, except by a peace officer or other authorized personnel. 
(Ord. of 6-1-92, § 5-613) 
Chapter 26 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The ordinance creating the downtown development authority was approved unanimously by the city council on September 5, 1978. The original publication of the ordinance utilized the resolution form, not the ordinance form. Therefore, the city council, at its regular meeting on July 18, 1994, has resolved to republish an ordinance creating the downtown development authority for clarification purposes, and a copy thereof shall be furnished the state secretary of state immediately thereafter. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 26-1. - Determination of necessity to create and purpose of development authority. 
    The city council has determined that it is necessary for the best interests of the public to create a public body corporate which shall operate to halt property value deterioration, eliminate the causes of that deterioration, increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, and promote economic growth, pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), as amended (Act 197). 
(Ord. of 7-18-94, § 2-1501) 
Sec. 26-2. - Creation of downtown development authority. 
    There is hereby created, pursuant to Act 197, a downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title "City of Iron Mountain Downtown Development Authority." The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this chapter and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this chapter or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Ord. of 7-18-94, § 2-1502) 
Sec. 26-3. - Powers of authority. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter or Act 197, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by the law and in this section. 
(Ord. of 7-18-94, § 2-1503) 
Sec. 26-4. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district shall consist of the territory in the city described as follows: 
    Commencing at the point of beginning which is the extension of the west line of Merritt Avenue north to the south shore of Lake Chapin; thence southeasterly along the shoreline of the lake to a point on the shoreline that is the extension of the east line of Iron Mountain Street; thence south along the east line of Iron Mountain Street to the north line of the alley between Brown Street and Ludington Street; thence east along the north line of such alley to ten feet past the NE corner of Lot 5 of Block 7; thence south to ten feet past the SE corner of such lot; thence west to the SW corner of such lot; thence south on the east side of Iron Mountain Street to the north line of the alley between Ludington Street and Hughitt Street; thence east along the north line of such alley to the NE corner of Lot 5 of Block 12; thence south along the east side of Lot 5 of Block 12 across Hughitt Street continuing along the east side of Lot 4 in Block 13 to the SE corner of such lot, all in the Iron Mountain City Addition; thence easterly along the north side of the alley between Hughitt Street and A Street to a point 25 feet across Lot 4 of Block 1 of the Buell, Jenkins & Spies First Addition; thence south midway through Lot 4 of Block 1 to A Street; thence west to the east side of Iron Mountain Street at A Street; thence south along the east side of Iron Mountain Street to the south line of the alley between A Street and B Street; thence west to the NW corner of Lot 18 of Block 5; thence south to the SW corner of Lot 18 of Block 5 of the Buell, Jenkins & Spies First Addition; thence east to the east line of Iron Mountain Street; thence south to the south line of D Street; thence west to the east line of Stephenson Avenue; thence south along the east line of Stephenson Avenue to the north line of H Street; thence west along the north line of H Street to the alley between Vine Street and Cedar Avenue; thence north to the south line of F Street; thence west to the west line of Cedar Avenue; thence north along the west line of Cedar Avenue to the SE corner of Lot 5 of Block 7 of Spies & Jenkins First Addition; thence west along the south line of Lot 5 of Block 7 to the SW corner of Lot 5; thence north along the west line of Lots 5 and 4 of Block 7 to the NW corner of Lot 4 of Block 7; thence east along the north lot line of Lot 4 to the west line of Cedar Avenue; thence north along the west line of Cedar Avenue to the NE corner of Lot 2 of Block 7; thence east crossing Cedar Avenue to the SE corner of Lot 11 of Block 8; thence north along the east side of Lot 11 to its NE corner; thence west along the north line of Lot 11 to the west side of Cedar Avenue; thence north along Cedar Avenue to the NE corner of Lot 1 of Block 4; thence west along the north line of Lot 1, 60 feet; thence south paralleling Cedar Avenue at a distance 60 feet from Cedar Avenue to the south line of Lot 2 of Block 4; thence west to the SW corner of Lot 2 of Block 4; thence north to the northwest corner of Lot 2 of Block 4; thence west along the north line of Lot 6 of Block 4 to the east line of River Avenue; thence south along the east line of River Avenue to the NW corner of Lot 12 of Block 7; thence east along the north line of Lot 12 of Block 7 to the NE corner of Lot 12; thence south along the east line of Lot 12 to the SE corner of Lot 12; thence west along the north line of Lot 12 to the west line of River Avenue at the NE corner of Lot 2 of Block 6; thence south along the east line of Lot 2 to its SE corner; thence west along the south line of Lot 2 to its SW corner; thence north along the north line of Lots 2 and 1 of Block 6 to the NW corner of Lot 1; thence east along the north line of Lot 1 of Block 6 of the Spies & Jenkins First Addition to its NE corner; thence north along the west line of Cedar Avenue to the SE corner of Lot 1 of Block 17 of the Buell, Jenkins & Spies First Addition; thence west along the south line of Lot 1 to its SW corner continuing across Merritt Avenue to its west line; thence north along the west line of Merritt Avenue to the SE corner of Lot 14 of Block 2 of Kimberly's First Addition; thence west along the south line of Lot 14 to its SW corner; thence north along the west line of Lot 14 to its NW corner; thence west along the south line of C Street to the NE corner of Lot 3 of Block 2; thence north across C Street to the SE corner of Lot 10 of Block 3, continuing north along the east line of Lot 10 to its NE corner; thence west along the north line of Lots 10 and 9 of Block 3 to the NW corner of Lot 9 of Block 3; thence south along the west line of Lot 9 across C Street along the west line of Lot 4 of Block 2 to the SW corner of Lot 4 of Block 2; thence west to the west line of Carpenter Avenue at the SE corner of Lot 1 of Block 9; thence south along the west line of Carpenter Avenue to the SE corner of Lot 12 of Block 9; thence west to the SW corner of Lot 12; thence north to the NW corner of Lot 12; thence west to the NW corner of Lot 11; thence north along the west line of Lot 2 of Block 9 to its NW corner; thence east along the north line of Lots 2 and 1 of Block 9 to the NE corner of Lot 1; thence north along the west line of Carpenter Avenue to the NE corner of Lot 1 of Block 8; thence west along the south lines of Lots 1 and 2 of Block 8 to the SW corner of Lot 2 of Block 8; thence north along the west line of Lot 2 to its NW corner; thence east along the north line of Lot 2 to its NE corner; thence across B Street to the west line of Lot 12 of Block 7 continuing along the west line of Lot 1 of Block 7, 66 feet; thence easterly on a line parallel to B Street to the west line of Carpenter Avenue; thence north to the NE corner of Lot 1 of Block 7; thence easterly along the south line of A Street to the NE corner of Lot 3 of Block 4; thence north across A Street to the SE corner of Lot 9 of Block 5 continuing northerly along the east line of Lot 9 to its NE corner; thence west to its NW corner; thence south to its SW corner; thence west to the SW corner of Lot 10 of Block 6; thence north 47 feet; thence east to the west line of Carpenter Avenue; thence north 56.8 feet; thence west to the west line of Lot 10; thence north 50 feet to the NW corner of Lot 10 of Block 6; thence west 30 feet; thence north paralleling the east line of Lot 9 to the north line of Lot 9; thence east 30 feet to the NE corner of Lot 9 continuing along the north line of Lot 10 of Block 7 to the west line of Carpenter Avenue; thence north along the west line of Carpenter Avenue to the SE corner of Lot 1 of Block 7 continuing north 30 feet past that SE corner of Lot 1; thence on a line paralleling Ludington west to the west line of Lot 2 of Block 7; thence north to the SW corner of Lot 9 of Block 8; thence east 35 feet on the south lines of Lot 9; thence north on a line paralleling Carpenter Avenue to the north line of Lot 9; thence east on the north lines of Lots 9 and 10 of Block 8 to the west line of Carpenter Avenue; thence south to the SE corner of Lot 10 of Block 8; thence east to the SW corner of Lot 9 of Block 3; thence north along the west line of Lot 9 to its NW corner; thence east along the north of Lot 10 of Block 6, Kimberly's First Addition to its NE corner; thence north along the east line of Lot 2 of Block 6 of Stephenson & Fleshiems First Addition to the south line of Hughitt Street; thence east along the north lines of Lots 9 and 10 of Block 3 to the west line of Merritt Avenue; thence north along the west line of Merritt Avenue to the SE corner of Lot 1, Block 1; thence east along the north lines of Fleshiem Street to the SE corner of Lot 4 of Block 3; thence north along the east line of Lot 4 to its NE corner; thence west along the north line of Lots 4 and 5 continuing to the west line of Merritt Avenue for extension thereof to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. of 7-18-94, § 2-1504) 
Sec. 26-5. - Department of planning and community development established. 
(a)  There is hereby created the department of planning and community development. The department shall be responsible for all code enforcement, planning/zoning and economic development in the City of Iron Mountain and any other duties as directed by the city council and city manager. 
(b)  There is hereby created the position of director of planning and community development. The director shall be responsible for the efficient and effective administration of the department. The director shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city council shall confirm the city manager's appointment of the director. The city manager shall establish other positions within the department of planning and community development as may be appropriate. 
(c)  The department and director shall provide advice to the other departments of the city, coordinate development activities and be involved in or initiate grant applications for departmental functions. 
(d)  The director and city manager shall determine the specific areas of departmental responsibility and report to the city council on a regular basis the activities of the department. 
(Ord. of 3-6-06, §§ I-IV) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Control of waterfowl and deer, § 6-71 et seq.; municipal civil infractions, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 5-21-12(2) repealed former Art. II, §§ 30-26-30-32, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 2-20-89, §§ 5-1401-5-1406; Ord. of 8-3-98; Ord. of 9-5-00. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 

Sec. 30-26. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Noise Ordinance of the City of Iron Mountain. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Sec. 30-27. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to its statutorily authorized power to enact ordinances for the purpose of preserving and protecting the general health, safety, and welfare, the City Council of the City of Iron Mountain hereby enacts the following noise ordinance, the purpose of which is to prohibit excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, or unusually loud noises, or which are prolonged, unusual, and unnatural in their time, place, and use, and which disturb the peace and comfort of the public, or are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, peace and prosperity of the general public, and to provide penalties for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Sec. 30-28. - General prohibited noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make, maintain, or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, repeated, prolonged or unusually loud noise, or any noise which annoys or disturbs or injures or irritates or unreasonably impairs the comfort, repose, health, or peace of another, within the limits of the City of Iron Mountain. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises within the City of Iron Mountain, and for the occupant or person in possession of any premises within the City of Iron Mountain, whether individual, corporate, or otherwise, to knowingly make, allow to be made, or to permit to be made upon the premises so owned, occupied, or possessed, any excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, repeated, prolonged or unusually loud noise, or any noise which annoys or disturbs or injures or irritates or unreasonably impairs the comfort, repose, health or peace of other, within the limits of the City of Iron Mountain. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Sec. 30-29. - Specific noises prohibited; standards. 
    The following noises and acts are hereby declared to be excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud which annoy, disturb, injure, or unreasonably impair the comfort, repose, health, or peace of others in violation of this article, said specification is not to be construed to exclude other violations not enumerated: 
(1)  Horns and other signaling devices. The sound of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, boat, bus, truck, or other vehicle, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, or at an unnecessary or unreasonable time of the day or night; and, the use of any hand held or hand operated signal device which emits a loud or harsh sound except as a danger warning. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, phonographs, and musical instruments. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio receiving set, television receiving set, phonograph, or musical instrument, or other such device for the production or reproduction of sound, in such a manner as to unreasonably or unnecessarily irritate, annoy, or disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time at a volume unnecessary for convenient listening of the person or persons in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is being operated, and who are voluntarily listeners thereto. The operation of any such radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, or other such machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located, or which is plainly audible in a dwelling unit other than that in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, and verbal noise. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or other verbal noise upon any premises, or upon the public streets, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any other time or place, in such a manner so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb peace, natural quietude, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity where such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from its point of origin shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(4)  Animals, birds, or pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or pet which, by causing frequent or continuous noise, plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from its point of origin shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(5)  Exhaust noises. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or any other form of engine, whether in a boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-road vehicle, or tractor, except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents or reduces loud or explosive noises. 
(6)  Loading, unloading, and opening of boxes. The creation of a load and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or trailer, or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers. 
(7)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. where such activity results in the creation of unusually loud noise or noise which annoys, disturbs, injuries, or unreasonably impairs the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety, for the duration of such emergency. 
(8)  Business operations and other premises activities. The carrying on of any business operations, or any other activities upon any premises in such a manner so as to create any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise, which disturbs, injures, or unreasonably impairs the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. 
(9)  Pile drivers and other heavy equipment. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other form of heavy equipment, the use of which is attended by loud, or repeated or continuous noise. 
(10)  The operation of any race track, proving ground, testing area, or obstacle course for vehicles, motorcycles, boats, racers, automobiles, snowmobiles, off-road vehicles, or vehicles of any kind or nature in a residential area of the city, or adjacent to a residential area of the city where such noise emanating from the identified vehicles would be unusually loud or continuous, or unreasonably disturbing, or upsetting to persons in that vicinity. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Sec. 30-30. - Exceptions. 
    The noise prohibitions set out hereinbefore shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine, or other emergency vehicle while engaged in necessary emergency activities. 
(2)  Excavation or repair of bridges, streets, or highways, or other property by or on behalf of the State of Michigan, City of Iron Mountain, or County of Dickinson, between sundown and 7:00 a.m. when the public welfare, health, safety or convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during other hours. 
(3)  Devices or activity creating sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime. 
(4)  All railroad operations meeting the maximum permissible noise levels allowed or permitted by law. 
(5)  Noise emanating from the discharge of firearms providing that such discharge is otherwise authorized under Michigan law or local ordinance. 
(6)  Otherwise lawful regular or permitted activities or operations of governmental units or agencies. 
(7)  Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster or to restore utilities, or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger. 
(8)  Lawn maintenance equipment: Customary lawn maintenance equipment for residential use, such as lawn mowers, leaf blowers and chain saws, from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., if in good working order and if used only as needed. 
(9)  Residential snow removal: Snow blowers for residential use if in good working order and if used only as needed. 
(10)  Commercial snow removal: Snow removal from commercial or industrial property by any internal combustion device is permitted at all times if the snow removal equipment has a properly functioning muffler. 
(11)  Municipal school district: This article shall not apply to sound made by municipal street and sidewalk maintenance equipment, or snow removal equipment used by the city, a school district, or their agents. 
(12)  Other activities as approved by the city as specified in section 30-31. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Sec. 30-31. - Application for permit to exceed noise limits. 
(a)  An application for a permit to engage in any activity, noise or use which would otherwise violate any provisions of this article must be made in writing and submitted to the city clerk. Application shall be made at least 30 days prior to the date of the proposed use or event. The application requesting the permit must be the taxpayer of record for the property on which the use or event will take place. The application shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  Name and mailing address of the person making the application; 
(2)  A statement of the type of event to take place which will require the permit; 
(3)  The address and legal description of the property the event is to be held on; 
(4)  The date and hours during which the event will be conducted; and 
(5)  An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the event. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application by the city clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the Iron Mountain Police Department serving the subject area, and to such other appropriate agencies as the city clerk shall deem necessary. Such officers and officials shall review matters relevant to the application and within ten days of receipt thereof, shall report their findings and recommendations to the city manager. 
(c)  In determining whether to grant or deny an application, the city council shall balance the hardship of the applicant, the community and other persons of not granting the permit to exceed noise limits, against the impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected and any other adverse impacts of grating the permit to exceed the noise limits. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Sec. 30-32. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Complaints . Complaints by a resident or property owner in the city regarding any violations of this article shall be filed with the chief of police, or his designee. 
(b)  Enforcement . The chief of police, or his designated representatives, is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce all provisions of this article and any subsequent amendments hereto (including issuing civil infraction appearance tickets). 
(c)  Penalties . Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of $50.00 for the first offense. 
(1)  Repeat offenses. Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as provided below. As used herein, "repeat offenses" means a second, or subsequent violation of this article committed on a specific parcel or property within any one-year period and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The minimum fine shall be no less than $50.00 or no more than $500.00 for subsequent offenses. 
(2)  Persons chargeable with a violation. Persons chargeable with a violation of this article and subject to being responsible for a municipal civil infraction may include the following: 
a.  The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or any other person using or having control or possession of the land, building or premises where such violation has been committee or shall exist; 
b.  Any person who knowingly commits, aids, or abets, takes part or assists in any such violation; or 
c.  Any person who owns or maintains any land, building or premise on which such violation shall exist. 
(d)  Appearance ticket . The chief of police, and the appointed officers of the police department, or such other officials as are designated by the city manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this article. Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the city attorney and shall be in conformity with all legal requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Sec. 30-33. - Violations. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed to be a civil infraction, and any person, firm, or entity found responsible therefore shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. A violator of this article may be subject to additional sanctions, remedies, injunctions or judicial orders as authorized under Michigan law. Each day a violation of this article continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 5-21-12(2)) 
Secs. 30-34-30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BLIGHT 

Sec. 30-51. - Purpose of article. 
    It is the purpose of this article to prevent, reduce, or eliminate potential blight in the city by the prevention or elimination of certain environmental causes of blight or blighting factors which exist in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(10), § 5-1801) 
Sec. 30-52. - Causes of blight enumerated; maintenance prohibited. 
    It is hereby determined that the following uses, structures, and activities are causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of these causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property in the city, owned, leased, rented, or occupied by such person. 
(1)  In any area, not zoned industrial, the storage upon any property of junk automobiles; junk motor-driven vehicles, trailers in disrepair, contractor's equipment in disrepair, or snowmobiles, or boat hulls in disrepair, except in a completely enclosed building is prohibited. For the purpose of this article, the term "junk automobiles, junk motor-driven vehicles, trailers in disrepair, contractor's equipment in disrepair, or snowmobiles in disrepair," shall mean such vehicles, trailers, equipment, or snowmobiles as are inoperable or partially dismantled. The word "inoperable" means incapable of being operated or propelled under its own power by reason of dismantling, disrepair, or other cause. "Partially dismantled" means a part which is ordinarily a component has been removed or is missing. 
(2)  In any area, not zoned industrial, the storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the Dickinson Area Construction Code Commission for construction upon the property, and/or such materials are intended for use in connection with an ongoing construction project, except the storage of building materials which, in the opinion of the building inspector, are not of a nature to be unsightly or cause of blight is prohibited. Building materials shall include, but shall not be limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structures. 
(3)  In any area not zoned industrial, the storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish, dead vegetation (standing or cut), or refuse of any kind, except domestic refuse stored in a rodentproof receptacle, in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to exceed 30 days. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal of any other kinds, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(4)  In any area the existence of any structure or part of any structure which, because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable, if a dwelling, or useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  In any area, the existence of any vacant dwelling, garage, or other outbuilding unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glassed or neatly boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals. 
(6)  In any area the existence of any partially completed structure, unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the Dickinson Area Construction Code Commission and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(10), § 5-1802) 
Sec. 30-53. - Enforcement of article; civil infraction; declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  Notice. The chief of police is hereby charged with the enforcement of this article. No person who is the owner or person in charge of or occupant of any private premises shall allow or permit the property to become blighted in a manner prohibited by the provisions of this article. When any such property is in violation of the provisions of the article, the enforcing officer, or his authorized representative, may notify the owner, person in control, or occupant of such private premises to correct the violation within five days after being put on notice of the violation. 
(b)  Abatement of nuisance; costs; lien. If the owner, person in charge, or occupant of any premises notified to abate a nuisance resulting from a violation of the provisions of this article shall fail to abate the same within the five days from being put on notice of a violation, the enforcing officer, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized to enter upon such private premises and abate the nuisance by correcting the violation. The cost of abating said nuisance plus an additional 15 percent for overhead and other expenses, shall constitute a lien against the private premises and shall be charged to the occupant or owner thereof, or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If not paid within 60 days after the bill for such charges is rendered, such charges may be collected as a single lot assessment against the premises in the manner provided by special assessment ordinances, or in any other manner authorized for collection of debts owed the city. Should the city elect to remove or abate a nuisance in the manner aforesaid, such action, on the part of the city, does not preclude enforcement of this article by the issuance of a municipal civil infraction as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Penalties for civil infractions. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The penalty for the first offense shall be $50.00 and for the first repeat offense, $150.00. Repeat offense shall be determined as defined in chapter 38. For any second or subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be no more than $500.00. It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city, or his authorized representative, to enforce the provisions of this article. If, after investigation, the chief of police, or his authorized representative, determines that a violation of this article exists, he shall be authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or municipal civil infraction citation to any person that is responsible for violating the provisions of this article. Service of such civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with chapter 38. 
(d)  Nuisance declared. Permitting a violation of this article on private premises is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and enjoined. The enforcement of this article by abatement of any nuisance by the enforcing officer or by application to any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement by judicial decree or writ shall not preclude enforcement of the article by the issuance of a municipal civil infraction and the imposition of fine and costs provided in this section. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(10), § 5-1803) 
Secs. 30-54-30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER 

Sec. 30-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means decaying animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Litter means garbage, refuse, and rubbish and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger or detriment to public health, safety, and welfare. 
    Private premises means any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by any person, corporation, or other entity, whether or not improved with any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building, or other structure erected thereon. 
    Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
    Refuse means all decaying and nondecaying solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, scrap metal, junk, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nondecaying solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, furniture, bathroom and plumbing fixtures, and similar materials. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1701) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-82. - In public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles and in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1702) 
Sec. 30-83. - Use of waste receptacles; dispersal prevention. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or upon private property. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1703) 
Sec. 30-84. - Sweeping into gutters, streets, sidewalks or other public places. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1704) 
Sec. 30-85. - Business owners' obligation to keep adjoining sidewalks clean. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front and back entrances of their business premises free of litter. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1705) 
Sec. 30-86. - On occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of occupied private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1706) 
Sec. 30-87. - Obligation of owner to maintain premises free from. 
    The owner and/or person in control of any private premises shall, at all times, maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1707) 
Sec. 30-88. - Posting of businesses by owners. 
    The owner, operator and/or person in charge of any food and/or beverage store; any fast food restaurant; any establishment selling carryout food or beverages for consumption on premises; or any establishment operating a vehicle drive-by food dispensing and sales window, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  There shall be posted and maintained in good condition at each principal customer exit, a notice in legible block letters at least one-half-inch high stating that the city Code prohibits throwing or depositing litter and/or refuse on any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or on any private property, except in proper public or private waste receptacles; or wording of similar meaning and effect, or, in the alternative, there shall be posted and maintained in good condition, a notice near each wall-mounted menu sign (or as a part of each wall-mounted menu sign) in letters not smaller in size than those of the menu sign, stating that the city Code prohibits throwing or depositing litter and/or refuse on any street sidewalk, or other public place or on any private property, except in proper public or private waste receptacles, or wording of similar meaning and effect. 
(2)  Any of the businesses operating a vehicle drive-by food dispensing and sales window shall post and maintain in good condition a notice near each exterior menu sign, or as part of each exterior menu sign, in letters not smaller in size than those of the exterior menu sign, stating that the city Code prohibits throwing or depositing litter and/or refuse on any street, sidewalk, or other public place or on any private property, except in proper public or private waste receptacles, or wording of similar meaning and effect, or, in the alternative, there shall be posted and maintained in good condition, at the food dispensing and sales window itself, a notice in legible block letters at least one-half-inch high stating that the city Code prohibits throwing or depositing litter and/or refuse on any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or on any private property, except in proper public or private waste receptacles, or wording of similar meaning and effect. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1708) 
Sec. 30-89. - Enforcement of article civil infraction; declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  Notice. The chief of police is hereby charged with the enforcement of this article. No person being the owner or person in charge of or occupant of any private premises shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of any litter on the private premises owned, controlled, or occupied by him in a manner prohibited by the provisions of this article. When any litter shall be accumulated or permitted to accumulate on any private premises in a manner prohibited by this article, the enforcing officer may notify the owner, person in control, or occupant of such private premises to remove the litter and clear such private premises with a time limited in the notice. Such time shall be no less than two days nor more than five days from the time the notice is given. 
(b)  Abatement of nuisance; costs; lien. If the owner, person in charge, or occupant of any premises notified to abate a nuisance consisting of the accumulation of litter on any private premises shall fail to abate the same within the time limited in the notice therefor, the enforcing officer is hereby authorized to enter upon such private premises and abate the nuisance by removing the litter and clearing the private premises. The cost of abating such nuisance, plus an additional 15 percent for overhead and other expenses, shall constitute a charge to the occupant or owner thereof or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If not paid within 60 days after the bill for such charges is rendered, such charges may be collected as a single lot assessment against the premises in the manner provided by special assessment ordinances of the city or in any other manner authorized for the collection of debts owed the city. Should the city elect to remove litter in the manner described in this subsection, such action, on the part of the city, does not preclude enforcement of this article by issuance of a civil infraction, as provided in this section. 
(c)  Penalties for civil infractions. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The penalty for the first offense shall be $50.00, and for the first repeat offense, $250.00 (repeat offense shall be determined as defined in chapter 38). For any second or subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be no more than $500.00. It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city, or his authorized representative, to enforce the provisions of this article. If, after investigation, the police chief, or his authorized representatives, determines that a violation of this article exists, he shall be authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or municipal civil infraction citation to any person that is responsible for violating the provisions of this article. Service of the civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with chapter 38. 
(d)  Nuisance declared. Accumulating or permitting the accumulation of litter on private premises in violation of section 30-87 is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and enjoined. The enforcement of this article by abatement of any nuisance by the enforcing officer or by application to any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement by judicial decree or writ shall not preclude enforcement of this article by issuance of a civil infraction for violation of the article and imposition of fines and costs as specified in this section. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(8), § 5-1709) 
Secs. 30-90-30-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Nov. 3, 2003(1), repealed ch. 30, art. V, §§ 30-121-30-136, in its entirety. Former art. V. pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Code 1982, §§ 8-201-8-215, ch. 8, art. 2. The entire Chapter 30, Article V is available for public inspection at City Hall during regular business hours.   The following ordinances have been adopted subsequent to repeal and are incorporated by reference: 
Adopt. Date Pt. Section 11- 3-03(2) 91 30-137, 
30-138  6-20-05 91 30-137, 
30-138  
Editor's note- Ord. of 6-4-12 set out provisions intended for use as §§ 30-91-30-93. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 30-121-30-123. 

Sec. 30-121. - Purpose of article. 
    It is the purpose of this article to regulate the ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks in the city. 
(Ord. of 6-4-12) 
Sec. 30-122. - Ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks. 
    The City of Iron Mountain hereby ordains it shall be unlawful for any person, entity, or corporation, to discharge within the city limits of the City of Iron Mountain any consumer fireworks as that term has been defined by Michigan law except on those days in which such regulation is prohibited under Michigan Public Act 256 of 2011. 
(Ord. of 6-4-12) 
Sec. 30-123. - Enforcement of article; civil infraction. 
    Penalties for civil infractions . Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The penalty for the first offense shall be $50.00 and for the first repeat offense, $150.00. Repeat offense shall be determined as defined in chapter 38. For any second of subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be no more than $500.00. It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city, or his authorized representative, to enforce the provisions of this article. If, after investigation, the chief of police, or his authorized representative, determines that a violation of this article exists, he shall be authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or municipal civil infraction citation to any person that is responsible for violating the provisions of this article. Service of such civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with chapter 38. 
(Ord. of 6-4-12) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; utilities, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Fires and fire departments, MCL 70.1 et seq.; state fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-26. - Adoption by reference. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Iron Mountain, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, including Appendix Chapters A through G, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the City of Iron Mountain for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Iron Mountain; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in the ordinance from which this section was derived. 
(Ord. of 4-16-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. of April 16, 2010 repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-101. 
Sec. 34-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of April 16, 2010 repealed § 34-27, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-103. 
Sec. 34-28. - Additions, insertions, and changes. 
    The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Iron Mountain 
Section 105 Omit: All of Section 105 PERMITS 
Section 109.3 Insert: Offense, Dollar Amount, Number of Days 
Section 111.4 Insert: Dollar Amount in Two Locations 
(Ord. of 4-16-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. of April 16, 2010 repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-102. 
Sec. 34-29. - Penalties for violation of article; enforcement; abatement. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made under such code, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under such code or any certificate or permit issued under such code, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order, as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this section, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 and/or by imprisonment for not less than one day nor more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-106) 
Sec. 34-30. - Establishment of limits. 
    The limits referred to in section 3303.2 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code in which the storage of explosives, ammunition or blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as follows: City of Iron Mountain, State of Michigan. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-104) 
Sec. 34-31. - Saving clause. 
    Nothing in this article or in the fire prevention code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-105) 
Secs. 34-32-34-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 34-46. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city the fire control measures and regulations as set forth in this division for the purposes of controlling conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-201) 
Sec. 34-47. - Penalty for violation of division. 
(a)  Any party who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one day nor more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Any such condition which continues for an additional period of ten days after conviction of the first offense shall be punishable pursuant to the terms of this division as a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of any penalty as issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the city from obtaining civil relief requiring the abatement of any condition which is in violation of the terms of this division with the costs of such proceeding to be paid by the party in violation of the terms of this division. 
(Ord. of 4-17-89, § 5-1505) 
Sec. 34-48. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
    The fire prevention code official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire prevention code official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from the scene any person, vehicle, or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire prevention code official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the fire prevention code official. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-202) 
Sec. 34-49. - Interference with fire department operations. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of, any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operations. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-203) 
Sec. 34-50. - Compliance with orders of code official. 
    A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire prevention code official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-204) 
Sec. 34-51. - Vehicles crossing fire hose. 
    A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire prevention code official in command of the operation. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-205) 
Sec. 34-52. - Vehicles following fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-208) 
Sec. 34-53. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire emergency equipment. 
    A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire prevention code official in charge of the fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether such vehicle is in motion or at rest; sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon; or to manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-209) 
Sec. 34-54. - Damage or injury to fire department equipment or personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while performing department duties. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-210) 
Sec. 34-55. - Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections, that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
(b)  If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire prevention code official shall proceed to remove the same. Costs incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the fire prevention code official and with the approval of the chief administrative official. The legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-212) 
Sec. 34-56. - Hydrant use approval. 
    A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the fire prevention code official and the water company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water company having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-213) 
Sec. 34-57. - Public water supply. 
    The fire prevention code official shall recommend to the chief administrative official of the municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire prevention code official. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-214) 
Sec. 34-58. - Yard systems. 
    All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement or exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and which are located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire prevention code official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The fire prevention code official shall designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The fire prevention code official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire prevention code official. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-215) 
Sec. 34-59. - Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. 
    A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire prevention code official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as permitted in this section, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purposes for which it was removed have been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire prevention code. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-216) 
Sec. 34-60. - Sale of defective fire extinguishers. 
    A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire prevention code official, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the fire prevention code official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when such units are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-217) 
Sec. 34-61. - Street obstructions. 
    A person shall not erect, construct, place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the municipality. The word "street" as used in this division, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-218) 
Secs. 34-62-34-75. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Emergency Vehicles 

Sec. 34-76. - Definition. 
    Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-206) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-77. - Operation of other vehicles on approach. 
    Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire prevention code official or a police officer. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-207) 
Sec. 34-78. - Operation. 
    The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in this article, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when such vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to, moveups do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic regulations. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operations. 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not endanger life or directions. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(5)  The exemptions granted in this section to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93(2), § 5-211) 
Secs. 34-79-34-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Flammable and Combustible Liquids 

Sec. 34-91. - Purpose of subdivision. 
    The following is intended to govern the storage of both flammable and combustible liquids within the city and shall supplement chapter 32 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by reference by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-17-89, § 5-1501) 
Sec. 34-92. - Prohibited acts. 
    The construction of new bulk plants for storage of either flammable or combustible liquids is prohibited within the city. 
* The entire chapter 34, article II, section 34-92 is available for public inspection at Iron Mountain City Hall during regular business hours. 
(Ord. of 5-5-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 5, 2003, repealed § 34-92, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 34-92 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of April 17, 1989, § 5-1502. 
Sec. 34-93. - Construction of storage facilities. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit by the city for construction of or modification to underground class I, II and III storage tanks for flammable and combustible liquids with a minimum 200-gallon capacity, the written plans and specifications for such installation or modification shall be submitted to the state fire marshal of the state for approval prior to commencement of any construction or modification. All such storage tanks shall be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 30 1987 or according to the state fire marshal rules and regulations for storage of flammable and combustible liquids. No permit shall be considered by the city for construction of any underground storage facility of the type specified until written approval has been obtained as to such plans and specifications by an appropriate representative from the office of state fire marshal for the state. 
(Ord. of 4-17-89, § 5-1503) 
Sec. 34-94. - Supplementation of BOCA National Fire Prevention Code. 
    This subdivision shall supplement article 32 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code as previously adopted by reference by the city, and no permits shall be issued as provided by article 32 for storage, handling and processing of flammable and combustible liquids which would be in violation of the provisions of this subdivision. 
(Ord. of 4-17-89, § 5-1504) 
Secs. 34-95-34-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 34-106. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate open burning within the City of Iron Mountain within the limitations and specifications established herein. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 34-107. - Definition. 
    As used in this section: 
    Open burning means any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into the open air and are not directed through a stack, chimney, or approved incinerator, and are otherwise in compliance with any state and federal air quality regulations that may be applicable. 
    Operator means a person who has the care, custody, or control of a building or real property, or a portion thereof, with or without the knowledge of the owner. 
    Owner means a person who has all or any part of the ownership interest of a building or real property. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 34-108. - Prohibitions. 
    No person, owner, or operator shall ignite or allow open burning unless a permit for open burning has been issued, as specified below. However, open burning of leaves or grass clippings is expressly prohibited, as is open burning of garbage or refuse. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 34-109. - Issuance of permit. 
    A permit for open burning may be issued by the fire chief of the city, or his/her authorized representative, within the discretion of the fire chief, or his/her representative. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 34-110. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
    A permit for open burning authorized by this section shall be given only if: 
(1)  The fire will not cause any general safety hazard. 
(2)  The fire will not endanger any overhead obstructions. 
(3)  The fire is not in such proximity to structures and vegetation that it would constitute a hazard or nuisance. 
(4)  The fire is not in such proximity to lot lines or activities so as to cause a hazard or nuisance. 
(5)  The fire or smoke will not adversely affect neighbors or the public. 
(6)  The fire will emit no objectionable emissions into the air causing pollution, noxious odors, or visual obstruction. 
(7)  It is clear that the nature of the fuel or the items to be burned will cause no nuisance or hazard to health or safety. 
(8)  There will be present, at all times, responsible individuals to monitor and maintain safety surrounding the fire. 
(9)  The state department of natural resources fire conditions would permit the fire. 
(10)  The remains of the fire, once it is extinguished, will cause no damage to property, further pollution, or safety hazard. 
(11)  It would not be prohibited under the Air Pollution Act, Act No. 348 of the Public Acts of 1965, being MCL 336.11 to 336.36, or rules promulgated under that Act. 
(12)  The purpose of the burning is not to dispose of yard waste, including grass clippings and/or leaves. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 34-111. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the open burning of wood, charcoal, or other accepted fuel for the preparation of food while being used in a safe manner, and under the same standards and conditions as permit fires. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 34-112. - Authority to extinguish. 
    The fire chief or his or her authorized representative may extinguish open burning and enter onto public or private property for the purpose of extinguishing open burning which is conducted contrary to this article or in an unsafe manner. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 34-113. - Penalties. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions in this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and assessed a fine of $25.00 for the first offense; $50.00 for a first repeat offense; and $100.00 for a second or any subsequent repeat offense. The fire chief, or his/her authorized representative, is hereby deemed the authorized city official responsible for issuing municipal civil infractions under this article. 
(Ord. of 6-1-98) 
Chapter 38 - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 6; environment, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 70. 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.), as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code, or any ordinance, to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau, as established by this chapter. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(1), § 11-101) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-2. - Action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of: 
(1)  A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or 
(2)  A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(1), § 11-102) 
Sec. 38-3. - Citations-Issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials, as follows: 
(1)  Time for appearance. The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  Place for appearance. The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(3)  Numbering; filing. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the Act. 
(4)  Citation to be made as though under oath. A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as if made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(5)  Preparation and subscription. An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  Basis of issuance. An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves, in writing, the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  Signing and service. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be signed by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.  Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building, or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building, or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(1), § 11-103) 
Sec. 38-4. - Same-Contents. 
(a)  A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with explanation, by mail, by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility with explanation, in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court, in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation, within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court, in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation, within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)  At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  At a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice, in bold-faced type, that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(1), § 11-104) 
Sec. 38-5. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau as authorized under section 8396 of the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices, issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at city hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose of any municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice, as compared with a citation, has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges, and protection accorded by law. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation and, in no event, shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and signed by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in sections 38-3(6) and 38-3(7). In addition to any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court, and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(1), § 11-105) 
Sec. 38-6. - Schedule of civil fines; established; enumerated. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines, payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices, is hereby established. The fines for the violations are listed as follows: 
  Code 
Section(s)    Offense 
   (Violation) First 
Offense First Repeat 
Offense Second or Subsequent Repeat 62-95 Disabled motor vehicle $50.00 $150.00 $250.00 70-28(c) Noxious weeds  50.00  150.00  500.00 30-89 Litter  50.00  250.00  500.00 6-48 Barking dogs  50.00  250.00  500.00 30-53 Blight  50.00  150.00  500.00  
(b)  A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(1), § 11-106) 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 6; environment, ch. 30; municipal civil infractions, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 70. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Loitering near place of illegal occupation or business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly loiter in or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(J)) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Sec. 42-2. - Loitering near public buildings for soliciting employment of legal services. 
    It shall be unlawful to be a person who loiters in or about a police station, police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building, or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(K)) 
Sec. 42-3. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, or peep into, or be found loitering around, or within view of any window not on his own property, with the intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(C)) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 42-4. - Use of skateboards. 
(a)  Generally. The purpose of this section is to ensure the safe and convenient use of the public highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and footpaths of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Central business district means that area of the city which is bounded by Iron Mountain Street on the east, H Street on the south, Carpenter Avenue on the west, and Flesheim Street on the north. 
    Skateboard means any surfboard like object with wheels attached. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. No person shall ride or in any manner use a skateboard upon the following public ways: 
(1)  Stephenson Avenue/U.S. 2 within the boundaries of the city limits; 
(2)  Carpenter Avenue/M-95 within the boundaries of the city limits; 
(3)  Central business district; 
(4)  The sidewalks running along the public ways set forth in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section; 
(5)  Any city-owned, city-leased or city-maintained parking lot. 
(d)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person violating any provision of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or 90 days in jail, or both. 
(e)  Juvenile arrest procedure. The arrest procedure for juveniles violating this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  If a police officer witnesses a violation of this section by a minor person, such police officer shall, on first offense, confiscate such minor person's skateboard, the return of which, after a period of 24 hours, shall be conditioned on the minor person being accompanied to the police department by a parent or legally appointed guardian. 
(2)  Subsequent arrest and prosecution of minors under the age of 17 years for violation of this section shall be in accordance with Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939 (MCL 712A.1 et seq.), as amended. 
(3)  In all other instances, enforcement of a violation under this section shall be by providing such person with a notice to appear, and such notice shall be on a standardized form approved by the police department. 
(Ord. of 9-17-90, § 5-1605) 
Secs. 42-5-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 42-31. - Nonsupport of family-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person of sufficient ability within the city to refuse or neglect to support his family. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(A)) 
State Law reference- Desertion and nonsupport, MCL 750.161; person neglecting family deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(a). 
Sec. 42-32. - Same-Repetitive neglect. 
    When a person, who has been convicted of refusing or neglecting to support his family under this article, is then charged with subsequent violations within a period of two years, that person shall be prosecuted as a second offender, or third and subsequent offender, if the family of that person is then receiving public relief or support. 
(Code 1982, § 7-102) 
Secs. 42-33-42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-61-42-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLACEMENT AND STORAGE OF ICE FISHING SHANTIES 

Sec. 42-76. - Purpose of division. 
    The purpose of this division is to regulate the placement and/or storage of ice fishing shanties on city property. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92, § 5-1901) 
Sec. 42-77. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ice fishing shanty means any building, structure, shack, or shelter device used in connection with ice fishing. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92, § 5-1902) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-78. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person or party found to be in violation of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, plus costs. Costs shall include any expense incurred by the city in causing the removal of the ice fishing shanty. Each day of violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92, § 5-1905) 
Sec. 42-79. - Prohibited placement. 
    The placing, or causing to be placed of ice fishing shanties upon the property of the city is prohibited, subject to the exception set forth in section 42-80. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92, § 5-1903) 
Sec. 42-80. - Exception. 
    Ice fishing shanties may only be placed upon the property of the city in connection with the transporting of the ice fishing shanties onto or off Lake Antoine, or any other body of water within the city limits so used for ice fishing. Such placement shall be for no longer than a 24-hour period. 
(Ord. of 2-18-92, § 5-1904) 
Secs. 42-81-42-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPEN BASEMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 42-96. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    It is hereby declared a nuisance and a danger to life and public health and safety, contrary to the public interest, for any owner to allow an open basement or excavation to remain unfilled or uncovered on any lot or other premises in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-401) 
Sec. 42-97. - Violation; service of procedural notice. 
    When notified by the city engineer of the presence of any such open basement or excavation, the city clerk shall cause the owner to be served with written notice of such fact, describing the lot or premises, where situated, and requiring the owner to abate the nuisance by filling or covering the basement or excavation within 45 days after the serving of such written notice. If written notice cannot be served on the owner, then such notice may be served by posting the notice on the premises where the nuisance exists and posting of such notice shall have the same effect as if written notice was served. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-402) 
Sec. 42-98. - Affidavit of notice. 
    The person who serves or posts the notice as required in section 42-97, shall cause to be filed with the city clerk, an affidavit setting forth the time, place or manner in which such notice was served or posted. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-403) 
Sec. 42-99. - Authorized city abatement and cost reimbursement. 
    If the nuisance is not abated after receiving notice as required in section 42-97, then the city is hereby authorized and empowered to abate such nuisance by either filling or covering any such open basement or excavation and cause all charges and expenses connected therewith to be paid by the owner. Upon failure of any owner to pay all expenses connected therewith within 60 days after the work has been completed and the nuisance abated, the city is hereby authorized and directed to collect such expenses by appropriate action at law, against the owner, or to cause the same to be collected by special assessment, against the property where such nuisance existed. 
(Ord. of 2-15-88, § 5-404) 
Secs. 42-100-42-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 42-116. - Breach of peace. 
    Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace, and disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1982, § 7-601(A)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 42-117. - Permitting gathering of disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1982, § 7-601(B)) 
Sec. 42-118. - Jostling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(L)) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 42-119. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be intoxicated in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(E)) 
State Law reference- Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Secs. 42-120-42-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-146-42-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POSSESSION AND DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS 

Sec. 42-161. - Intent of division. 
    This division governs the carrying, shooting, firing and discharge of bows and arrows, slingshots, firearms, BB guns and pellet pistols in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 7-501) 
Sec. 42-162. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BB gun and pellet pistol means a loaded or unloaded device for the ejection of BB balls or pellets by force of spring, gas or air power. 
    Bow and arrow means any weapon or device of over 15 pounds pull by means of which an arrow or missile may be propelled or catapulted. 
    Firearm means a loaded or unloaded gun, rifle, shotgun, pistol, handgun, revolver, and other such rifled or smooth-bore weapon from which projectiles can be fired by force of gunpowder or other explosive. 
    Slingshot means any weapon or device consisting of a Y-shaped wood, metal, bone or plastic piece to which one or more thongs, straps or elastic bands are attached and from which stones, pellets, balls or other missiles can be hurled or catapulted. 
(Code 1982, § 7-502) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-163. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Discharge. No person shall fire, shoot or discharge whether in practice or otherwise within the limits of the city any such bow and arrow, slingshot, firearm, BB gun or pellet pistol without first obtaining permission from the chief of police or his authorized delegate so to do. 
(b)  Possession. No person shall carry or have in his possession while walking or otherwise moving on foot within the limits of the city, except in his dwelling house or place of business, or on other land possessed by him, any such bow and arrow, slingshot, firearm, BB gun or pellet pistol unless such weapon shall be unstrung, taken down or apart, or enclosed in a quiver or case, and while so transported within the city limits such firearm, BB gun or pellet pistol shall be unloaded both in chamber and magazine. 
(Code 1982, § 7-503) 
Sec. 42-164. - Exceptions. 
    Excepted from the applicability of this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any member of a law enforcement agency of the federal or state government and any subdivision thereof, while under the authority of such government or its subdivision; 
(2)  Any member of the armed forces of the United States under authority of federal law while under such authority and not on a leave or furloughed status; 
(3)  Any member of the National Guard or other duly authorized military organization when on duty or drill, or while going to or returning from the customary places of assembly or practices; 
(4)  Any member of a color guard, honor guard, memorial guard or funeral service guard while therein engaged, or while going to or returning from such assembly or service; 
(5)  Any person licensed by this state or any other state to carry a firearm concealed upon his person; 
(6)  Any person in the regular and ordinary repair or transportation of weapons as merchandise; 
(7)  Any person carrying an unstrung bow, slingshot, or firearm, BB gun or pellet pistol unloaded in a wrapper or package from the place of purchase to his home or place of business, or to a place of repair or back to his home or place of business, or in moving goods from one place of abode or business to another; 
(8)  Any personal having a valid hunting license while in the exercises of the authority permitted or prescribed by state hunting laws, and on private property with the express permission of the property owner; 
(9)  Any person acting under authority of state law; and 
(10)  Any person validly participating in the City of Iron Mountain Deer Management Program as provided in the "City Comprehensive Deer Management Hunt Guidelines." Such person must first secure a permit from the city council or its designee, which the city council may name from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1982, § 7-504; Ord. of 7-20-15) 
Secs. 42-165-42-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-181-42-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROSTITUTION 

Sec. 42-196. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be in or near any place frequented by the public or any public place for the purpose of inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly receive or offer to or agree to receive any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(B)) 
Sec. 42-197. - Patronizing houses of ill fame. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to patronize, frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to accept the solicitation of or solicit a prostitute for the practice of fornication, prostitution or lewdness. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101(I)) 
State Law reference- Admitting to place for purpose of prostitution, MCL 750.449; engaging or offering to engage services of female, MCL 750.449a. 
Secs. 42-198-42-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIAL 

Sec. 42-216. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pornographic material means any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent, sadistic or masochistic book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character. 
(Code 1982, § 7-201(A)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-217. - Test for determining. 
    The test to be applied in cases under this division shall not be whether sexual desires or sexually improper thoughts would be aroused in those comprising a particular segment of the community, the young, the immature or the highly prudish, or would leave another segment, the scientific or highly educated or the so-called worldly wise and sophisticated, indifferent and unmoved. But such test shall be the effect of the book, picture, or other matter subject to complaint considered as a whole, not upon any particular class, but upon the average person in the community. The book, picture or other subject of complaint must be judged as a whole in its entire context, not by considering detached or separate portions only, and by the standards of common conscience of the community of the contemporary period of the violation charged. 
(Code 1982, § 7-201(B)) 
Sec. 42-218. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, distribute or disseminate pornographic material to minors. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to display pornographic material in a manner which is readily observable to minors and/or nonconsenting adults; provided, however, that it shall not be deemed a violation as to nonconsenting adults if an establishment that displays pornographic material posts a warning sufficient to put one on notice that such materials are on display, and provided further that the warning be posted at all entrances to the display area and that the display area be not readily observable by one outside the area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell, distribute, disseminate or display pornographic material in an establishment frequented by minors. 
(Code 1982, § 7-202) 
Sec. 42-219. - Exceptions. 
    This division and the prohibitions of this division shall not apply to schools, libraries or other cultural or educational institutions which offer or display sexually explicit materials which have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1982, § 7-203) 
Secs. 42-220-42-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-236-42-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 42-256. - Intent of division. 
    The following division is intended to prohibit loitering by children under the age of 16 years after 10:00 p.m. on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public thoroughfares of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 7-301) 
Sec. 42-257. - Loitering after 10:00 p.m.-Parental notification. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent of, or person standing in the relation of parent to, any child under the age of 16 years, to permit such child to loiter on any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public thoroughfares of the city after the hour of 10:00 p.m., and it shall be unlawful for any such child to so loiter. Any child under the age of 16 years found loitering on any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public thoroughfares of the city shall be brought to his home by a law enforcement officer, and the parent of the child or the person standing in relation of parent to the child shall be expressly and personally notified by such officer of the dual violation of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 7-302) 
Sec. 42-258. - Same-Second violation. 
    Following a first violation by a child and parental notification, as provided for in section 42-256, if the child is again found loitering, the law enforcement officer shall forthwith refer the child and the repeated violation thereby to the juvenile division of the county probate court and concurrent therewith or immediately subsequent thereto the person standing in relation of parent to the child, to the detective division of the county department of social services. 
(Code 1982, § 7-303) 
Sec. 42-259. - Liability of parent for violation by child. 
    Any parent of, or person standing in relation of parent to, any child under the age of 16 years, determined to be in violation of this division shall be forthwith subject to the jurisdictional judicial processes of the juvenile division of the county probate court and such other remedial administrative or judicial actions as may be implemented and enforced by the county department of social services. 
(Code 1982, § 7-304) 
Chapter 46 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; control of waterfowl and deer, § 6-71 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; vegetation, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation areas and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY PARK AND THE JAMES AND IDA GOULETTE SENIOR CITIZENS REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance of Sept. 3, 2002, amended art. II(title) to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, art. II(title) pertained to City Park Regulations. 

Sec. 46-26. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Every person who violates this article shall be liable to arrest for such violation and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-714; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-27. - Restricted hours; use and occupancy. 
    No persons, other than employees of the city during the course of their employment, shall be allowed within the limits of the city park or the James and Ida Goulette Senior Citizens park after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., except as authorized in section 46-28. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-701; Ord. of 9-3-02(1); Ord. of 9-3-02(2)) 
Sec. 46-28. - Permit required for variation from permitted hours. 
    Any variation from the hours of permissible use and occupation of the parks shall only be allowed under a written permit approved by the city council, in advance, and issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-702; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-29. - Animals. 
    No dog or other animals shall be permitted within the boundaries of the parks except when kept on a leash not more than six feet in length and kept under the immediate control of the owner or person having custody of the animal. Further, such person shall immediately remove any animal excrement deposited in the parks by such dog or pet. The foregoing shall not apply to any legally blind person using a Seeing Eye dog. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-703; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-30. - Destruction of signs. 
    No persons other than employees of the city shall remove, destroy, mutilate or deface posters, notice, signs or markers that are placed or positioned by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-704; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-31. - Business. 
    No person shall use the parks for business or commercial purpose without proper written consent. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-705; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-32. - Destruction of property. 
    No person shall destroy or remove any city property including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, grass and any other vegetation without proper written consent. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-706; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-33. - Fires. 
    No person shall build fires except in a designated place, such as stoves or grills. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-707; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-34. - Horses. 
    No person shall ride or lead a horse, or other riding animal or pack animal, or any animal drawn vehicle, on roads, trails or parking areas unless written consent is given or where a designated bridle path or trail exists. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-709; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-35. - Noise. 
    No person shall use the loudspeaker system, public address system or sound amplifying equipment of any kind, without proper written permission. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-710; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-36. - Conduct. 
    No person shall engage in any violent abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, lewd, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct, tending to create a breach of the peace or to annoy or disturb others, or to lounge, sit or lie upon walks, passages, steps or porches which obstruct the free passage of others. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-711; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-37. - Motorcycle, motor-driven cycles, etc., allowed only where designated. 
    No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor-driven cycles, minibikes, dunemobile, snowmobile, amphibious vehicle, except if a designated trail or road exists. This rule does not apply to the caretaker who must cover the parks. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-712; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-38. - Fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge firearms, firecrackers, rockets, or any other fireworks within the parks, except by a peace officer or other authorized personnel. 
(Ord. of 5-21-84, § 5-713; Ord. of 9-3-02) 
Chapter 47 - SKATE PARKS 

Sec. 47-1. - Purpose 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public safety, health, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Iron Mountain through the regulation of the skate park owned by the City of Iron Mountain and requiring persons riding skateboards, in-line skates, and other self-propelled wheeled apparatus at the facility to wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. 
(Ord. of 10-20-14) 
Sec. 47-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply to the provisions of this chapter: 
    Skateboard means a mechanism with wheels that are fastened to a platform commonly constructed to accommodate a standing person. Skateboards are normally propelled by the operator pushing off the ground with one foot, or by the force of gravity. "Skates" mean any footwear device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion, including in-line skates, roller blades and roller skates. 
(Ord. of 10-20-14) 
Sec. 47-3. - Helmet, elbows pads and knee pads required. 
    It is prohibited for any person to ride skateboards, in-line skates, or other similar devices in the skate park unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. 
(Ord. of 10-20-14) 
Sec. 47-4. - Posting of signs at skate park. 
    Signs shall be posted at the skate park giving notice that any person riding a skateboard, in-line skates, or similar devices, must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation and prohibition of use of the facilities for one year. Signs shall also be posted setting rules for use of the skate park as set from time to time by resolution, and violation thereof will be subject to citation. 
(Ord. of 10-20-14) 
Sec. 47-5. - Regulations of use and rules of conduct. 
    Any person using the skate park shall comply with the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  The hours of use of the skate park shall be established by city council and shall be posted at the skate park. Use of the park at any time outside the hours posted is prohibited. The City of Iron Mountain reserves the right to close the skate park or modify its hours of operation for any reason at the direction and discretion of the city manager. 
(2)  While skating or skateboarding, the participant may only use those areas designated for skateboarding or related skating activities. 
(3)  While using the facility, the participant must use personal safety equipment comprised of at least head, knee and elbow protection. 
(4)  No food or drink is allowed in the designated skate area. 
(5)  No moveable obstacles or materials (i.e. ramps/jumps) are allowed in the park. 
(6)  Bicycling is prohibited within the skate area. 
(7)  Stunt, trick or luge skateboarding is limited to persons 12 years of age or older. 
(8)  Placing of graffiti anywhere in or on the park is prohibited and the park will be closed until the graffiti is removed and/or repaired. In addition to other penalties provided herein, any person putting graffiti on any part of the skate park shall pay for the cost of removal and damages thereof. 
(9)  Personal conduct and behavior: The following are prohibited in the park area at all times: 
a.  Possession or use of drugs or alcohol or being under the influence; 
b.  Fighting or other violence; 
c.  Possession or use of firearms, knives, or other weapons of any kind; 
d.  Smoking or use of tobacco products; 
e.  No amplified music or other excessive noise; 
f.  No profanity. 
(10)  Everyone shall treat others with respect and courtesy. 
(Ord. of 10-20-14) 
Sec. 47-6. - Penalties. 
    The violation of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction for a first offense and punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation. Second and subsequent offenses within one year may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor. A second infraction within a year may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00, and a third or further infraction within a year may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.00. Additionally, any person found by a preponderance of the evidence to have violated any provision of this chapter may lose his or her privilege to use the skate park facility for up to one year. 
(Ord. of 10-20-14) 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISPOSAL AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 50-26. - Prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, or place any garbage, rubbish, and refuse at any place within the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96) 
Sec. 50-27. - Container type. 
    Garbage, refuse, and rubbish, subject to section 50-29 below, must be placed in cylindrical plastic/metal garbage containers with handles, or any other hard shell containers that are approved by the City of Iron Mountain Department of Public Works. Any such containers shall not exceed a maximum volume of 32 gallons and shall not weigh more than 50 pounds when filled. 
    Any garbage, refuse and rubbish that exceeds the maximum capacity of the container utilized may not, at the discretion of the department of public works, be picked up for disposal. Any such container will be tagged by the department of public works with notification to the property owner stating the reason it was not picked up for disposal. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96; Ord. of 7-1-02) 
Sec. 50-28. - Container placement. 
    Such containers must have unobstructed access and must be placed adjacent to street or alley within three feet of pavement. If alley collection is not available in the judgment of the city because of refuse collection vehicle access limitations, then such garbage and refuse must be placed adjacent to the street. The area around container must be kept free of snow and debris for clear access from the alley or street. A written waiver of these requirements can be provided by the city manager for the city to individuals physically incapable of complying with this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96) 
Sec. 50-29. - Exception-Leaf collection. 
    The city may, by promulgation of appropriate rules and regulations, provide for alternate solid waste collection procedures in respect to leaves. At the discretion of the city council, the city may elect, upon reasonable notice, to employ alternate means for leaf collection and, in that event, those rules and regulations will control, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96) 
Sec. 50-30. - Supplemental rubbish collection. 
    The city shall provide supplemental rubbish collection, pursuant to appropriate rules and regulations, to be, from time to time, enacted by the city council as to the nature and type of rubbish to be collected, the time periods of collection, and manner of preparation of said rubbish in preparation for collection. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96) 
Sec. 50-31. - Administrative rules and regulations. 
    The city council will enact, from time to time, appropriate rules and regulations controlling the administrative aspects in respect to solid waste removal, to include amounts, collection schedules, and charges. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96) 
Sec. 50-32. - Enforcement; penalty; civil infraction; nuisance. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The penalty for the first offense shall be $50.00 and for the first repeat offense $150.00. Repeat offense shall be determined as defined in section 1-15, et seq. For any second or subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be no more than $500.00. It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city or his authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this article. If, after investigation, the chief of police or his authorized representative, determines that a violation of this article exists, he/she shall be authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or a municipal civil infraction citation to any person, firm, or corporation that is responsible for violating the provisions of this article. Service of said civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with section 38-3, et seq. 
    Permitting a violation of the article on private premises is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and enjoined. The enforcement of the article by abatement of any nuisance by the enforcing officer or by application to any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement by judicial decree or writ shall not preclude enforcement of the article by the issuance of a municipal civil infraction and the imposition of fine and costs herein provided. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96) 
Secs. 50-33-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISPOSAL COSTS 

Sec. 50-61. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish an assessment amount necessary to fund solid waste disposal costs associated with the removal, baling, transporting, and landfill fees, if any, for solid waste disposal and collection methods thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-20-91, § 5-500) 
Sec. 50-62. - Assessment amount. 
    The rates and charges for each residential and commercial account within the city shall be set by resolution of the city council from time to time. The rates and charges shall be on file for public inspection at the Iron Mountain City Hall. The rates and charges may be amended by the city council at its sole discretion. 
(Ord. of 5-20-91, § 5-501; Ord. of 3-18-02) 
Sec. 50-63. - Collection method. 
    The assessment shall be collected by adding the cost to the customer's water bill. 
(Ord. of 5-20-91, § 5-502) 
Sec. 50-64. - Lien on property. 
    The city clerk shall audit any unpaid account and certify the same to the city assessor. Such accounts audited and allowed shall be levied on the lands owned by the customer, and the same shall become a lien upon the land and shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes are collected and, when collected, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-20-91, § 5-503) 
Secs. 50-65-50-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ACCUMULATIONS 

Sec. 50-91. - Substantive violation of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or parcel of land, or any person in possession or control of any lot or parcel of land within the corporate city limits to allow or maintain upon any portion of such lot or parcel of land, any growth of brush or to permit the deposit or accumulation upon any portion of such lot or parcel of land of any debris, rubbish, refuse, trash, dead vegetation (standing or cut) or garbage so as to create an unhealthy or unsafe condition or a fire hazard. 
(Code 1982, § 3-102) 
Sec. 50-92. - Legal remedial procedures; issuance of order; hearing. 
(a)  Upon complaint of a violation of the provisions of section 50-91, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such complaint and the premises complained of. If, after such investigation, the chief of police determines that the condition of the premises is such as to be in violation of section 50-91, he shall issue an order directing such owner or person in possession or control of the land upon which the violation is committed, requiring the cutting of such brush or the removal of such debris, rubbish, refuse, trash, dead vegetation (standing or cut) or garbage within ten days after receipt of such order. Such order may be served either by personal service upon the person to whom such order is directed, or by certified mail. 
(b)  If the person disagrees with such order, they shall be entitled to a hearing on the merits of the order before the city council, if such request for hearing is filed with the city clerk within a period of ten days after the order has been served. The city council may confirm, modify or sustain the chief of police's order after such hearing. 
(Code 1982, § 3-103) 
Sec. 50-93. - Abatement by city upon failure of owner; statement of costs; lien; collection. 
(a)  If the owner or person in possession or control of the land upon which said violation is committed fails to cut such brush or remove such debris, rubbish, refuse, trash, dead vegetation (standing or cut) or garbage within ten days after receipt of such order, in the event there is no request for hearing, or within ten days after the hearing, if one is held, the city engineer shall assign employees, or designated independent contractors to enter upon such land for the purpose of cutting such brush or removing such debris, rubbish, refuse, trash, dead vegetation (standing or cut) or garbage. The city engineer shall keep an accurate account of the expense incurred in cutting such brush or removing such debris, rubbish, refuse, trash, dead vegetation (standing or cut) or garbage and shall make a sworn statement of said account and deliver the same to the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk shall audit such accounts and certify the same to the city assessor. Such accounts audited and allowed shall be levied on the lands on which the expenditures were made, and the same shall become a lien upon such land and shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes are collected and, when collected, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-104) 
Chapter 54 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost, when referring to the cost of any local public improvement, means the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, and legal fees and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Local public improvement means any construction of or improvement upon public property which results in special benefit to the real property in the vicinity of such improvement, including specifically, but not by way of limitation, the construction of sewers, waterworks, streets, sidewalks, municipal costs incurred pursuant to city ordinances, etc. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-400) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-2. - Power of council. 
    The city council shall have the power to determine that the whole, or any part, of the cost of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon property in a special district. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-401) 
Sec. 54-3. - Initiatory resolution. 
    Whenever the council shall have the power to make a local public improvement by special assessment, it shall, by resolution, set forth the improvement intended to be made and direct the city manager to prepare a report containing any information it may require relative to such improvement. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-402) 
Sec. 54-4. - Plans and specifications. 
    The city manager shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications of the local public improvement to be made; an estimate of the life of the improvement and of the cost thereof; a description of the assessment district or lands affected; and such other pertinent information as the council requests. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-403) 
Sec. 54-5. - Report of city manager. 
    The city manager shall prepare his report and set forth therein: A schedule of all property affected by the proposed local public improvement and the owners thereof; the assessed valuation of each parcel of land and any tax delinquencies thereon and whether such land is improved or unimproved; and such other information as the council may have requested. The city manager shall present this report and the plans and specifications to the council, together with his recommendations as to the estimated cost of the improvement, as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment, and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city; the number of installments in which the assessment shall be spread or levied; and whether the assessment shall be based upon special benefits, frontage, area, valuation, or other factors permitted by law, or a combination thereof; and the land which should be included in the special assessment district. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-404) 
Sec. 54-6. - Resolution; contents; notice. 
    After the city manager has presented the report required in section 54-5 for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of the council, and the council has reviewed the report, a resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the project, the estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost shall be paid by special assessment, and what part, if any, shall be the general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which the assessment shall be levied, and whether the assessment shall be based upon special benefits, frontage, area, valuation, or other factors permitted by law, or a combination thereof, and designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected. Such resolution shall also direct that the complete information shall be placed on file in the office of the clerk where the same may be found for examination; and, further, such resolution shall direct the clerk to give notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city. Such publication and mailing shall be made at least 14 full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the council. The notice shall contain a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing is required to appeal the amount of the assessment to the state tax tribunal. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-405) 
Sec. 54-7. - Hearing on necessity. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the council may modify the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole; provided, however, that if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held, pursuant to notice prescribed in section 54-6. If the determination of the council shall be to proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the preliminary plans, the assessment district, and estimates of cost, directing the engineer to prepare construction plans and specifications, and directing the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination, and report the same to the council for confirmation. The council shall approve construction plans and specifications prior to the meeting to review the special assessment roll. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-406) 
Sec. 54-8. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
    No deviation from construction plans and specifications, as approved by the council, shall be permitted by any official or employee of the city without authority of the council by resolution; provided, however, that minor changes as authorized by the city manager may be made without such approval. A copy of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation, other than minor changes authorized by the city manager, shall be certified by the clerk and attached to the original plans on file in his office. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-407) 
Sec. 54-9. - Limitations on preliminary expenses. 
    The council shall specify the provisions and procedures for financing a local public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary plans, estimates of cost, and publication of notices, shall be made for the improvement until special assessments to defray the costs of the same shall have been levied. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-408) 
Sec. 54-10. - Special assessment roll-Generally. 
    The assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefitted by the proposed local public improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount benefitted thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the estimate of the city manager as approved by the council. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-409) 
Sec. 54-11. - Same-Assessor to file. 
    When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he shall file the same with the clerk for presentation to the council for review, confirmation, and certification of it. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-410) 
Sec. 54-12. - Same-Meeting to review; objections in writing. 
    Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the council, by resolution, shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the clerk for public examination; shall fix the time and place the council will meet to review such special assessment roll, and direct the clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, such publication and mailing to be made at least 14 full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the council. At this meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the assessments against them. The assessor shall be present at every meeting of the council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-411) 
Sec. 54-13. - Same-Changes and corrections. 
    The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll and, at such meeting or a proper adjournment of such meeting, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The council may correct such roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution, annul such assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll, and that assessments are in proportion, reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the clerk, and directing the clerk to attach his warranty to a certified copy thereof within ten days, therein commanding the treasurer to levy the various sums and amounts appearing on a special assessment roll for the full amounts or in annual installments as directed by the council. Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the local public improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 54-16. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-412) 
Sec. 54-14. - Special assessment; due date. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the council shall make payable at a future time, as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-413) 
Sec. 54-15. - Partial payments; due date. 
(a)  The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed 20 in number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll. On all special assessments confirmed between July 1 and December 31 of any year, the second installment shall be due on the following July 1, and the remaining installments shall be due on July 1 of each succeeding year. On all special assessments confirmed between January 1 and June 30 of any year, the second installment shall be due July 1 of the following year, and the remaining installments shall be due July 1 of each succeeding year. Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at a rate not in excess of that authorized by law, commencing on confirmation and payable on the due date of each installment. The full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates thereof. If special assessment bonds are sold, MCL 141.153, shall apply. Each owner shall have 60 days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of the assessment, or the full amount of any installments thereof, without interest or penalty. Following the 60-day period, the assessment or first installment shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent, and the same penalties shall be collected on such unpaid assessments, or unpaid first installments thereof, as are provided in the city Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. Deferred installments shall be collected on the July 1 general city tax roll. Any installments unpaid shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on the installments shall be collected as are provided in the city Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. 
(b)  After the council has confirmed the roll, the city treasurer shall notify by mail, each property owner on the roll that the roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of the city treasurer to give such notice or of such owner to receive such notice, shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any assessment thereon nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-414) 
Sec. 54-16. - Land divided after assessment. 
    Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, and before the collection of all installments, the council may require the city assessor to apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several parts of lots and lands so divided. The report of such apportionment, when confirmed, shall be conclusive upon all the parties and all assessments thereafter made upon such lots or lands shall be according to such division. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-415) 
Sec. 54-17. - Creation of lien. 
    Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for county and school taxes, and by the city Charter for city taxes, until paid, and the lands upon which the same are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor the same as are lands upon which delinquent city taxes constitute a lien. If special assessments or installments thereof remain delinquent as of February 28, they shall be returned delinquent, with interest, penalties and charges added, to the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as are city, county, and school taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-416) 
Sec. 54-18. - Additional assessments; refunds. 
    The city manager shall, after the completion of each local public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the council. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the council may make an additional pro rata assessment. If the amount of the special assessment roll for any local public improvement, as confirmed by the council, proves larger than the actual cost of the special assessment roll, as compiled by the city manager and certified to the council, the council shall make a refund. The refund shall be made to the owner of the property as shown by the current tax rolls of the city on the date that the council orders the refund. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-417) 
Sec. 54-19. - Additional procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the council shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-418) 
Sec. 54-20. - Accounts. 
    Monies raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local public improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-419) 
Sec. 54-21. - Contested assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining collection of any special assessment unless, within 30 days after confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or action, stating grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and unless such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days of confirmation of the roll. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-420) 
Sec. 54-22. - Reassessment for benefits. 
(a)  Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part of the improvement has been completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection of such assessment shall be made in the manner as provided for the original assessment. 
(b)  If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-421) 
Sec. 54-23. - Combination of projects. 
    The council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs; provided, however, that for each district there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the same. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-422) 
Sec. 54-24. - Single lot assessments. 
    When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against such premises and the owner of such premises, under the provisions of the Charter, this Code of Ordinances, or law of the state and is not of that class required to be prorated among several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material or services for which such expense was incurred, verified by the city manager, with a description of the lot and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the city treasurer who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. Such bill shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed, and such bill shall notify the owner of the time of the meeting of the council, not sooner than 30 days thereafter, when the council will meet for the purpose of adopting a resolution placing a special assessment upon the property or such charges unless the same are paid prior to the date of such meeting. At such meeting, the council shall adopt, in accordance with section 11.1 of the Charter, a special assessment resolution covering each parcel of land for which such charges have not been heretofore paid in full. As many parcels may be included in a single resolution as shall be convenient. Upon adoption of such resolution, the council may authorize installment payments, and if installment payments are authorized, shall determine the number of installments and the rate of interest to be charged thereon. Immediately after the adoption of such resolution, the clerk shall give notice of the several amounts so determined to the several persons chargeable therewith. Such notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last known addresses of such persons as shown on the assessment roll of the city, or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, and the amount of the assessment, and shall give a reasonable time, not less than 30 days, within which payment shall be made to the treasurer. In all cases where payment is not made within the time set, the fact shall be reported by the treasurer to the assessor, who shall charge such amounts, together with a penalty of ten percent of such amounts, against the persons or real property chargeable therewith, on the next tax roll. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-423) 
Sec. 54-25. - General procedure inapplicable in certain cases. 
    The special assessment resolution shall be treated as a special assessment roll, and the adoption of such resolution shall correspond to the confirmation of a special assessment roll. The provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter with reference to special assessments generally and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvements, shall not apply to assessments contemplated under sections 54-23 and 54-25, and the following sections of this chapter shall, however, be applicable to single lot assessments. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-424) 
Sec. 54-26. - Attachment of lien. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and, until paid, shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-425) 
Sec. 54-27. - Collection by court action. 
    In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action, it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities, the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Ord. of 11-19-90, § 3-426) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 18; special assessments, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 70. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Public encroachments. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any encroachment on or purpresture of any sidewalk, street, alley or public place within the city. 
(b)  Violation, notice and abatement. If such encroachment or purpresture is not removed within five days after notice to remove the same is given in writing by the city engineer to the person making such encroachment or purpresture, the city engineer shall remove the same and report the expense thereby incurred to the city council, and the city council shall direct the city assessor to assess the same as a special tax against the property of the person making the encroachment or purpresture. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall, on conviction, be punished according to the provisions of section 1-15. 
(Code 1982, § 5-803) 
Secs. 58-2-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 58-26. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to enhance the public health, safety, and welfare by providing for certain specifications and regulations regarding construction, repair, and removal of sidewalks within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2000) 
Sec. 58-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disrepair of a sidewalk means, but shall not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Potholes of one inch or more in depth on the surface of any sidewalk; 
(2)  Loosened, crumbling, or breaking sidewalk surfaces; 
(3)  Difference of one inch or more in height of adjoining sections of sidewalk; 
(4)  Insufficient slope to adequately drain water off sidewalks; and 
(5)  Any and all other standards of disrepair established by the city manager, approved by the city council, and available in the city clerk's office for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-28. - Penalty for violation of article; civil infraction. 
    Violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a civil infraction: $50.00 for the first offense, $100.00 for a first repeat offense, and $500.00 for a second or subsequent repeat offense. In addition, permitting a defective sidewalk to exist after being notified to repair or remove it shall constitute a nuisance per se, and, upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained or enjoined. Nothing in this section shall preclude the enforcement of this article by issuance of a civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2010) 
Sec. 58-29. - Duty of owner-Construction. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the city to construct a sidewalk adjacent to or abutting on any premises belonging to such owner whenever the city shall determine that the construction of such sidewalk is necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2001) 
Sec. 58-30. - Same-Maintenance and repair. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the city to maintain and keep in good repair any sidewalk abutting or adjacent to any premises belonging to such owner, except any condition of disrepair caused by the city shall be repaired by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2002) 
Sec. 58-31. - Resolution to construct, repair or remove sidewalks. 
    Whenever the city council shall determine, on its own volition, or by petition of its citizens, that it is necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare that a sidewalk is constructed adjacent to or abutting any premises, or whenever the city council shall determine, on its own volition or by petition of its citizens, that any existing sidewalk is in a state of disrepair, it shall, after a public hearing with notice of same being provided to the affected property owner, adopt a resolution requiring the construction, repair, or removal thereof, and shall, in such resolution, direct the owner of the premises adjacent to or abutting the purposed location of the sidewalk to be constructed, repaired, or removed to take action within a specified period of time, which shall not be less than 15 days from the date of such resolution. Such resolution may be served upon the owner, either personally or by ordinary mail addressed to such owner under the name and at the address as shown upon the city's latest tax assessment roll. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2003) 
Sec. 58-32. - Failure or refusal to construct, repair, or remove sidewalk. 
    If the owner of such premises shall fail or refuse to construct, repair, or remove such sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the premises owned by such owner within the period of time specified and the resolution referred to in section 58-31, then the city manager shall proceed to have the sidewalk constructed, repaired, or removed, and the expense shall be charged to such premises and the owner and collected as provided in chapter 54. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2005) 
Sec. 58-33. - Construction according to city specifications. 
    All sidewalk construction, repair, and removal must be done according to the specifications established by the city manager, and approved by the city council. Such specifications will be in writing and available in the city clerk's office for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2006) 
Sec. 58-34. - Participation of city in cost of construction, repair, or removal of sidewalk. 
    Notwithstanding any provision contained in this article to the contrary, the city may participate in the cost of the construction, repair, or removal of any sidewalk constructed, repaired, or removed under the provisions of this article. If the city does so determine to participate in such cost, it shall notify the owner in the resolution provided for in section 58-31 of the share that the city will pay for the construction, repair, or removal directed in such resolution. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2007) 
Sec. 58-35. - Permit and bonding requirements. 
    No sidewalk shall be constructed, repaired, or removed without a sidewalk construction permit. Such construction permit shall be obtained from the city and shall contain the date issued, the name of the owner of the property where the sidewalk is to be constructed, repaired, or removed, description of the property, and an estimate of the number of square feet of sidewalk to be so constructed, repaired, or removed. If the construction, repair, or removal of sidewalk is to be performed by a qualified contractor, no permit shall be issued unless the applicant has on file with the city clerk, a duly executed bond, running to the city, with a bonding company operating under the laws of this state as a surety thereon in the amount of $5,000.00. Such bond shall be conditioned on the construction, repair, removal of the sidewalk as required by the terms of this article. No such permit shall be required for the construction or repair or removal of any sidewalk pursuant to the contract let by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2008) 
Sec. 58-36. - Revocation of permit. 
    The city manager may revoke any permit issued for any violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-3-94, § 5-2009) 
Secs. 58-37-58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL 

Sec. 58-61. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall take or remove or cause to be taken or removed any snow, ice or other material from any property owned, occupied or controlled by him and pile or dump the same within the lines of any street or right-of-way of the city, except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 4-401(B)) 
Sec. 58-62. - Snow placement and conditions-Permitted. 
    Any such person may take and remove snow or ice from a driveway on his property and pile the same in a public street, but only along, parallel with and as part of the bank of snow formed by the city in its snowplowing operations. Such snow or ice removed from a driveway shall be piled on the bank immediately in front of and adjacent to the property so owned or occupied and in no event shall the snow or ice so placed extend more than two feet further into the roadway than the existing bank. Snow or ice shall not be piled, blown or otherwise placed upon any portion of the street or sidewalk right-of-way within 25 feet of the lateral curb of any intersecting road, street or alley. Snow and ice shall not be piled, blown or otherwise placed upon any portion of the street or sidewalk right-of-way within 20 feet of any driveway extended to be used by the general public for access to any commercial establishment. 
(Code 1982, § 4-401(C)) 
Sec. 58-63. - Same-Prohibited displacement. 
(a)  No person shall take or remove, or cause to be removed, any snow, ice or other material from any public walk or from the banks of snow formed by the city in its plowing operations and pile, dump or blow same within the street right-of-way in such manner as to reduce the width between the banks of snow by the city in its plowing operations by more than two feet on either side. 
(b)  No person shall take or remove or cause to be removed any snow, ice or other material from any public or private property and pile, dump or blow same on the street, plowed sidewalk or on the property between the curb and lot line adjoining any lot without the express permission of the lot owner and/or owners. 
(Code 1982, § 4-401(D), (E)) 
Sec. 58-64. - Violation; city remedies and costs. 
    Snow, ice or other material moved, piled or dumped in violation of this article may be removed or caused to be removed by the City of Iron Mountain and the expense of such removal shall be changed to the party found in violation of this article, such charges may be collected as costs in connection with a conviction and/or by civil process. 
(Code 1982, § 4-401(F)) 
Sec. 58-65. - Sidewalk clearance required; violation; remedy. 
(a)  Every person in charge or control of any building or any parcel of land used for commercial purposes within the city fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed and cleared away any snow and ice from so much of the sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on the building or parcel of land. Such snow and ice shall be removed from the sidewalks within 72 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain or by the end of the next business day following such fall, whichever is shorter. 
(b)  If the public sidewalks are not cleared, as required by subsection (a) of this section, the city may clear or cause to be cleared the sidewalks and collect the cost therefor in the manner provided in section 58-34. 
(Code 1982, § 4-402) 
Secs. 58-66-58-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALK CAFES 

Sec. 58-70. - Sidewalk cafe permits. 
(a)  Permit conditions. The city clerk may issue to an adjacent food service establishment a revocable sidewalk cafe permit to occupy a portion of adjacent city right-of-way to place tables and chairs, planters and windscreens adjacent to the tables and chairs in conjunction with selling and consuming food and beverages under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Prohibitions. The occupancy must not: 
a.  Interfere with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
b.  Unreasonably interfere with the view, access to, or use of property adjacent to said street. 
c.  Reduce the pedestrian travel area of any sidewalk to less than that required in the American with Disabilities Act. The pedestrian travel area shall not include trees, bushes, walls, parking meters, fire hydrants, tree grates or any other fixtures permanently located in the right-of-way. 
d.  Cause damage to the street or sidewalk or to trees, benches, landscaping, or other objects lawfully located in the right-of-way. Any anchoring system to secure an item to the sidewalk shall be approved by the city manager in writing prior to installation. 
e.  Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
f.  Be principally used for off-premises advertising. All signs must conform to the sign ordinance. 
g.  Conceal or detract from the appearance of landscaping features in or adjacent to the street. 
h.  Be in or adjacent to property zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
i.  Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
j.  Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
k.  Violate regulations adopted by the city manager pursuant to this Code. 
l.  Serve liquor unless the business holds a sidewalk cafe with alcohol permit issued by the city clerk. 
m.  Obstruct or interfere with any accessible parking or loading spaces and accessible routes to buildings. 
n.  Sell or serve food, beverages or other merchandise to customers in vehicles parked adjacent to or nearby the public right-of-way and sidewalk. 
(2)  Notice. Notice to the adjacent property owners or occupants on both sides of the applicant's property shall be required before issuing a permit to occupy any right-of-way area between the edge of the vehicle use area of the right-of-way and the right-of-way property line. 
(3)  Fee. Prior to the issuance of a permit, a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city clerk. This fee shall be tripled if any such occupancy occurred prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(4)  Insurance. The permittee shall show proof of and maintain comprehensive general liability insurance and have the city as an additional named insured. The amount of such insurance shall be determined by the city clerk. 
(5)  Food service establishment. Food service establishment shall be defined in accordance with its meaning in the Food Law of 2000, as amended, MCLA 289.1101. 
(6)  Regulations. The city manager may adopt an executive order controlling the occupancy pursuant to a sidewalk cafe permit. 
(b)  Duration. Permits shall be valid only for the period of time specified on such permit. Permits shall not be issued for any period starting before April 1, and extending beyond November 1, for the year in which such permit is granted. 
(c)  Display. A permit shall only be valid if displayed in a manner visible to the public. 
(d)  Permit revocation. Any permit may be revoked by the city clerk upon a finding that the occupancy does not meet the standards of this Code, any other provisions of this Code, or other applicable law or regulation, or that the right-of-way is needed for other street or utility purposes. Upon such revocation, the fee paid for any period after termination of the street occupancy shall be fully or partially refunded depending on duration of occupancy. 
(e)  Appeal. Persons who are refused a permit or have had their permit revoked may request in writing a hearing on that determination before the city manager. The decision of the manager may be appealed to the city council. Requests for a hearing or an appeal must be made within five days of the questioned decision. 
(f)  Appearance tickets. The police chief and the appointed officers of the police department, or such other officials as are designated by the city manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended, MCLA 764.9c(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the city attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(g)  Violations. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. See City of Iron Mountain Ordinances, chapter 38. 
(Ord. of 5-7-07) 
Sec. 58-71. - Sidewalk cafe with alcohol permit. 
(a)  Permit conditions. The city clerk may issue to an adjacent food service establishment a revocable sidewalk cafe with alcohol permit to occupy a portion of adjacent city right-of-way to place tables and chairs, planters and windscreens adjacent to the tables and chairs in conjunction with selling and consuming food and alcoholic beverages, provided the following terms and conditions are met: 
(1)  The business regularly closes on all nights no later than 11:00 p.m. 
(2)  Service of alcohol at the sidewalk cafe does not violate any state, federal or local laws, promulgated rules, or policies or executive orders of the city. 
(3)  A barrier shall surround the sidewalk cafe. Generally the barrier shall be 36 inches or less in height. The barrier may be required to be removed when the establishment closes each day or other specified times, or be in a fixed location only to be removed at the end of the permit period. 
(4)  The business must post a sign in a prominent location that is one square foot that indicates "No beverages beyond the barrier of this Sidewalk Cafe." Specifically, the sign shall be posted within the perimeter of the sidewalk cafe. 
(5)  Liquor may not be served beyond 11:00 p.m. 
(6)  Prohibitions. The occupancy must not: 
a.  Interfere with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
b.  Unreasonably interfere with the view, access to, or use of property adjacent to said street. 
c.  Reduce the pedestrian travel area of any sidewalk to less than that required in the American with Disabilities Act. The pedestrian travel area shall not include trees, bushes, walls, parking meters, fire hydrants, tree grates or any other fixtures permanently located in the right-of-way. 
d.  Cause damage to the street or sidewalk or to trees, benches, landscaping, or other objects lawfully located in the right-of-way. Any anchoring system to secure an item to the sidewalk shall be approved by the city manager in writing prior to installation. 
e.  Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
f.  Be principally used for off-premises advertising. All signs must conform to the sign ordinance. 
g.  Conceal or detract from the appearance of landscaping features in or adjacent to the street. 
h.  Be in or adjacent to property zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
i.  Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
j.  Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
k.  Violate regulations adopted by the city manager pursuant to this Code. 
l.  Obstruct or interfere with any accessible parking or loading spaces and accessible routes to buildings. 
m.  Sell or serve food, beverages or other merchandise to customers in vehicles parked adjacent to or nearby the public right-of-way and sidewalk. 
(7)  Notice. Notice to the adjacent property owners or occupants on both sides of the applicant's property shall be required before issuing a permit to occupy any right-of-way area between the edge of the vehicle use area of the right-of-way and the right-of-way property line. 
(8)  Fee. Prior to the issuance of a permit, a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city clerk. This fee shall be tripled if any such occupancy occurred prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(9)  Insurance. The permittee shall show proof of and maintain comprehensive general liability insurance and liquor liability insurance and have the City of Iron Mountain as an additional named insured. The amount of such insurance shall be determined by the city clerk. 
(10)  Food service establishment. Food service establishment shall be defined in accordance with its meaning in the Food Law of 2000, as amended, MCLA 289.1101. 
(11)  Regulations. The city manager may adopt an executive order controlling the occupancy pursuant to a sidewalk cafe with alcohol permit. 
(b)  Duration. Permits shall be valid only for the period of time specified on such permit. Permits shall not be issued for any period starting before April 1, and extending beyond November 1, for the year in which such permit is granted. 
(c)  Permit review. The application for a sidewalk cafe with alcohol permit shall include an elevation drawing for the barrier and a plot plan for the barrier and the cafe's location. Such application documents shall be reviewed by the city director of planning and community development prior to the issuance of such permit. It shall be approved only if the location, barrier, materials and design are in accordance with any the City of Iron Mountain Comprehensive Plan, this section and any applicable ordinances, laws, or policies. 
(d)  Display. A permit shall only be valid if displayed in a manner visible to the public. 
(e)  Permit revocation. Any permit may be revoked by the city clerk upon a finding that the occupancy does not meet the standards of this Code, any other provisions of this Code, or other applicable law or regulation, or that the right-of-way is needed for other street or utility purposes. Upon such revocation, the fee paid for any period after termination of the street occupancy shall be fully or partially refunded depending on duration of occupancy. 
(f)  Appeal. Persons who are refused a permit or have had their permit revoked may request in writing a hearing on that determination before the city manager. The decision of the manager may be appealed to the city council. Requests for a hearing or an appeal must be made within five days of the questioned decision. 
(g)  Appearance tickets. The police chief and the appointed officers of the police department, or such other officials as are designated by the city manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended, MCLA 764.9c(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the city attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(h)  Violations. A person who violates this section is responsible for a misdemeanor. See City of Iron Mountain Ordinances, section 1-15. 
(Ord. of 5-7-07) 
Chapter 60 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of Oct. 2, 2006 amended Ch. 60 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 60, §§ 60-1-60-3, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1982, §§ 8-301-8-303. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 60-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the harmonious development of areas within the city, for the coordination of streets within developments with other existing or planned streets or with other features of the comprehensive plan; for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience and prosperity. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Sec. 60-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Building line shall mean a line on a plat between which line and a street right-of-way where no building or structure may be erected, except as may be allowed per the City of Iron Mountain Zoning Ordinance. 
    Cul-de-sac shall mean a minor street with only one outlet and culminated by a turnaround which meets requirements. 
    Developer shall mean any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
    Easement shall mean a grant by the property owner of the use for a specific purpose of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or a certain person. 
    Greenbelt shall mean a strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the preservation of, and/or planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip. 
    Lot shall mean a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    Major street shall mean a street designated as a major street in the major street plan for the city. 
    Minor street shall mean a street not designated as a major street in the major street plan for the city. 
    Public land shall mean land dedicated for public use, such as parks, playgrounds, walkways, pathways, basins, greenbelts or buffers. 
    Performance bond shall mean a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by this chapter, the cost being estimated by the city engineer and the surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the city that the improvements will be constructed in accordance with this chapter. 
    Roadway shall mean that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back-to-back of curbs. 
    Street shall mean all property dedicated or intended for public or private use for access to abutting lands or subject to public easements therefore, thereof and whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place, circle or however otherwise designated. 
    Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land in accordance with the Land Division Act, MCL 560.101. 
    Subdivider shall mean any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision and includes any agent of the subdivider. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 560.102, MSA 26.430(102), P.A. 591 of 1996. 
Sec. 60-3. - Modification of requirements. 
(a)  Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider or developer because of unusual topography; or other such non-self-inflicted conditions or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this chapter, the planning commission may vary, modify or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variance, modification or waiver, will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter or interfering with carrying out the comprehensive plan and shall be no less restrictive than is required by the applicable MCL. 
(b)  In no case shall any variation or modification be more than a minimum easing of the requirements. In no case shall it have the effect of reducing the traffic capacity of any street below that is shown on the comprehensive plan or be in conflict with any zoning ordinance and map. 
(c)  Such variances and waivers may be granted only by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of the members of the planning commission. 
(d)  In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so varied or modified. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 60-4. - Violations. 
    Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the city, knowingly or with intent to defraud, transfers or sells by reference to or exhibition of or by a other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the city council, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each lot so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold, and a description by metes and bounds shall not exempt the transaction. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Secs. 60-5-60-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 60-21. - When plat required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or person having control of any land within the city to subdivide or lay out such land into lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and grounds, unless by plat in accordance with the laws of the state and the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Each subdivider or developer shall confer with the administrators before preparing the preliminary plat in order that he may become familiar with the requirements of this chapter, the comprehensive plan, the City of Iron Mountain Zoning Ordinance, and any other city ordinance, as they may apply to the land proposed to be subdivided. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Sec. 60-22. - Subdivision procedure. 
(a)  In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the city council, the subdivider or developer shall submit a tentative preliminary plat, a final preliminary plat, detailed engineering plans, a performance bond as may be required, and a final plat in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  The subdivider or developer shall first prepare and file with the city administrators 15 copies of the tentative plat, and subsequent to its review, 15 copies of a final preliminary plat, both conforming to the requirements set forth in this chapter, and the subdivision control act of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.) or the Land Division Act of 1996 being Public Act 591 of 1996. 
(c)  A hearing on the tentative preliminary plat will be held before the planning commission at its first regular meeting following the filing. No hearing shall be held by the planning commission until notice thereof, which shall include the time and place, shall be given by the city planner on behalf of the commission, by mailing notice to the person who filed the tentative preliminary plat to the address set forth in the filing papers and to such other interested parties as may be determined by the planning commission. 
(d)  The city administrators shall examine the tentative plat and final preliminary plat as to their compliance with the laws and regulations of the city, the existing street system and good engineering and planning practices and shall, within 15 business days, submit their findings in duplicate to the planning commission. 
(e)  The planning commission, upon receiving the city administrators report, shall within a reasonable time consider the report and make a recommendation to the city council of approve, approve with modification, or disapprove the tentative plat and final preliminary plats. It shall then set forth its recommendations and requirements in writing, whether of approval, modification or disapproval. In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefore. The planning commission shall return one copy of any approved preliminary plat to the subdivider or developer. 
(f)  Between the final preliminary plat and the beginning of any land clearing and construction, the subdivider or developer must submit detailed engineering plans to the city engineer and planner for review and approval or disapproval. Approval must be obtained prior to any land clearing and construction. 
(g)  Upon approval of the final preliminary plat by the city council, and upon approval of the detailed engineering plans, the subdivider or developer may proceed with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, the Land Division Act, road and utility construction, all required improvements for or related to the subdivision, and then with the preparation of the final plat. 
(h)  The approval of the tentative plat and final preliminary plat by the city council is revocable and does not constitute final approval or acceptance of the subdivision by the city council but shall constitute approval of layout and general engineering proposals and plans. 
(i)  Before submitting the final plat to the planning commission for review, the subdivider or developer shall furnish all information as listed in the "final plat requirements." 
(j)  For final plat approval, the subdivider or developer shall submit to the planning commission: 
(1)  Fifteen copies of the final plat; 
(2)  A performance bond as required and approved by the city engineer; 
(3)  A filing fee(s) as adopted by the city council; 
(4)  A certificate from the city engineer that the final plat is in accord with the final preliminary plat as approved by the city council. 
(k)  When the final plat has been reviewed by the planning commission, copies of the final plat and any required performance bond shall forthwith be transmitted to the city council together with a certificate showing the action of the planning commission. 
(l)  When the final plat has been approved by the city council, any required performance bond accepted, and all copies duly certified, one copy shall be delivered to the planning commission, and one copy to the city engineer and city assessor for their respective files, and three to the subdivider or developer, two of which are for filing with the county recorder and county auditor. 
(m)  The passage of the resolution accepting the plat shall constitute final approval by the city of the area shown on the final plat, but the owner shall cause the plat to be duly certified and recorded as required by the land division act, and said recorded plat shall be filed in the office of the city engineer and the city planner before the city shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect. 
(n)  The state requires certain certificates be entered on record together with the certified plat. 
(o)  Once the subdivider or developer has completed all required signatures and recordings for the final plat and has received the duly certified final plat, he is authorized to proceed with the selling of lots. He may also begin with the construction of buildings provided he has obtained all required City of Iron Mountain Zoning Compliance Certificates and permits from any other applicable agency. 
(p)  The city will return any performance bond to the subdivider or developer upon certification by the city engineer of satisfactory completion of the installation and construction of the required improvements and acceptance of the required improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 60-23. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  The preliminary plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet or less and shall be plainly marked "tentative preliminary plat" or "final preliminary plat" and in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision control act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), land division act and any applicable city ordinance. 
(b)  The preliminary plats shall include: 
(1)  The proposed name of the subdivision and, if different, the title under which the subdivision is to be recorded; 
(2)  The name and address of the owner and the name, address and profession of the person preparing the plat; 
(3)  The date, scale and northpoint, and a key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development; 
(4)  The legal description of the area being developed; 
(5)  The boundary line (accurate in scale), the dimensions and location of the property to be developed and the location of section lines; contours with intervals of not less than five feet; 
(6)  The names and location of adjacent subdivisions and site condominiums and the names of record owners and location of adjoining parcels of unplatted land; 
(7)  The location of property lines, streets, alleys, easements, buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree masses, and other existing features affecting the development; 
(8)  The zoning classification and proposed use for the area being developed; 
(9)  The layout, numbers and dimensions of proposed lots; 
(10)  The layout of all existing and proposed building lines and easements; 
(11)  The location, width and dimensions of all streets, alleys and grounds proposed to be dedicated for public use; 
(12)  Proposed names for all public and private streets in the area being developed; 
(13)  Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider or developer proposes to provide and install all improvements required by this chapter; 
(14)  Written and signed statements of the appropriate officials of the availability of gas, electricity and water to the proposed subdivision; 
(15)  Any restrictions proposed to be included in the owner's declaration of plat. 
(c)  In addition to the preliminary plats, the developer shall submit an existing conditions map. The existing conditions map shall be presented in a 1? = 400' scale and illustrate existing conditions surrounding the proposed development, including existing streets, utilities and topography. The city will provide any information in its possession to assist in the development of the existing conditions map. 
(d)  As an additional requirement, the developer or subdivider shall submit a pedestrian transportation plan. The pedestrian transportation plan shall illustrate the extent, nature and location of all proposed pedestrian facilities, including widths and locations of proposed easements and specific construction standards of proposed paths or walkways, if applicable. The pedestrian transportation plan shall be approved by the city planner and planning commission. The approval of the preliminary plat shall be contingent upon the approval of the pedestrian transportation plan. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
State Law reference- Preliminary plat, MCL 560.107 et seq., MSA 26.430(107) et seq. 
Sec. 60-24. - Final plat. 
(a)  The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.) and on material specified by the state recording agency. 
(b)  The final plat shall contain: 
(1)  The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded; 
(2)  The name or names of the owners and subdividers or developers; 
(3)  The date, scale and northpoint, and a key map showing the general location of the proposed development; 
(4)  The legal description of the area being developed; 
(5)  Accurate distances and bearings of all boundary lines of the development including all sections, United States Survey and GLO township lines; 
(6)  Street right-of-way lines of all proposed and adjoining public and private streets with their right-of-way width and names; 
(7)  Lines of all lots with a simple method of numbering to identify all lots and blocks. Each lot and out lot of any subdivision shall have direct access to a street or road. Direct access shall include any public or private right-of-way or permanent, perpetual easement established for the purpose of providing access to any such lots or out lots designated in a final plat of a subdivision; 
(8)  All building lines and all easements provided for public service together with their dimensions and any limitations of the easements; 
(9)  Any and all dimensions necessary for accurate location of the boundaries of the site to be developed and of all streets, lots, easements and dedicated areas; these dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot; 
(10)  All radii, arcs, points of tangency, central angles and lengths of curbs; 
(11)  Certification by a surveyor that the final plat as shown is a correct representation of the survey as made; 
(12)  All survey monuments and benchmarks, together with their description; 
(13)  Private restrictive deeds or covenants and their period of existence; and 
(14)  The accurate outline, dimensions and purposes of all property which is offered for dedication or is to be reserved for acquisition for public use, or is to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 7-2-10) 
Secs. 60-25-60-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 60-41. - Streets. 
(a)  The street arrangement shall be such as to cause no hardship to owners of adjoining property when they seek to subdivide their lands. 
(b)  The arrangement of public and private streets shall make provisions for continuation of the principal or major existing streets in adjoining areas. The continuation of the minor streets shall be determined by the planning commission after taking into consideration the topography, natural features, emergency access, number of lots served by such street(s), and traffic circulation. 
(c)  Off-set streets shall be avoided. 
(d)  The right-of-way width for major streets shall conform to the major street plan of the comprehensive plan and to all subsequent amendments or additions thereto. 
(e)  The minimum right-of-way for minor streets shall be 80 feet, or as designated on a precise plat. 
(f)  When streets adjoin unsubdivided property, a half-street shall be dedicated, and whenever the subdivided property adjoins a half-street the remainder of the street shall be dedicated. 
(g)  Proper access shall be given to all lots from a dedicated street. 
(h)  All dead-end streets shall terminate in an open space having a minimum radius of 50 feet. No dead-end streets shall exceed 600 feet in length. 
(i)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. 
(j)  A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be placed between reverse curves on major streets; on minor streets such tangents shall be at least 50 feet long. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 60-42. - Lots. 
(a)  The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites properly related to topography and the character of adjacent development. 
(b)  All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines unless a variation of this rule will give a better street and lot plan. 
(c)  Lots with double frontage shall be avoided. 
(d)  Access from a public street shall be provided for all lots. 
(e)  Lots shall conform to the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Sec. 60-43. - Building lines. 
    Restrictions requiring buildings to be set back to such building lines shall either be shown on the plat or shall be contained in a separate recorded instrument. The building lines shall not be in conflict with minimum requirements as specified in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Sec. 60-44. - Open spaces other than streets. 
(a)  Dedicated public land shall be set aside, at no charge to the city, for any of the following: 
(1)  If the Comprehensive Plan or Recreation Plan shows a park or other public land need on the property being developed. 
(2)  The city planning director requires public land be dedicated to preserve sites of historical, environmental, or cultural significance or for geographical, strategic or other beneficial reasons. 
(b)  Unless specifically approved otherwise by the city planning director and planning commission, dedicated greenbelts shall be required in addition to any other required public land as follows: 
(1)  Provide 50 feet minimum greenbelts adjacent to incompatible features such as highways, commercial or industrial areas, or as deemed appropriate by the city planning director. 
(2)  Provide 25 feet minimum greenbelts on both sides of all major streets. 
(3)  All greenbelts shall be included in the preliminary and final plat(s). 
(Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 60-45. - Alleys. 
    Alleys in residential developments are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Sec. 60-46. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements of at least ten feet in width shall be provided and dedicated on each side of any lot line where necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and other mains. 
(b)  An adequate easement shall be dedicated along all important watercourses for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or protecting the stream for drainage purposes. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Sec. 60-47. - Character of development. 
(a)  The planning commission shall confer the subdivider or developer regarding the type and character of development that will be permitted, and may agree with the subdivider or developer as to certain minimum restrictions to be placed upon the property to prevent the construction of substandard buildings, to control the type and use of structures or the use of lots which, unless so controlled, would clearly depreciate the character and value of the proposed development and of adjoining property. 
(b)  The planning commission shall have power to agree with the subdivider or developer upon the use, height, area or bulk restrictions governing building and premises, providing that said restrictions do not authorize the violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Deed restrictions in any covenants shall not contain reversionary clauses wherein any lot shall return to the subdivider or developer because of a violation of the terms of the restrictions or covenants. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 60-48. - Maintenance of improvements outside corporate limits. 
    The developer shall provide a trust agreement when a subdivision outside the corporate limits of the city contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas, street trees or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area which are of common use or benefit and which the city does not desire to or cannot maintain. This trust agreement shall be a part of the deed restrictions acceptable to the city council for the proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of such facilities by the lot owners in the development. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Secs. 60-49-60-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 60-61. - Completion of improvements. 
    Plans for improvements shall be prepared in accordance with the laws of the state. The improvements listed below shall be installed prior to the approval of the final plat which is prepared for recording purposes. In lieu of actual completion of the improvements, the city council may accept a performance bond assuring the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within a reasonable time, and with the provision that no residence or other building shall be constructed until the street improvements, water and sewer lines have been installed for the entire block in which the residence or other building shall be located. All improvements required by this ordinance must be correctly located and installed and then approved by the city administrators prior to any city utilities being utilized. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Sec. 60-62. - Required improvements. 
(a)  The improvements to be installed shall include the following: 
(1)  Permanent markers. All boundary corners, street corners and lot-corners shall be marked in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision control act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). 
(2)  Street improvements. All residential streets shall be constructed to the following standards: 
a.  All unsuitable soil, as determined by the city engineer, that exists under proposed streets and a 1:1 influence area extending below the curbline shall be excavated and replaced with MDOT Class II subbase, or other subbase as specified by the city engineer. 
b.  Eight inches of MDOT 22A base course, or other base course as specified by the city engineer, shall be placed to the line and grade shown on the approved plans. 
c.  MDOT C2 curb and gutter shall be required on all residential developments. 
d.  Three inches of bituminous asphalt shall be placed to the line and grade as shown on the approved plans (see illustration). 
For residential developments, local streets shall be 30 feet back to back of curb and major streets shall be 36 feet back to back of curb. 
Costs associated with street improvements shall be borne solely by the developer (see illustration). 

Figure 1. Typical Residential Street Cross-Section 
In industrial or commercial areas or developments where heavy truck traffic is expected, the minimum requirements may be modified by the city engineer to ensure properly designed streets. 
(3)  Water lines. For all developments, the subdivider or developer shall provide an adequate supply of potable water to each lot by a connection to the city water system, and shall serve each lot with a water main. 
(4)  Sewers. For all developments, the subdivider or developer shall connect with a public sanitary sewer system, and the sewer lines shall serve each lot and shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the state department of health and under the supervision of and subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(5)  Sidewalks. A six-foot wide sidewalk shall be installed along both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall conform to city specifications and be installed to the line and grade as shown on the approved plan or by the city engineer. The developer or subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of sidewalks and shall complete all sidewalks within two years of final acceptance of the plat by the city. 
(6)  Drainage. A storm drainage system, including but not limited to storm sewers, catch basins, manholes, culverts, retention/detention ponds, ditches and curb and gutter, shall be constructed in accordance with the city engineer and/or stormwater management plan. 
(7)  Easements. Easements shall be graded to their maximum usable width to a grade approved by the city engineer. 
(8)  Lines and cables. All electrical energy and telephone lines or other cables within the development limits shall be installed underground and in accordance with the policy, specifications or other requirements of each specific utility company involved. 
(b)  The subdivider or developer shall present with the final preliminary plat a letter from each of the utilities indicating that the development of these utilities will be in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-2-06) 
Chapter 61 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 61-1-61-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPTION-CENTRAL SCHOOL APARTMENT HOMES 

Sec. 61-21. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Iron Mountain Tax Exemption Ordinance-Central School Apartment Homes." 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 1) 
Sec. 61-22. - Preamble. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its low income persons and families and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the act. The city is authorized by this act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for low income persons and families is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose. It is further acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of all ad valorem taxes during the period contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of the housing projects that is constructed or rehabilitated with financing extended in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that the sponsor (as defined below) has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program by the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to construct/acquire and rehabilitate, own and operate a housing project identified as Central School Apartment Homes on certain property located at Stephenson and Fleshiem 2nd Addition Block 14 Lots 1-8, Stephenson and Fleshiem 2nd Addition Block 15 North 135 Feet of Lots 1-4, Stephenson and Fleshiem 1st Addition Block 7 Lots 1-5 in the City of Iron Mountain to serve low income persons and families, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing project an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 2) 
Sec. 61-23. - Definitions. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from or paid on behalf of all occupants of a housing project representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of utilities. 
    LIHTC program means the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program administered by the authority under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
    Low income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move into a housing project. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan that is federally-aided (as defined in section 11 of the act) or a loan or grant made or to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction, rehabilitation, acquisition and/or permanent financing of a housing project, and secured by a mortgage on the housing project. 
    Sponsor means Central School Apartment Homes LDHA, LP and any entity that receives or assumes a mortgage loan. 
    Utilities means charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer and other utilities furnished to the occupants that are paid by the housing project. 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 3) 
Sec. 61-24. - Class of housing projects. 
    It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be housing projects for low income persons and families that are financed with a mortgage loan. It is further determined that Central School Apartment Homes is of this class. 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 4) 
Sec. 61-25. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing project identified as Central School Apartment Homes LDHA, LP and the property on which it will be located shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes from and after the commencement of construction or rehabilitation. The city acknowledges that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing project in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article, and the qualification of the housing project for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this article. Therefore, in consideration of the sponsor's offer to construct and rehabilitate and operate the housing project, the city agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. Subject to receipt of a mortgage loan, the annual service charge shall be equal to 12 percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected by the housing project during each operating year. 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 5) 
Sec. 61-26. - Contractual effect of article. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 6) 
Sec. 61-27. - Limitation on payment of annual service charge. 
    Notwithstanding section 61-25, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing project that is tax exempt but which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing project if the housing project were not tax exempt. 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 7) 
Sec. 61-28. - Payment of service charge. 
    The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city and distributed to the several units levying the general property tax in the same proportion as prevailed with the general property tax in the previous calendar year. The annual payment for each operating year shall be paid on or before March 31 of the following year. Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 8) 
Sec. 61-29. - Duration. 
    This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as a mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid and the housing project remains subject to income and rent restrictions under the LIHTC program. 
(Ord. of 3-29-17, § 9) 
Chapter 62 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; municipal civil infractions, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE 

Sec. 62-26. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for the city shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police and the police department and, where applicable, as provided in the Uniform Traffic Code, concurrent with the office of traffic engineer, who is hereby ordained to be the city engineer. 
(Code 1982, § 4-103; Ord. of 4-7-2003(1); Ord. of 4-7-2003(2)) 
Sec. 62-27. - Access to code. 
    The office of the city clerk shall have on file a copy of the Uniform Traffic Code as is adopted and incorporated by direct reference thereto in section 62-28. 
(Code 1982, § 4-104) 
Sec. 62-28. - Adoption by reference. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of state law, there is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing traffic and traffic-related conditions within the city, the Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages promulgated by the director of state police and published in the 1979 Edition of the Michigan Administrative Code and amendments as published in the Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 Edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Act No. 62 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1982, § 4-101) 
Sec. 62-29. - References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code to "governmental unit" shall mean the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-102; Ord. of 4-7-2003(1); Ord. of 4-7-2003(2)) 
Sec. 62-30. - Amendments. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code adopted in this article are hereby amended as set forth, and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Section numbers shall refer to the like-numbered sections in the Uniform Traffic Code. 
Sec. 2.5a. Abandoned vehicle procedures. 
(1)  As used in this section, "abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle which has remained on public property or private property for a period of 48 hours after a police agency or other governmental agency designated by the police agency has affixed a written notice to the vehicle. 
(2)  If a vehicle has remained on public or private property for a period of time so that it appears to the police agency to be abandoned, the police agency shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The date and time the notice was affixed. 
(ii)  The name and address of the police agency taking the action. 
(iii)  The name and badge number of the police officer affixing the notice. 
(iv)  The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and stored at the owner's expense or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed. 
(v)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, if available. 
(3)  If the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours after the date the notice was affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the police agency may have the vehicle taken into custody. 
(4)  A police agency which has a vehicle taken into custody shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement information network. 
(c)  Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
(ii)  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iii)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iv)  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. 
(v)  The business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
(vi)  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
(vii)  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees. 
(viii)  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action. 
(ix)  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale. 
(5)  The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to the accrued towing and storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees. 
(6)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(7)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle and the police agency for its accrued costs. 
(8)  Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (5) of this section or, if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice, the police agency shall offer the vehicle for a sale at a public sale pursuant to section 2.5g. 
(9)  If the ownership of a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under this section cannot be determined either because of the condition of the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the secretary of state does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 2.5g, not less than 30 days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.252a. 
Sec. 2.5b. Abandoned scrap vehicle procedures. 
(1)  As used in this section: 
(a)  Registered abandoned scrap vehicle means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements: 
(i)  Is on public or private property. 
(ii)  Is seven or more years old. 
(iii)  Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by section 5.71 would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle. 
(iv)  Is currently registered in the State of Michigan or displays current year registration plates from another state. 
(v)  Is not removed within 48 hours after a written notice, as described in section 2.5a(2)(b), is affixed to the vehicle. 
(b)  Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements: 
(i)  Is on public or private property. 
(ii)  Is seven or more years old. 
(iii)  Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by section 5.71, would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle. 
(iv)  Is not currently registered in this state and does not display current year registration plates from another state. 
(v)  Is not removed within 48 hours after a written notice, as described in section 2.5a(2)(b), is affixed to the vehicle. 
(2)  A police agency may have an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Take two photographs of the vehicle. 
(c)  Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number if available. 
(ii)  The date of abandonment. 
(iii)  The location of abandonment. 
(iv)  A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment. 
(v)  The reporting officer's name and title. 
(vi)  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(d)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(3)  Within 24 hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after taking the vehicle into custody, the police agency shall complete a release form and release the vehicle to the towing service or a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who shall then transmit that release form to the secretary of state and apply for a certificate of title or a certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the release form and application, the secretary of state shall issue a certificate of title or a certificate of scrapping. 
(4)  The release form described in subsection (3) shall be furnished by the secretary of state and shall include a certification executed by the applicable police agency when the abandoned scrap vehicle is released. The certification shall state that the police agency has complied with all the requirements of subsections (2)(b) and (c). 
(5)  The secretary of state shall retain the records relating to an abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than two years. The two photographs taken pursuant to subsection (2)(b) of this section shall be retained by the police agency for not less than two years. After the certificate of scrapping has been issued, a certificate of title for the vehicle shall not be issued again. 
(6)  A police agency may have a registered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been stolen. 
(b)  Take two photographs of the vehicle. 
(c)  Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as a registered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number if available. 
(ii)  The date of abandonment. 
(iii)  The location of abandonment. 
(iv)  A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment. 
(v)  The reporting officer's name and title. 
(vi)  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(d)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(e)  Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
(ii)  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iii)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iv)  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. 
(v)  The business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
(vi)  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
(vii)  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees. 
(viii)  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action. 
(ix)  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle. 
(7)  The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap vehicle may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the court in an amount as determined by the court. The owner of the vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees. 
(8)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(9)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(10)  Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (7), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice described in subsection (6)(e), the police agency shall follow the procedures established in subsections (3) to (5). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.252b. 
Sec. 2.5c. Vehicle removed from private property. 
(1)  When a vehicle is removed from private property at the direction of a person other than the registered owner of the vehicle or a police agency, the custodian of the vehicle immediately shall notify the police agency from whose jurisdiction the vehicle was towed. The custodian shall supply that information which is necessary for the police agency to enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the notification described in subsection (1), the police agency immediately shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(3)  The owner of the vehicle removed as described in subsection (1) may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the accrued towing and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. Upon release of the vehicle, the custodian shall notify the police agency of the disposition of the vehicle. 
(4)  If the vehicle described in subsection (1) is not claimed by the owner within seven days after the police agency has been notified by the custodian that it has been taken into custody, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the procedures prescribed in section 2.5a(4)(c) to (9) shall apply. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.252c. 
Sec. 2.5d. Vehicle removed by police. 
(1)  A police agency or a governmental agency designated by the police agency may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from public or private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the registered owner of the vehicle in any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  If the vehicle is in such a condition that the continued operation of the vehicle upon the highway would constitute an immediate hazard to the public. 
(b)  If the vehicle is parked or standing upon the highway in such a manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic. 
(c)  If a vehicle is parked in a posted tow-away zone. 
(d)  If there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any part of the vehicle is stolen. 
(e)  If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence of a crime, or when there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the commission of a crime. 
(f)  If removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or manmade disaster, or other emergency. 
(g)  If the vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which impedes the movement of another vehicle. 
(h)  If the vehicle is stopped, standing or parked in a space designated for handicapper parking and is not permitted by law to be stopped, standing, or parked in a space designated for handicapper parking. 
(2)  A police agency which authorizes the removal of a vehicle under subsection (1) of this section shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Within 24 hours after removing the vehicle, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network if the vehicle has not been redeemed. This subdivision does not apply to a vehicle that is removed from the scene of a motor vehicle traffic accident. 
(c)  If the vehicle has not been redeemed within ten days after moving the vehicle, send to the registered owner and the secured party as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first class mail or personal service a notice that the vehicle has been removed; however, if the police agency informs the owner or operator of the vehicle of the removal and the location of the vehicle within 24 hours after the removal, and if the vehicle has not been redeemed within 30 days and upon complaint from the towing service, the police agency shall send the notice within 30 days after the removal. The notice shall be by a form furnished by the secretary of state. The notice form shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle. 
(ii)  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iii)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iv)  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. 
(v)  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(vi)  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
(vii)  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing and daily storage fees. 
(viii)  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action. 
(ix)  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale or to both the vehicle and the proceeds. 
(3)  The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the court in an amount equal to the accrued towing and storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly removed, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees. 
(4)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(5)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle prior to the date of the sale. 
(6)  Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (3), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice described in subsection (2)(c), the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale unless the vehicle is redeemed. The public sale shall be held pursuant to section 2.5g. 
(7)  If the ownership of the vehicle which has been removed under this section cannot be determined either because of the condition of the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the secretary of state does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 2.5g, not less than 30 days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.252d. 
Sec. 2.5e. Abandoned vehicle; jurisdiction of court. 
(1)  The following courts shall have jurisdiction to determine if a police agency has acted properly in processing a vehicle under section 2.5a, 2.5b(6) to (10), 2.5c, or 2.5d: 
(a)  The district court. 
(b)  A municipal court. 
(c)  The common pleas court of the City of Detroit. 
(2)  The court specified in the notice prescribed in section 2.5a(4)(c), 2.5b(6), 2.5c(4), or 2.5d(2)(c) shall be the court which has territorial jurisdiction at the location from where the vehicle was removed or deemed abandoned. Venue in the district court shall be governed by section 8312 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.8312), as amended. 
(3)  If the owner fails to pay the accrued towing and storage fees, the towing and storage bond posted with the court to secure release of the vehicle under section 2.5a, 2.5b, 2.5c, or 2.5d shall be used to pay the towing and storage fees. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.252e. 
Sec. 2.5f. Abandoned vehicle; duties of court. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a petition prescribed in section 2.5a, 2.5b, 2.5c, or 2.5d, signed by the owner of the vehicle which has been taken into custody, the court shall do both of the following: 
(a)  Schedule a hearing within 30 days for the purpose of determining whether the police agency acted properly. 
(b)  Notify the owner and the police agency of the time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  At the hearing specified in subsection (1) the police agency shall have the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that it has complied with the requirements of this act in processing the abandoned vehicle or vehicle removed pursuant to section 2.5d. 
(3)  After the hearing the court shall make a decision which shall include one or more of the following: 
(a)  A finding that the police agency complied with the procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed under section 2.5d, and an order providing a period of 20 days after the decision for the owner to redeem the vehicle. If the owner does not redeem the vehicle within 20 days, the police agency shall dispose of the vehicle pursuant to section 2.5b or 2.5g. 
(b)  A finding that the police agency did not comply with the procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed pursuant to section 2.5d. After making such a finding, the court shall issue an order directing that the vehicle immediately be released to the owner, and that the police agency is responsible for the accrued towing and storage charges. 
(c)  A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were reasonable. 
(d)  A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were unreasonable and issue an order directing an appropriate reduction. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.252f. 
Sec. 2.5g. Abandoned vehicle; public sale. 
(1)  A public sale for a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under section 2.5a or 2.5c or removed under section 2.5d shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(a)  It shall be under the control of the police agency or agent of the police agency. 
(b)  It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction bidding or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the person submitting the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the police agency or agent of the police agency. 
(c)  Except as provided by sections 2.5a(9) and 2.5d(7), it shall be held not less than five days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
(d)  The public notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle was abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the vehicle for sale and shall state the time, date, and location of the sale. 
(2)  The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be applied in the following order of priority: 
(a)  Towing and storage charges. 
(b)  Expenses incurred by the police agency. 
(c)  To the secured party, if any, in the amount of the debt outstanding on the vehicle. 
(d)  Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall be made to mail the remainder to the registered owner. If delivery of the remainder cannot be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of the unit of government that the police agency represents. 
(3)  If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police agency may do one of the following: 
(a)  Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy charges against the vehicle. 
(b)  Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency or the unit of government the police agency represents, by doing the following: 
(i)  Paying the towing and storage charges. 
(ii)  Applying for title to the vehicle. 
(c)  Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (1). 
(4)  A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under subsection (1) or (3), which vehicle has been designated as a distressed vehicle, shall make application for a salvage certificate of title within 15 days after obtaining the vehicle. 
(5)  Upon disposition of the vehicle, the police agency shall cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.252g. 
Sec. 5.14c. Exhibition driving. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle upon any highway or a frozen public lake, stream or pond or other place open to the general public, including any areas designated for the parking of vehicles in an exhibition of speed or acceleration, whether or not the authorized speed limit is exceeded and whether or not conditions of competition exist. 
State Law reference- Reckless driving, MCL 257.626; drag racing, prohibited, MCL 257.626a. 
Sec. 5.15. Driving while under influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substance or with certain blood alcohol percentage; accident; arrest without warrant. 
(1)  Definition of "under the influence." A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within the village if either of the following applies: 
(a)  The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
(b)  The person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(2)  Prohibition against permitting intoxicated person to operate motor vehicle. The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the village by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance or who has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(3)  Operation while visibly impaired; finding of guilty. A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles within the village, when, due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance or a combination of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the person's ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired. If a person is charged with violating subsection (1), a finding of guilty under this subsection may be rendered. 
(4)  Minors. A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within the village if the person has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection, the expression "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(a)  An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(b)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(5)  Subsection (1) violations; misdemeanor, penalty; community service supervision; costs. If a person is convicted of violating subsection (1), all of the following apply: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not more than 45 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(iii)  A fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
(b)  If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00 and either of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not less than ten days or more than 90 days and may be imprisoned for not more than 93 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not less than 48 consecutive hours or more than 93 days and may be sentenced to community service for not more than 90 days. 
(c)  A term of imprisonment imposed under subdivision (b)(ii) shall not be suspended. 
(d)  As used in this subsection, "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation or attempted violation of subsection (1), (4), or (5), of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (4) or (5)) or former section 625(1) or (2), of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to subsection (1), (4) or (5), or former section 625(1) or (2) or a law of another state substantially corresponding to subsection (1), (4), or (5) or former section 625(1) or (2). 
(6)  Subsection (2) violation; misdemeanor; penalty. A person who is convicted of violating subsection (2) is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 or both. 
(7)  Subsection (3) violations; misdemeanor; penalty. If a person is convicted of violating subsection (3), all of the following apply: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subdivisions (b) and (c), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not more than 45 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(iii)  A fine of not more than $300.00. 
(b)  If the violation occurs within seven years of one prior conviction, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00 and either of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not less than ten days or more than 90 days and may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days and may be sentenced to community service for not more than 90 days. 
(c)  If the violation occurs within ten years of two or more prior convictions, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00 and either of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not less than ten days or more than 90 days and may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days and may be sentenced to community service for not more than 90 days. 
(d)  As used in this subsection, "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation or attempted violation of subsection (1), (3), (4), or (5), of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), or (5)), or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to subsection (1) or (3) (MCL 257.625(1), or (3)) or former section 625(1) or (2) or former section 625b or a law of another state substantially corresponding to subsection (1), (3), (4), or (5), or former section 625(1) or (2) or former section 625b. 
(8)  Subsection (4) violations; misdemeanor; penalty. If a person is convicted of violating subsection 5.15(4), the following shall apply: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or both of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not more than 45 days. 
(ii)  A fine of not more than $250.00. 
(b)  If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or both of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not more than 60 days. 
(ii)  A fine of not more than $500.00. 
(c)  As used in this subsection, "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation or attempted violation of subsection (1), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5) or (6)), or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to subsection (1), (3), or (6) (MCL 257.625(1), (3) or (6)), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to subsection (1), (3), (4), (5), or (6), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b. 
(9)  Payment of costs. In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under subsection (5), (7), or (8), the court may order the person to pay the costs of the prosecution pursuant to the code of criminal procedure, Act No. 175 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1927 (MCL 760.1 et seq.). 
(10)  License sanctions. The court shall impose license sanctions pursuant to section 625b. 
(11)  Community service. A person sentenced to perform community service under this section shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the village for the cost of supervision incurred by the village as a result of the person's activities in that service. 
(12)  Statement listing prior convictions; requirement for enhanced sentence. If the prosecuting attorney intends to seek an enhanced sentence under subsection 5(b) or subsection 7(b) or (c) or subsection 8(b) based upon the defendant having one or more prior convictions, the prosecuting attorney shall include on the complaint and information, or an amended complaint and information, filed in district court, circuit court or probate court a statement listing the defendant's prior convictions. 
(13)  Plea bargaining. If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (1) or (3), the court shall not permit the defendant to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of violating subsection (4) in exchange for dismissal of the original charge. This subsection does not prohibit the court from dismissing the charge upon the motion of the prosecuting attorney. 
(14)  Establishment of prior conviction. A prior conviction shall be established at sentencing by one or more of the following: 
(a)  An abstract of conviction. 
(b)  A copy of the defendant's driving record. 
(c)  An admission by the defendant. 
(15)  Attempt conviction; punishment. A person who is convicted of an attempted violation of subsections (1), (3) or (4) shall be punished as if the offense had been completed. 
(16)  Attempt conviction; assessing points for licensing action. When assessing points and taking licensing action under the act, the secretary of state and the court shall treat a conviction of an attempted violation of subsection (1), (3) or (4) or a law of another state substantially corresponding to subsection (1), (3) or (4) the same as if the offense had been completed. 
(17)  Burden of proof. In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (4), the defendant shall bear the burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating liquor was a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a preponderance of the evidence. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625. 
Sec. 5.15a. Arrest; preliminary chemical breath analysis; chemical test. 
(1)  Arrest without warrant of intoxicated driver involved in accident. A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant when the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of an accident in the village, the operator of a vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of section 5.15(1), (3) or (4). 
(2)  Requiring submission to preliminary chemical breath analysis; consequences. A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within the village, and that the person by the consumption of intoxicating liquor may have affected his ability to operate a vehicle, or reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a commercial motor vehicle within the village while the person's blood, breath or urine contained any measurable amount of alcohol or while the person had any detectable presence of intoxicating liquor, or reasonable cause to believe that a person who is less than 21 years of age was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this village, while the person had any bodily alcohol content as that term is defined in section 5.15(4), may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The following provisions shall apply with respect to a preliminary chemical breath analysis administered pursuant to this subsection: 
(a)  A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. 
(b)  The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in section 5.15c(1) or in an administrative hearing for one or more of the following purposes: 
(i)  To assist the court or hearing officer in determining a challenge to the validity of an arrest. This subparagraph does not limit the introduction of other competent evidence offered to establish the validity of an arrest. 
(ii)  As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered by the defendant. 
(iii)  As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered by the prosecution to rebut testimony or other evidence, including but not limited to testimony elicited on cross examination of a prosecution witness, that is offered or elicited to prove that the defendant's breath alcohol content was lower at the time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered pursuant to subsection (6). 
(c)  A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis shall remain subject to the requirements of sections 5.15c, 5.15d, 5.15e and 5.15f for purposes of chemical tests described in those sections. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (5), a person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(3)  Use of preliminary chemical breath test. A peace officer shall use the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis conducted pursuant to this section to determine whether to order a person out-of-service under section 319d of the act (MCL 257.319d). A peace officer shall order out-of-service as required under section 319d of the act (MCL 257.319d) a person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis as provided in this section. This section does not limit use of other competent evidence by the peace officer to determine whether to order a person out-of-service under section 319d of the act (MCL 257.319d). 
(4)  Warning of consequences of refusal of test. A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who is requested to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis under this section shall be advised that refusing a peace officer's request to take a test described in this section is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both, and will result in the issuance of a 24-hour out-of-service order. 
(5)  Refusal to take test. A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a peace officer's lawful request is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(6)  Tests of presence of alcohol or controlled substance in blood; admissibility into evidence; advisement of rights; collection of urine or breath samples; blood withdrawn for post-accident medical treatment, admissibility of test results; withdrawal of blood from deceased driver, results of test to law enforcement agency. The following provisions apply with respect to chemical tests and analysis of a person's blood, urine or breath, other than preliminary chemical breath analysis: 
(a)  The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in a driver's blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in a person's breath at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine or breath is admissible into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
(b)  A person arrested for a crime described in section 5.15c(1) shall be advised of all of the following: 
(i)  If he takes a chemical test of his blood, urine or breath administered at the request of a peace officer, he has the right to demand that a person of his own choosing administer one of the chemical tests. 
(ii)  The results of the test are admissible in a judicial proceeding as provided under the act and shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. 
(iii)  He is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of a test sample obtained pursuant to his own request. 
(iv)  If he refuses the request of a peace officer to take a test described in subparagraph (i), a test shall not be given without a court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain such a court order. 
(v)  Refusing a peace officer's request to take a test described in subparagraph (i) shall result in the suspension of his operator's or chauffeur's license and vehicle group designation or operating privilege and in the addition of six points to his driver record. 
(c)  A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician or an individual operating under the delegation of a licensed physician under section 16215 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.16215), as amended, qualified to withdraw blood and acting in a medical environment, may withdraw blood at a peace officer's request to determine the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in the person's blood, as provided in this subsection. Liability for a crime or civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing or analyzing blood and related procedures shall not attach to a licensed physician or individual operating under the delegation of a licensed physician who withdraws or analyzes blood or assists in the withdrawal or analysis in accordance with this subsection, unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed in a negligent manner. 
(d)  A chemical test described in this subsection shall be administered at the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to believe the person has committed a crime described in section 5.15c(1). A person who takes a chemical test administered at a peace officer's request, as provided in this section, shall be given a reasonable opportunity to have a person of his own choosing administer one of the chemical tests described in this subsection within a reasonable time after his detention. The test results are admissible and shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. If the person charged is administered a chemical test by a person of his own choosing, the person charged is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of the test sample. 
(e)  If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the driver's blood is withdrawn at that time for medical treatment, the results of a chemical analysis of that sample are admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance, or both, in the person's blood at the time alleged, regardless of whether the person had been offered or had refused a chemical test. The medical facility or person performing the chemical analysis shall disclose the results of the analysis to the prosecuting attorney who requests the results for use in a criminal prosecution as provided in this subdivision. A medical facility or person disclosing information in compliance with this subsection is not civilly or criminally liable for making the disclosure. 
(f)  If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent's blood shall be withdrawn in a manner directed by the medical examiner to determine the amount of alcohol or the presence of a controlled substance or both in the decedent's blood. The medical examiner shall give the results of the chemical analysis of the sample to the law enforcement agency investigating the accident, and that agency shall forward the results to the department of state police. 
(g)  The department of state police shall promulgate uniform rules under the administrative procedures act, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), as amended, for the administration of chemical tests for the purposes of this section. An instrument used for a preliminary chemical breath analysis may be used for a chemical test described in this subsection if approved pursuant to rules promulgated by the department of state police. 
(7)  Introduction of other competent evidence on issue of intoxication not precluded. The provisions of subsection (6) relating to chemical testing do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of whether or not a person was impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance or whether the person had an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 milliliters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or if the person is less than 21 years of age whether the person had any bodily alcohol content within his body. As used in this section, the expression "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(a)  An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 milliliters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(b)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(8)  Offender entitled to copy of test results upon written request; failure of prosecution to furnish as bar to admissibility into evidence. If a chemical test described in subsection (6) is administered, the test results shall be made available to the person charged or the person's attorney, upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the results at least two days before the day of the trial. The prosecution shall offer the test results as evidence in that trial. Failure to fully comply with the request bars the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution. 
(9)  Presumptions. Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of section 5.15(1)(b) or (4) the amount of alcohol in the driver's blood, breath or urine at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath or urine gives rise to the following presumptions: 
(a)  If there were at the time 0.07 grams or less of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 milliliters of the defendant's breath or per 67 milliliters of the defendant's urine, it is presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a motor vehicle was not impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor and that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(b)  If there were at the time more than 0.07 grams but less than 0.10 grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 milliliters of the defendant's breath or per 67 milliliters of the defendant's urine, it is presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a vehicle was impaired within the provisions of section 5.15(3) due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor. 
(c)  If there were at the time 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 milliliters of the defendant's breath or per 67 milliliters of the defendant's urine, it is presumed that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(10)  Jury instruction as to effect of refusal to take test. A person's refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in subsection (6) is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in section 5.15c(1) only to show that a test was offered to the defendant, but not as evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. The jury shall be instructed accordingly. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625a. 
Sec. 5.15b. Arraignment; pretrial conference advising accused; licensing sanction. 
(1)  Arraignment. A person arrested for a misdemeanor violation of section 5.15(1), (3) or (4) or 5.15m shall be arraigned on the citation, complaint or warrant not more than 14 days after the arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 14 days after the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with this time limit. The time limit does not apply to a violation of section 5.15(1), (3) or (4) or section 5.15m joined with a felony charge. 
(2)  Scheduling of pretrial conference; mandatory attendance by defendant; acceptance of plea; not more than one adjournment; final adjudication time limit. The court shall schedule a pretrial conference between the prosecuting attorney, the defendant and the defendant's attorney in each case in which the defendant is charged with a misdemeanor violation of section 5.15(1), (3) or (4) or 5.15m. The pretrial conference shall be held not more than 35 days after the person's arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 35 days after the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. If the court has only one judge who sits in more than one location in that district, the pretrial conference shall be held not more than 42 days after the person's arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 42 days after the date the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with the applicable time limit. The 35- and 42-day time limits do not apply to a violation of section 5.15(1), (3) or (4) or 5.15m joined with a felony charge. The court shall order the defendant to attend the pretrial conference and may accept a plea by the defendant at the conclusion of the pretrial conference. The court may adjourn the pretrial conference upon the motion of a party for good cause shown. Not more than one adjournment shall be granted to a party, and the length of an adjournment shall not exceed 14 days. 
(3)  Time limit for adjudication. Except for delay attributable to the unavailability of the defendant, a witness or material evidence or due to an interlocutory appeal or exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket congestion, the court shall finally adjudicate by a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, entry of a verdict or other final disposition, a case in which the defendant is charged with a misdemeanor violation of section 5.15(1), (3), or (4), or 5.15m, within 77 days after the person is arrested for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not more than 77 days after the date the issued or reissued arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with this time limit. The 77-day time limit does not apply to a violation of section 5.15(1), (3), or (4) or section 5.15m joined with a felony charge. 
(4)  Advisement of maximum penalty prior to acceptance of plea. Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere under section 5.15, the court shall advise the accused of the maximum possible term of imprisonment and the maximum possible fine that may be imposed for the violation and shall advise the defendant that the maximum possible license sanctions that may be imposed will be based upon the master driving record maintained by the secretary of state pursuant to section 204a of the act (MCL 257.204a), as amended. 
(5)  Screening and assessment as to alcohol or drug abuse; rehabilitative services. Before imposing sentence, other than court-ordered license sanctions, for a violation of section 5.15(1), (3), or (4), the court shall order the person to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency designated by the office of substance abuse services, to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. As part of the sentence, the court may order the person to participate in and successfully complete one or more appropriate rehabilitative programs. The person shall pay for the costs of the screening, assessment and rehabilitative services. 
(6)  Consideration of prior convictions; imposition of licensing sanctions; restricted license. Immediately upon acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or upon entry of a verdict of guilty for a violation of section 5.15(1), (3), or (4), whether or not the person is eligible to be sentenced as a multiple offender, the court shall consider all prior convictions currently entered upon the person's state driving record, except those convictions the court determines, upon the defendant's motion to be constitutionally invalid, and shall impose the following licensing sanctions: 
(a)  For a conviction under section 5.15(1): 
(i)  If the court finds that the person has no prior convictions within seven years for a violation of section 625(1), (3), (4) or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), or (5)), or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) or (3) (MCL 257.625(1) or (3)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act or former section 625b of the act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4) or (5), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the person's operator's or chauffeur's license for not less than six months or more than two years if the court finds compelling circumstances under subsection (10) sufficient to warrant the issuance of a restricted license to a person, the court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license during all or a specified portion of the suspension, except that a restricted license shall not be issued during the first 30 days of the suspension. 
(ii)  If the court finds that the person has one prior conviction within seven years for a violation of section 625(3) of the act (MCL 257.625(3), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(3) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(3) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the person's operator's or chauffeur's license for not less than six months or more than two years. If the court finds compelling circumstances under subsection (9) sufficient to warrant the issuance of a restricted license to a person, the court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license during all or any portion of the suspension, except that a restricted license shall not be issued during the first 60 days of the suspension. 
(iii)  If the court finds that the person has one or more prior convictions within seven years for a violation of section 625(1), (4) or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (4) or (5)), or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) of the act (MCL 257.625(1)), or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (4) or (5) of the act, or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or that the person has two or more prior convictions within ten years for a violation of section 625(1), (3), (4) or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4) or (5)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) or (3) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (3)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4) or (5) of the act, former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, the court shall order the secretary of state to revoke the person's operator's or chauffeur's license and shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license to the person. 
(b)  For a conviction under section 5.15(3): 
(i)  If the court finds that the convicted person has no prior conviction within seven years for a violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4) or (5)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) or (3) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (3)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act, former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the person's operator's or chauffeur's license for not less than 90 days or more than one year. However, if the person is convicted of a violation of section 5.15(3) for operating a vehicle when, due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the person's ability to operate the vehicle was visibly impaired, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person for not less than six months or more than one year. If the court finds compelling circumstances under subsection (10) sufficient to warrant the issuance of a restricted license to a person, the court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license during all or a specified portion of the suspension. 
(ii)  If the court finds that the person has one prior conviction within seven years for a violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), or (5)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)) of the act or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) or (3) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (3)) of the act or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act, former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the person's operator's or chauffeur's license for not less than six months or more than two years. If the court finds compelling circumstances under subsection (10) sufficient to warrant the issuance of a restricted license to a person, the court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license during all or any portion of the suspension, except that a restricted license shall not be issued during the first 60 days of the suspension. 
(iii)  If the court finds that the person has two or more prior convictions within ten years for a violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4) or (5)), or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) or (3) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (3)), or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act, or former section 625(1) or (2) of the act, or former section 625b of the act, the court shall order the secretary of state to revoke the person's operator's or chauffeur's license and shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license to the person. 
(c)  For a conviction under section 5.15(4): 
(i)  If the court finds that the convicted person has no prior conviction within seven years for a violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), or (6) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3) or (6)), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days. The court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license during all or a specified portion of the suspension. 
(ii)  If the court finds that the person has one or more prior convictions within seven years for a violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), or (6) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3) or (6)), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person for not less than 90 days or more than one year. The court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license during all or any portion of the suspension, except that a restricted license shall not be issued during the first 90 days of the suspension. 
(7)  Permitted uses under restricted license. A restricted license issued pursuant to an order under subsection (6) shall permit the person to whom it is issued to drive under one or more of the following circumstances: 
(a)  To and from the person's residence and work location. 
(b)  In the course of the person's employment or occupation. 
(c)  To and from the person's residence and an alcohol or drug education or treatment program as ordered by the court. 
(d)  To and from the person's residence and the court probation department or a court-ordered community service program, or both. 
(e)  To and from the person's residence and an educational institution at which the person is enrolled as a student. 
(f)  To and from the person's residence or work location and a place of regularly occurring medical treatment for a serious condition for the person or a member of the person's household or immediate family. 
(8)  Ignition interlock device requirement. The court may order that the restricted license issued pursuant to subsection (6) include the requirement that the person shall not operate a motor vehicle unless the vehicle is equipped with a functioning ignition interlock device. The device shall be set to render the motor vehicle inoperable if the device detects an alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 210 liters of breath in the person who offers a breath sample. The court may order installation of an ignition interlock device on any motor vehicle that the person owns or operates, the costs of which the person whose license is restricted shall bear. 
(9)  Hauling of hazardous materials under restricted license prohibited. The court shall not order the secretary of state under subsection (6) to issue a restricted license that would permit a person to operate a commercial motor vehicle that hauls hazardous materials. 
(10)  Transportation need requirement. The court shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license unless the person states under oath, and the court finds pursuant to testimony taken in open court or pursuant to statements contained in a sworn affidavit on a form prescribed by the state court administrator, that both of the following are true: 
(a)  The person needs vehicular transportation to and from his work location, place of alcohol or drug education treatment, court probation department, court-ordered community service program, or educational institution, or a place of regularly occurring medical treatment for a serious condition or in the course of the person's employment or occupation. 
(b)  The person is unable to take public transportation and does not have any family members or other individuals able to provide transportation to a destination or for a purpose described in subdivision (a). 
(11)  Restricted license to indicate travel destination, route and time. The court order issued under subsection (6) and the restricted license shall indicate the permitted destination of the person or the permitted purposes for which the person may operate a vehicle, the approved route if specified by the court, and permitted times of travel. 
(12)  Surrender of license on conviction; abstract forwarded to secretary; suspension or revocation; issuance of restricted license; stay pending appeal. Immediately upon acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or upon entry of a verdict of guilty for a violation of section 5.15(1), (3) or (4) the person shall surrender to the court his operator's or chauffeur's license or permit. The court shall immediately destroy the license or permit and forward an abstract of conviction with court-ordered license sanctions to the secretary of state. Upon receipt of, and pursuant to, the abstract of conviction with court-ordered license sanctions, the secretary of state shall suspend or revoke the person's license and, if ordered by the court and the person is otherwise eligible for a license, issue to the person a restricted license stating the limited driving privileges indicated on the abstract. If the judgment and sentence is appealed to the circuit court, the court may, ex parte, order the secretary of state to stay the suspension, revocation, or restricted license issued pursuant to this section pending the outcome of the appeal. 
(13)  Vehicle group designation suspension; restricted license permitting commercial vehicle operation prohibited. In addition to any other suspension or revocation ordered under this section and as part of the sentence imposed upon a person who violates section 5.15(1) or (3), while operating a commercial motor vehicle, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license in accordance with section 319b(1)(c) of the act (MCL 257.319b(1)(c)), as amended. If the vehicle was transporting hazardous material required to have a placard pursuant to 49 CFR 100 to 199, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license in accordance with section 319b(1)(d) of the act (MCL 257.319b(1)(d)), as amended. The court shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license that would permit the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle. 
(14)  Vehicle group designation revocation; restricted license permitting commercial vehicle operation prohibited. In addition to any other suspension or revocation ordered under this section and as part of the sentence imposed upon a person who is convicted of a violation of section 5.15(1) or (3), while operating a commercial motor vehicle within ten years of a prior conviction, the court shall order the secretary of state to revoke the vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license in accordance with section 319b(1)(c) of the act (MCL 257.319b(1)(c)), as amended. The court shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license that would permit the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle. As used in this subsection, the term "prior conviction" means a conviction under section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), or (5)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) or (3) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (3)), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b involving the operation of a commercial motor vehicle, or a conviction under section 625m of the act (MCL 257.625m), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625m, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625m. 
(15)  Work location. As used in this section, the term "work location" means, as applicable, the specific place or places of employment or the territory or territories regularly visited by the person in pursuance of the person's occupation, or both. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625b. 
Sec. 5.15c. Preliminary chemical breath analysis. 
(1)  Consent to chemical test. A person who operates a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles within the village, is considered to have given consent to chemical tests of his blood, breath or urine for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance, or both, in his blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in his breath, in all of the following circumstances: 
(a)  If the person is arrested for a violation of section 5.15(1), (3), (4), 5.15a or 5.15m. 
(b)  If the person is arrested for felonious driving, negligent homicide, manslaughter or murder resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle and the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating the vehicle while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance or while having an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or if the person is less than 21 years of age while having any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subdivision, the expression "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(i)  An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(ii)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(2)  Exceptions. A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes or a condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a physician is not considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of blood. 
(3)  Administration. The tests shall be administered as provided in section 5.15a(6). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625c. 
Sec. 5.15d. Refusal to submit to chemical test. 
(1)  Necessity of court order upon refusal of accused to submit to chemical test. If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to a chemical test offered pursuant to section 5.15a(6), a test shall not be given without a court order, but the officer may seek to obtain the court order. 
(2)  Advisement of consequences of refusal; report to secretary of state. A written report shall immediately be forwarded to the secretary of state by the peace officer. The report shall state that the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a crime described in section 5.15c(1), and that the person had refused to submit to the test upon the request of the peace officer and had been advised of the consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and furnished by the secretary of state. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625d. 
Sec. 5.15e. Notice of receipt of report; request for hearing. 
(1)  If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to section 5.15d, the peace officer shall immediately notify the person in writing, that within 14 days of the date of the notice the person may request a hearing as provided in section 5.15f. The form of the notice shall be prescribed and furnished by the secretary of state. 
(2)  Notice; contents; failure to request hearing, consequences; counsel. The notice shall specifically state that failure to request a hearing within 14 days will result in the suspension of the person's license or permit to drive. The notice shall also state that there is not a requirement that the person retain counsel for the hearing, though counsel would be permitted to represent the person at the hearing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625e. 
Sec. 5.15f. Failure to request hearing; effect. 
(1)  License sanctions for test refusal. If the person who refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to section 5.15d does not request a hearing within 14 days after the date of notice pursuant to section 5.15e, the secretary of state shall impose the following license sanctions: 
(a)  If the person was operating a vehicle other than a commercial motor vehicle, suspend or deny the person's operator's or chauffeur's license or permit to drive, or nonresident operating privilege, for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year. If the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a vehicle in the state, the secretary of state shall not issue the person a license or permit for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year. 
(b)  If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, for the first refusal, suspend all vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license or permit, or nonresident privilege to operate a commercial motor vehicle, or if the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a commercial motor vehicle in the state, not issue the person an operator's or chauffeur's license with vehicle group designations, for one year. 
(c)  If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, for a second or subsequent refusal that occurred in a separate incident from, and within ten years of, a prior refusal, revoke all vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license or permit, or nonresident privilege to operate a commercial motor vehicle, or if the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a commercial motor vehicle in the state, not issue the person an operator's or chauffeur's license with vehicle group designations, for not less than ten years and until the person is approved for the issuance of a vehicle group designation. 
(d)  If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle and was arrested for an offense enumerated in section 5.15c other than a violation of section 5.15a(5) or 5.15m, impose the license sanction described in subdivision (a) and the license sanction described in subdivision (b) or (c), as applicable. 
(2)  Hearing; time for holding; scope of inquiry. If a hearing is requested, the secretary of state shall hold the hearing in the same manner and under the same conditions as provided in section 322 of the act (MCL 257.322). Not less than five days' notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the person requesting the hearing, to the peace officer who filed the report under section 5.15d and, if the prosecuting attorney requests receipt of the notice, to the prosecuting attorney of the county where the arrest was made. The hearing officer may administer oaths, issue subpoenas for the attendance of necessary witnesses, and grant a reasonable request for an adjournment. Not more than one adjournment shall be granted to a party and the length of an adjournment shall not exceed 14 days. A hearing under this subsection shall be scheduled to be held within 45 days after the date of arrest for the violation. The hearing officer shall not impose any sanction for a failure to comply with these time limits. 
(3)  Hearing deadline. Except for delay attributable to the unavailability of the defendant, a witness or material evidence or due to an interlocutory appeal or exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket congestion, a hearing shall be finally adjudicated within 77 days after the date of arrest. The hearing officer shall not impose any sanction for failure to comply with this time limit. 
(4)  Issues at hearing. The hearing shall cover only the following issues: 
(a)  Whether the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a crime described in section 5.15c(1). 
(b)  Whether the person was placed under arrest for a crime described in section 5.15c(1). 
(c)  If the person refused to submit to the test upon the request of the officer, whether the refusal was reasonable. 
(d)  Whether the person was advised of the rights under section 5.15a(6). 
(5)  Hearing officer to be independent. A person shall not order a hearing officer to make a particular finding on any issue enumerated in subsection (4)(a) to (d). 
(6)  Record of proceedings, preparation, transcription; transmittal to reviewing court; stipulation; corrections. The hearing officer shall make a record of a hearing held pursuant to this section. The record shall be prepared and transcribed in accordance with section 86 of the administrative procedures act of 1969, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), as amended. Upon notification of the filing of a petition for judicial review pursuant to section 323 of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code (MCL 257.323), and not less than ten days before the matter is set for review, the hearing officer shall transmit to the court in which the petition was filed, the original or a certified copy of the official record of the proceedings. Proceedings at which evidence was presented need not be transcribed and transmitted if the sole reason for review is to determine whether the court will order issuance of a restricted license. The parties to the proceedings for judicial review may stipulate that the record be shortened. A party unreasonably refusing to stipulate to a shortened record may be taxed by the court in which the petition is filed for the additional costs. The court may permit subsequent corrections to the record. 
(7)  Failure of defendant to prevail; imposition of licensing sanctions. If the person who requested a hearing does not prevail, the secretary of state shall impose the following license sanctions after the hearing: 
(a)  If the person was operating a vehicle other than a commercial motor vehicle, suspend or deny issuance of a license or driving permit or a nonresident operating privilege of the person for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year. If the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a vehicle in the state, the secretary of state shall not issue the person a license or permit for six months, or for a second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year. The person may file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the suspension or denial as provided in section 323 of the act (MCL 257.323), as amended. 
(b)  If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, impose the sanction prescribed under subsection (1)(b) or (1)(c), as applicable. The person may file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the suspension or denial as provided in section 323 of the act (MCL 257.323), as amended. 
(c)  If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle and was arrested for an offense enumerated in section 5.15c, other than a violation of section 5.15a(5) or 5.15m, impose the license sanctions described in subdivisions (a) and (b). 
(8)  Defendant prevails. If the person who requested the hearing prevails, the peace officer who filed the report under section 5.15d may, with the consent of the prosecuting attorney, file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the determination of the hearing officer as provided in section 323 of the act (MCL 257.323), as amended. 
(9)  Suspension or revocation of nonresident's license; procedure. When it has been finally determined that a nonresident's privilege to operate a vehicle in the state has been suspended or denied, the department shall give notice in writing of the action taken to the motor vehicle administrator of the state of the person's residence and of each state in which he has a license to operate a motor vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625f. 
Sec. 5.15g. Duty of officer upon refusal. 
(1)  Confiscation by peace officer of accused's license upon refusal to take test or if test reveals impermissible blood alcohol content; issuance of temporary license; report to secretary of state; destruction of accused's license. If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to section 5.15a(6) or submits to the chemical test or a chemical test is performed pursuant to a court order and the test reveals an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall do all of the following: 
(a)  On behalf of the secretary of state, immediately confiscate the person's license or permit to operate a motor vehicle and, if the person is otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a temporary license or permit to the person. The temporary license or permit shall be on a form provided by the secretary of state. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (2), immediately do all of the following: 
(i)  Forward a copy of the written report of the person's refusal to submit to a chemical test required under section 625d to the secretary of state. 
(ii)  Notify the secretary of state by means of the law enforcement information network that a temporary license or permit was issued to the person. 
(iii)  Destroy the person's driver's license or permit. 
(2)  Duty of peace officer when report of test results are not immediately available. If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant to section 5.15a(6) that requires an analysis of blood or urine and a report of the results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall comply with subsection (1)(a) pending receipt of the test report. If the report reveals an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately comply with subsection (1)(b). If the report does not reveal an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately notify the person of the test results and immediately return the person's license or permit by first class mail to the address given at the time of arrest. 
(3)  Validity of temporary license. A temporary license or permit issued under this section is valid for one of the following time periods: 
(a)  If the case is not prosecuted, for 90 days after issuance or until the person's license or permit is suspended pursuant to section 5.15f, whichever occurs earlier. The prosecuting attorney shall notify the secretary of state if a case referred to the prosecuting attorney is not prosecuted. The arresting law enforcement agency shall notify the secretary of state if a case is not referred to the prosecuting attorney for prosecution. 
(b)  If the case is prosecuted, until the criminal charges against the person are dismissed, the person pleads guilty or nolo contendere to or is found guilty of or acquitted of those charges, or the person's license or permit is suspended pursuant to section 5.15f, whichever occurs earlier. 
(4)  Definition of "unlawful alcohol content". As used in this section, "unlawful alcohol content" means any of the following, as applicable: 
(a)  If the person tested is less than 21 years of age, 0.02 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(b)  If the person tested was operating a commercial motor vehicle within this state, 0.04 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(c)  If the person tested is not a person described in subdivision (a) or (b), 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625g. 
Sec. 5.15m. Prohibition of operation of commercial motor vehicle with certain percentage of alcohol in blood. 
(1)  Operator restrictions. A person, whether licensed or not, who has an alcohol content of 0.04 grams or more but not more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this state. 
(2)  Arrest for violation. A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant if the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a commercial motor vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of this section or of a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section. 
(3)  Violation as misdemeanor; penalty for conviction; suspension of vehicle group designations on license or hazardous material placard; prohibition against issuance of restricted license. A person who is convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $300.00, or both, together with costs of the prosecution. As part of the sentence, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license pursuant to section 319b(1)(c) of the act (MCL 257.319b(1)(c)), as amended, or, if the vehicle was carrying hazardous material required to have a placard pursuant to 49 CFR 100 to 199, in accordance with section 319b(1)(d) of the act (MCL 257.319b(1)(d)), as amended. The court shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license that would permit the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle. 
(4)  Enhancement of punishment for violation within ten years of prior conviction; revocation of vehicle group designations on license; issuance of restricted license. A person who violates this section within ten years of a prior conviction may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. As part of the sentence, the court shall order the secretary of state to revoke the vehicle group designations on the person's operator's or chauffeur's license pursuant to section 319b(1)(e) of the act (MCL 257.319b(1)(e), as amended. The court shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license that would permit the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle. As used in this subsection, "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation of this section, section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5) of the act (MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), or (5)), former section 625(1) or (2) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (2)), or former section 625b of the act (MCL 257.625b); a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section, section 625(1) or (3) of the act (MCL 257.625(1) or (3)), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b; or a law of another state substantially corresponding to this section, section 625(1), (3), (4), or (5), former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b, while operating a commercial motor vehicle. 
(5)  Point assessment. When assessing points and taking license actions under the act, the secretary of state and the court shall treat a conviction for an attempted violation of subsection (1) the same as if the offense had been completed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.625m. 
5.62. Penalties. Sections 5.62a, 5.62b, 5.62c, 5.62d, 5.62e, 5.62f and 5.62g are amended as follows: 
Sec. 5.62a 
(1)  A person whose operator's or chauffeur's license or registration certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in section 212 of that suspension or revocation, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within this state. 
(2)  A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state by a person whose license or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, except as permitted under this act. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who violates subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: 
(a)  For the first violation, by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used with the permission of a person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed driver to operate the vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be canceled by the secretary of state upon notification by the peace officer. 
(b)  For the violation that occurs after a prior conviction, by imprisonment for not more than one year or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be canceled by the secretary of state upon notification by a peace officer. 
(4)  A person who operates a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (1) and who, by operation of that motor vehicle, causes the death of another person is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than 15 years or a fine of not less than $2,,500.00 or more than $10,000.00. or both. This subsection does not apply to a person whose operator's or chauffeur's license was suspended because that person failed to answer a citation or comply with an order or judgment pursuant to section 321a. 
(5)  A person who operates a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (1) and who, by operation of that motor vehicle causes the serious impairment of a body function of another person is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years or a fine of not less than $1,000.00 or more than $5,000.00, or both. This subsection does not apply to a person whose operator's or chauffeur's license was suspended because that person failed to answer a citation or comply with an order or judgment pursuant to section 321a. As used in this subsection and subsection (7), "serious impairment of a body function" includes, but is not limited to, one or more of the following: 
(a)  Loss of a limb or loss of use of limb. 
(b)  Loss of a foot, hand, finger, or thumb or loss of use of a foot, hand, finger, or thumb. 
(c)  Loss of an eye or ear or loss of use of an eye or ear. 
(d)  Loss or substantial impairment of a bodily function. 
(e)  Serious visible disfigurement. 
(f)  A comatose state that lasts for more than three days. 
(g)  Measurable brain or mental impairment. 
(h)  A skull fracture or other serious bone fracture. 
(i)  Subdural hemorrhage or subdural hematoma. 
(6)  In addition to being subject to any other penalty provided for in this act, if a person is convicted under subsection (4) or (5), the court may impose the sanction permitted under section 625n. If the vehicle is not ordered forfeited under section 625n, the court shall order vehicle immobilization under section 904d in the judgment of sentence. 
(7)  A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state, by a person whose license or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never been licensed except as permitted by this act. If a person permitted to operate a motor vehicle in violation of this subsection causes the serious impairment of a body function of another person by operation of that motor vehicle, the person knowingly permitting the operation of that motor vehicle is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than two years, or a fine of not less than $1,000.00 or more than $5,000.00, or both. If a person permitted to operate a motor vehicle in violation of this subsection causes the death of another person by operation of that motor vehicle, the person knowingly permitting the operation of that motor vehicle is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years, or a fine of not less than $1,000.00 or more than $5,000.00, or both. 
(8)  If the prosecuting attorney intends to seek an enhanced sentence under this section or a sanction under section 904d based upon the defendant having one or more prior convictions, or suspensions or revocations under this section, the prosecuting attorney shall include on the complaint and information, or an amended complaint and information, filed in district court, circuit court, municipal court, or family division of circuit court, a statement listing the defendant's prior convictions, suspensions, or revocations. 
(9)  A prior conviction, a suspension, or a revocation under this section shall he established at or before sentencing by one or more of the following: 
(a)  An abstract of conviction. 
(b)  A copy of the defendant's driving record. 
(c)  An admission by the defendant. 
(10)  Upon receiving a record of a person's conviction or civil infraction determination for the unlawful operation of a motor vehicle or a moving violation reportable under section 732 while the person's operator's or chauffeur's license is suspended or revoked, the secretary of state immediately shall impose an additional like period of suspension or revocation. This subsection applies only if the violation occurs during a suspension of definite length or if the violation occurs before the person is approved for a license following a revocation. 
(11)  Upon receiving a record of a person's conviction or civil infraction determination for the unlawful operation of a motor vehicle or a moving violation reportable under section 732 while the person's operator's or chauffeur's license is indefinitely suspended or whose application for a license has been denied, the secretary of state immediately shall impose a 30-day period of suspension or denial. 
(12)  Upon receiving a record of the conviction, bond forfeiture or a civil infraction determination of a person for unlawful operation of a motor vehicle requiring a vehicle group designation while the designation is suspended pursuant to section 319a or 319b, or revoked, the secretary of state immediately shall impose an additional like period of suspension or revocation. This subsection applies only if the violation occurs during a suspension of definite length, if the violation occurs before the person is approved for a license following a revocation, or if the person operates a commercial vehicle while disqualified under the commercial motor vehicle safety act of 1986, title XII of Public Law 99-570, 100 Stat. 3207-170. 
(13)  If the secretary of state receives records of more than one conviction or civil infraction determination resulting from the same incident, all of the convictions or civil infraction determination shall be treated as a single violation for purposes of imposing an additional period of suspension or revocation under subsection (10), (11), or (12). 
(14)  Before a person is arraigned before a district court magistrate or judge on a charge of violating this section, the arresting officer shall obtain the person's driving record from the secretary of state and shall furnish the record to the court. The driving record of the person may be obtained from the secretary of state's computer information network. 
(15)  This section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle solely for the purpose of protecting human life or property if the life or property is endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential. 
(16)  A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in section 212 of that suspension or revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group designation has been denied as provided in this act, or who has never applied for a vehicle group designation and who operates a commercial vehicle within this state, except as permitted under this act, while any of those conditions exist is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable, except as otherwise provided in this section, by imprisonment for not less than three days or more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(17)  If a person has a second or subsequent suspension or revocation under this section within seven years as indicated on the person's Michigan driving record, the court shall proceed as provided in section 904d. 
(18)  Any period of suspension or revocation required under subsection (10), (11), or (12) does not apply to a person who has only one current effective suspension or denial on his or her Michigan driving record under section 321a and was convicted of or received a civil infraction determination for a violation that occurred during that suspension or denial. This subsection may only be applied once during the person's lifetime. 
(19)  For purposes of this section, a person who never applied for a license includes a person who applied for a license, was denied, and never applied again. 
Sec. 5.62b 
    Any person, not exempt from license under this act, who shall operate a motor vehicle upon the highways of this state and who is unable to show that he or she has been issued a license to operate a motor vehicle by any state or foreign country valid within the 3 year[s] preceding is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, or both. Any person convicted of a second offense under this section shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than two nor more than 90 days, or by a fine of $100.00, or both. 
Sec. 5.62c 
(1)  When a person is convicted of an offense punishable under section 904(1) (b) or (c) or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 904(1)(b) or (c) for operating a motor vehicle while his or her license to operate a motor vehicle is suspended, revoked, or denied, the court shall order the motor vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part or leased by that person, impounded for not less than a period the court orders but not more than 120 days from the date of judgment. 
(2)  When a person is convicted of an offense punishable under section 904(1)(a) or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 904(1)(a) for operating a motor vehicle while his or her license to operate a motor vehicle is suspended, revoked, or denied, the court may order the motor vehicle if it is owned in whole or in part or leased by that person, impounded for not more than 120 days from the date of judgment. 
(3)  An order for the impounding of a motor vehicle issued pursuant to this section is valid throughout the state. Any peace officer may execute the impoundment order. The order shall include the implied consent of the owner of the vehicle to the storage for insurance coverage purposes. 
(4)  The owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section is liable for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle whether or not the vehicle is returned to him or her. The vehicle shall be returned to the owner only if the owner pays the expense for removal and storage. If redemption is not made or the vehicle is not returned as provided in this section within 30 days of the time set in the impoundment order for return of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and disposed of as provided in section 252a. 
(5)  This section does not affect the rights of a conditional vendor, chattel mortgagee, or lessor of a motor vehicle registered in the name of another person as owner who becomes subject to this act. 
Sec. 5.62d 
(1)  When a peace officer detains the driver of a motor vehicle for a violation of a law of this state or local ordinance for which vehicle immobilization is required, the peace officer shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Immediately confiscate the vehicle's registration plate and destroy it. 
(b)  Issue a temporary vehicle registration plate for the vehicle in the same form prescribed by the secretary of state for temporary registration plates issued under section 226a or 226b. 
(c)  Place the temporary vehicle registration plate on the vehicle in the manner required by the secretary of state. 
(d)  Notify the secretary of state through the law enforcement information network in a form prescribed by the secretary of state that the registration plate was confiscated and destroyed, and a temporary plate was issued. 
(2)  A temporary vehicle registration plate issued under this section is valid until the charges against the person are dismissed, the person pleads guilty or nolo contendere to those charges, or the person is found guilty of or is acquitted of those charges. 
Sec. 5.62e 
(1)  Vehicle immobilization applies as follows: 
(a)  For a conviction under section 625(1), (3), or (7) or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(1) or (3) with no prior convictions, the court may order vehicle immobilization for not more than 180 days. 
(b)  For a conviction under section 625(4) or (5) with no prior convictions, the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not more than 180 days. 
(c)  For a conviction under section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (7) with seven years after the prior conviction, the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not less than 90 days or more than 180 days. 
(d)  For a conviction under section 625(1), (3) (4), (5) or (7) within 10 years after two or more prior convictions, the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not less than one year or more than three years. 
(2)  For a conviction or civil infraction determination occurring during a period of suspension, revocation, or denial, the following apply: 
(a)  Except as provided in subdivision (b), for 1 prior suspension, revocation or denial under section 904(10), (11), or (12) within the past seven years, the court may order vehicle immobilization for not more than 180 days. 
(b)  Except as provided in subdivisions (c) and (d), if the person is convicted under section 904(4) or (5), the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not more than 180 days. 
(c)  For any combination of two or three prior suspensions, revocations, or denials under section 904(10), (11), or (12) with the past seven years, the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not less than 90 days or more than 180 days. 
(d)  For any combination of four or more prior suspensions, revocations, or denials under section 904(10), (11), or (12) within the past seven years, the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not less than one year or more than three years. 
(3)  The defendant shall provide to the court the vehicle identification number and registration plate number of the vehicle involved in the violation. 
(4)  The court may order vehicle immobilization under this section under either of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The defendant is the owner, co-owner, lessee, or co-lessee of the vehicle operated during the violation. 
(b)  The owner, co-owner, lessee, or co-lessee knowingly permitted the vehicle to be operated in violation of section 625 (2) or section 904(1) regardless of whether a conviction resulted. 
(5)  An order required to be issued under this section shall not be suspended. 
(6)  If a defendant is ordered imprisoned for the violation for which immobilization is ordered, the period of immobilization shall begin at the end of the period of imprisonment. 
(7)  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
(a)  A suspension, revocation, or denial based on a violation of the support and parenting time enforcement act, 1982 PA 295, MCL 552.601 to 552.650. 
(b)  A vehicle that is registered in another state or that is a rental vehicle. 
(c)  Any of the following: 
(i)  A violation of chapter II. 
(ii)  A violation of chapter V. 
(iii)  A violation for failure to change address. 
(iv)  A parking violation. 
(v)  A bad check violation. 
(vi)  An equipment violation. 
(vii)  A pedestrian, passenger, or bicycle violation, other than a violation of section 703(1) or (2) of the Michigan liquor control code of 1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1703, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 703(1) or (2) of the Michigan liquor control code of 1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1703, or section 624a or 624b or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 624a or 624b. 
(viii)  A violation of a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a violation described in subparagraphs (i) to (vii). 
(8)  As used in this section: 
(a)  Subject to subsection (9), "prior conviction" means a conviction for any of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state: 
(i)  Except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph, a violation or attempted violation of section 625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7), section 625m, former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b. However, only one violation or attempted violation of section 625(6), a local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625(6), or a law of another state substantially corresponding to section 625(6) may be used as a prior conviction. 
(ii)  Negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the operation of a vehicle or an attempt to commit any of those crimes. 
(b)  "Vehicle immobilization" means requiring the motor vehicle involved in the violation immobilized in a manner provided in section 904e. 
(9)  If two or more convictions described in subsection (8)(a) are convictions for violations arising out of the same incident, only one conviction shall be used to determine whether the person has a prior conviction. 
Sec. 5.62f 
(1)  A court shall order a vehicle immobilized under section 904d by the use of any available technology approved by the court that locks the ignition, wheels, or steering of the vehicle or otherwise prevents any person from operating the vehicle or that prevents the defendant from operating the vehicle. If a vehicle is immobilized under this section, the court may order the vehicle stores at a location and in a manner considered appropriate by the court. The court may order the person convicted of violating section 625 or a suspension, revocation, or denial under section 904 to pay the cost of immobilizing and storing the vehicle. 
(2)  A vehicle subject to immobilization under this section may be sold during the period of immobilization, but shall not be sold to a person who is exempt from paying a use tax under section 3(3)(a) of the use tax act, 1937 PA 94, MCL 205.93 without a court order. 
(3)  A defendant who is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle by vehicle immobilization shall not purchase, lease or otherwise obtain a motor vehicle during the immobilization period. 
(4)  A person shall not remove, tamper with, or bypass or attempt to remove, tamper with, or bypass a device that he or she knows or has reason to know has been installed on a vehicle by court order for vehicle immobilization or operate or attempt to operate a vehicle that he or she knows or has reason to know has been ordered immobilized. 
(5)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(6)  To the extent that a local ordinance regarding the storage or removal of vehicles conflicts with an order of immobilization issued by the court, the local ordinance is preempted. 
(7)  If a peace officer stops a vehicle that is being operated in violation of an immobilization order, the vehicle shall be impounded pending an order of the court of competent jurisdiction. 
(8)  The court shall require the defendant or a person who provides immobilization services to the court under this section to certify that a vehicle ordered immobilized by the court is immobilized as required. 
Sec. 5.62g 
    The vehicle registration records of the secretary of state shall disclose which vehicles are assigned a temporary registration plate under section 904c or are immobilized under this act. 
Sec. 5.82. Mandatory child restraints. 
(1)  Except as provided in this section, or as otherwise provided by law, a rule promulgated pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), as amended, or federal regulation, each driver transporting a child in a motor vehicle shall properly secure each child in a child restraint system as follows: 
(a)  Any child less than one year of age in a child restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, except as provided in subsection (6). 
(b)  Any child one year of age or more but less than four years of age, when transported in the front seat, in a child restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, except as provided in subsection (6). 
(c)  Any child one year of age or more but less than four years of age, when transported in the rear seat, in a child restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, unless the child is secured by a safety belt provided in the motor vehicle, except as provided in subsection (6). 
(2)  This section does not apply to any child being nursed. 
(3)  This section does not apply if the motor vehicle being driven is a bus, school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law or regulations. 
(4)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(5)  Points shall not be assessed under section 320a of the act (MCL 257.320a), as amended, for a violation of this section. An abstract required under section 732 of the act (MCL 257.732), as amended, shall not be submitted to the secretary of state regarding a violation of this section. 
(6)  The secretary of state may exempt by rules promulgated pursuant to Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.), as amended, a class of children from the requirements of this section, if the secretary of state determines that the use of the child restraint system required under subsection (1) is impractical because of physical unfitness, a medical problem, or body size. The secretary of state may specify alternate means of protection for children exempted under this subsection. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.710d. 
Sec. 5.83. Safety belt required; enforcement. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to a driver or passenger of: 
(a)  A motor vehicle manufactured before January 1, 1965. 
(b)  A bus. 
(c)  A motorcycle. 
(d)  A moped. 
(e)  A motor vehicle if the driver or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician that the driver or passenger is unable to wear a safety belt for physical or medical reasons. 
(f)  A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law. 
(g)  A commercial or United States postal service vehicle which makes frequent stops for the purpose of pickup or delivery of goods or services. 
(h)  A motor vehicle operated by a rural carrier of the United States postal service while serving his rural postal route. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to a passenger of a school bus. 
(3)  Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a street or highway within the village shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt, except that a child less than four years of age shall be protected as required in section 5.82. 
(4)  Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more but less than 16 years of age in a motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. If the motor vehicle is transporting more children than there are safety belts available for use, all safety belts available in the motor vehicle are being utilized in compliance with this section, and the driver and all front seat passengers comply with subsection (3) of this section, then the driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more but less than 16 years of age for which there is not an available seat belt is in compliance with this subsection if that child is seated in other than the front seat of the motor vehicle. However, if that motor vehicle is a pickup truck without an extended cab or jump seats, and all safety belts in the front seat are being used, the driver may transport such a child in the front seat without a safety belt. 
(5)  Enforcement of this section by state or local law enforcement agencies shall be accomplished only as a secondary action when a driver of a motor vehicle has been detained for a suspected violation of another section of this act. 
(6)  Failure to wear a safety belt in violation of this section may be considered evidence of negligence and may reduce the recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance or operation of a motor vehicle. However, such negligence shall not reduce the recovery for damages by more than five percent. 
(7)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of not more than $25.00. 
(8)  Points shall not be assessed under section 320a of the act (MCL 257.320a), as amended, for a violation of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.710c. 
Sec. 5.97. School bus; signs; overtaking, meeting and passing; mirror; evidence of violation; violation as civil infraction. 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting a school bus which has stopped and is displaying two alternately flashing red lights located at the same level shall bring the vehicle to a full stop not less than 20 feet from the school bus and shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the visual signals are no longer actuated. At an intersection where traffic is controlled by an officer or a traffic stop-and-go signal, a vehicle need not be brought to a full stop before passing a stopped school bus, but may proceed past the school bus at a speed not greater than is reasonable and proper but not greater than ten miles an hour and with due caution for the safety of passengers being received or discharged from the school bus. The driver of a vehicle who fails to stop for a school bus, as required by this subsection, who passes a school bus in violation of this subsection, is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway which has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing sections, so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, need not stop upon meeting a school bus which has stopped across the dividing space, barrier or section. 
(3)  In a proceeding for a violation of subsection (1), proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was in violation of subsection (1), together with proof that the defendant named in the citation was, at the time of the violation, the registered owner of the vehicle shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(4)  In addition to the civil fine and costs provided for a civil infraction under section 907, the judge, district court referee or district court magistrate may order a person who violates this section to perform not to exceed 100 hours of community service at a school. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.682. 
Sec. 10.39. Operation of snowmobiles on roadway prohibited; exceptions. 
(1)  A person shall not operate a snowmobile on any roadway within the corporate limits of this governmental unit, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to permit the operation of a snowmobile on a roadway when, because of snow or other extreme roadway conditions, conventional motor vehicles cannot be used for necessary transportation. 
(b)  A snowmobile may be operated upon designated snowmobile trails within the city limits if so designated and signed as snowmobile trails by the city council. Any designated snowmobile trail may be modified, eliminated, or changed. Such snowmobile trails, if any, shall be established at the discretion of the city council. There shall be no use of snowmobiles other than upon designated and appropriately signed snowmobile trails. 
(c)  A snowmobile may be operated on a roadway within the limits of the city only if and when a designated snowmobile trail traverses a roadway within the city. The snowmobile shall be brought to a complete stop before entering onto the roadway, and the operator shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle approaching on the roadway. 
(d)  Operation of snowmobiles within the city limits shall conform to the following requirements: 
(i)  Must travel in single file only; 
(ii)  Must be operated at a rate of speed not greater than the speed limit that is posted on the designated trails, and that is reasonable and proper having due regard for conditions then and there existing; 
(iii)  Shall be in compliance with all other provisions and regulations set forth in the Uniform Traffic Code, as amended, and incorporated by reference by the city for the purpose of proscribing regulations governing traffic and traffic related conditions within the city. 
(2)  A person shall not transport a bow or firearm on a snowmobile, unless the bow is unstrung or the firearm is securely encased or equipped with, and made inoperative by, a manufactured, key-locked, trigger-housing mechanism. 
(Ord. of 11-23-92, § 10-39; Ord. of 11-22-99; Ord. of 11-22-99) 
Secs. 62-31-62-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-56-62-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 62-71. - Establishment; administration and enforcement. 
    There is hereby created for the city a traffic violations bureau, which bureau shall be administered and enforced by and within the city police department. The chief of police shall be in charge of the traffic violations bureau and shall enforce, as provided in this article, all of the traffic parking regulations prescribed by the Uniform Traffic Code of the city, namely, the office of the traffic engineer and all rules and regulations established pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 4-201) 
Sec. 62-72. - Violations; procedures. 
(a)  The traffic violations bureau is hereby authorized to grant to any person charged with a violation of any traffic parking regulation, the option of either paying to the bureau the fines and penalties provided for in this article for such violation, or of answering to a complaint before the district court of the city. It shall not be mandatory, however, for the bureau to grant to such violator the optional choice provided in this subsection. 
(b)  If a violator neglects or refuses to pay the fine provided in this section at the bureau, then it shall be the duty of the person in charge of such bureau, or some other officer having knowledge of the facts, to forthwith make a complaint before the district court, and to bring the violator before the court to answer unto the complaint. 
(Code 1982, § 4-202) 
Sec. 62-73. - Scheduled offenses and fines; accountability. 
(a)  There shall be established by the chief of police, in conjunction with the office of traffic engineer, subject to the approval of the city council, a schedule of offenses and fines, which shall be binding on the traffic violations bureau in all cases which may be settled before it, and no other fines than those contained in such schedule shall be charged. However, any such schedule of fines shall not be binding upon any court having jurisdiction under this division or the Uniform Traffic Code, in cases where the violator elects, or is required to answer to a complaint before such court. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the traffic violations bureau to keep a full and complete and accurate account of all violations settled before it, and of all monies received by it, and it shall deposit all such monies with the city treasurer each month. 
(Code 1982, § 4-203) 
Sec. 62-74. - Duties of police officer generally; in relation to unlawful parking. 
(a)  If any police officer of the city shall witness a violation of any of the provisions of this article or the Uniform Traffic Code, or of any rule and/or regulation made pursuant thereto, it shall be his duty to either arrest the violator forthwith, and bring him before the bureau or the district court, if timely and appropriate, or if that course is impractical, to give to such violator a written notice, directing him to appear before the bureau or district court within 48 hours, or as may be otherwise prescribed, after receipt of such notice. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked on any public street or alley in the city, or parked on any private property, in violation of the provisions of section 62-74 or the Uniform Traffic Code, then a notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be affixed, by the officer witnessing the violation, to some part of the vehicle, in such manner as to give to the owner or operator of such vehicle the same notice as would be given were the notice served upon him personally. The notice provided in this section shall further state the nature of the violation and when and where it occurred. It shall state that unless the offender appears before the bureau within the designated period, a complaint will be made before the district court of the city. If such person so summoned fails or refuses to appear before the bureau within such designated period, then it shall become the duty of the person in charge of the bureau to cause such complaint to be made. 
(Code 1982, § 4-204) 
Sec. 62-75. - Finality of disposition. 
    Any cases which may come within the jurisdiction of the traffic violations bureau, as provided in this division, and which may be settled therein, shall be deemed settled in full, and such settlement shall be res adjudicata, and no further proceedings shall be taken under any traffic regulations for the same violation. 
(Code 1982, § 4-205) 
Secs. 62-76-62-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISABLED VEHICLES 

Sec. 62-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disabled motor vehicles means motor vehicles which are incapable of being self-propelled upon the public streets, or which do not meet the requirement for operation upon the public streets, including a current license. 
    Dwelling means any house, building, structure, tent, shelter, trailer, or vehicle or portion thereof which is occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence, living or sleeping place, or which is intended to be occupied by one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. 
    Motor vehicles means any wheeled vehicles which are self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-301) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-92. - Applicability of division. 
    Storage, repair, and servicing of disabled motor vehicles not authorized in this division and the tearing down, stripping or junking of motor vehicles shall be permitted, only where and when such use is specifically authorized, permitted or licensed under other ordinances of the city, and in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-304) 
Sec. 62-93. - Construction and interpretation of division. 
    This division shall not be construed as repealing any other ordained regulations now in effect or hereafter made effective relating to rubbish, litter, garbage, refuse, trash or junk, but shall be construed as supplementary to such regulations as well as any state statutes relating thereto. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-307) 
Sec. 62-94. - Enforcement of article. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate, administer, and enforce this division. If, after investigation, the chief of police, or his authorized representative, determines that a person is in violation of this division, he is authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or municipal civil infraction citation to the alleged violator. Service of such civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with chapter 38. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-308) 
Sec. 62-95. - Penalty for violation of division; municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  A violation of this division shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of $50.00, plus costs, for the first violation. 
(b)  Any repeat offense shall be subject to the increased fines, as follows: 
(1)  First repeat offense shall be no less than $150.00, plus costs. 
(2)  The fine for any second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs. (Repeat offenses shall be determined as defined in chapter 38.) 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-309) 
Sec. 62-96. - Prohibited acts-Generally. 
    No person shall permit any disabled motor vehicle to be parked, stored, placed or allowed to remain within the city in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-302) 
Sec. 62-97. - Same-Streets and yards. 
(a)  Streets. Disabled motor vehicles shall not be permitted in the rights-of-way of the streets, alleys, or highways within the city; provided, however, that this shall not apply to towing or similar transporting of such vehicles; and provided further that reasonable time (not to exceed 12 hours from the time of disability) shall be permitted for the removal or servicing of a disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by accident or sudden breakdown of the vehicle. 
(b)  Front yard of residential property. Disabled motor vehicles or any parts of a motor vehicle shall not be permitted in the front yard of a parcel of land, upon which there is a structure used in whole or in part as a dwelling, unless said disabled motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle shall be kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. 
(c)  Side or rear yards; singular exception and limitation. One disabled motor vehicle may be permitted in a side or rear yard of a residential, commercial or industrial lot as an accessory use to the main use of the lot. Service and repair work may be performed on such vehicle and incidental thereto parts, tools, and equipment may be stored and used. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as authorizing the disassembling, teardown, or scrapping of a motor vehicle, or to permit one motor vehicle to be scavenged or stripped for parts for use on another motor vehicle; provided, however, that a disabled vehicle shall not be permitted to remain outside of a building for a period in excess of ten days on any lot used for residential purposes or on that portion of any lot within three feet of an abutting lot used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-303) 
Sec. 62-98. - Noise. 
    Service and repair of a disabled motor vehicle which is conducted entirely within the confines of an accessory garage shall be permitted; provided, however, that the tearing down, stripping, or junking of a motor vehicle between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall not be permitted when loud or unusual noise annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of the public. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-305) 
Sec. 62-99. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled or disabled motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle on any platted or unplatted parcel of land in violation of the terms of this division is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(4), § 4-306) 
Secs. 62-100-62-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 62-116-62-130. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Prohibited Parking 

Sec. 62-131. - Enumeration of prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall park or cause to be parked any motorized vehicle in any manner requiring such vehicle to be driven over an established curb for purposes of ingress or egress. 
(b)  No person shall park or cause to be parked any motorized vehicle in unpaved public right-of-way adjacent to the paved portion of an existing public road. 
(c)  This section shall not be applicable to established driveways servicing a garage or in any other area previously paved and utilized for parking of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 5-501) 
Sec. 62-132. - Months in effect. 
    Subdivision II shall be in effect during the months of April, May, June, July, August, September and October of each year. During the remaining months, the terms of subdivision II shall be suspended so as to permit compliance with subdivision III of this division pertaining to winter parking of such vehicles. Provided, however, that no parking shall be permitted on the south side of Fifth Street from the Vulcan Street intersection to the Broadway Street intersection within the city's rights-of-ways. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 5-502; Ord. of 3-6-17(2); Ord. of 11-20-17) 
Sec. 62-133. - Enforcement of subdivision. 
    It will be the duty of the police department to administer and enforce this subdivision. The police department may at its sole discretion issue a preliminary warning to any person found to be in violation of this subdivision. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 5-503) 
Sec. 62-134. - Penalty for violation of subdivision. 
    Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of any provision of this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 5-504) 
Secs. 62-135-62-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Winter Parking 

Sec. 62-151. - Prohibited parking; hours and months; nuisance. 
    The parking of automobiles, trucks or other vehicles on the streets, alleys and city-owned parking lots of the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the months of January, February, March, November and December of each year constitutes a hindrance and a nuisance to the proper and necessary removal of snow from the streets and alleys. 
(Code 1982, § 4-403(A); Ord. of 3-6-17(2)) 
Sec. 62-152. - Specific prohibited parking and exceptions. 
    No person shall park any automobile, truck or other vehicle on the streets, alleys or city-owned parking lots (with the exception of the parking lots on Iron Mountain Street between Hughitt and Ludington Streets) in the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the months of January, February, March, November and December of each year. The only exception shall be the motor vehicles of physicians on emergency calls. 
(Code 1982, § 4-403(B); Ord. of 3-6-17(2)) 
Sec. 62-153. - Violation; city remedies and procedures; notice. 
    Any automobile, truck or other vehicle which is found parked or abandoned in violation of subdivision III of this division may be impounded and towed away under the direction of any police officer of the city or of any employee who is engaged in removing snow or ice from the streets and alleys in the city. Such police officers or city employees so engaged in removing snow or ice from the streets, alleys or city-owned parking lots, may utilize a commercial towing service to actually tow away any such parked or abandoned vehicle. Any such police officer or employee shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the vehicle stating to the owner the date and time such vehicle was found parked or abandoned and informing the owner as to the present whereabouts of the vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 4-403(C); Ord. of 11-4-02(1)) 
Sec. 62-154. - Penalty for violation of subdivision. 
    Any person who shall violate the terms of section 62-151 shall be subject to a fine of $25.00. The amount of the fine may be amended from time to time by the Iron Mountain City Council as it sees fit. The owner of any such vehicle parked or abandoned in violation of this subdivision shall, in addition to paying the fine provided in this section, pay all necessary costs of impounding or storing such vehicle, and the costs shall constitute a lien against the vehicle until paid. 
(Code 1982, § 4-403(D); Ord of 11-4-02(2)) 
Sec. 62-155. - General penalty; exception. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this subdivision, except any section which has a different penalty provision, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00, together with costs, and may further be subject to imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than ten days. 
(Code 1982, § 4-404(A)) 
Secs. 62-156-62-160. - Reserved. 
SUBDIVISION IV. - PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, TRAILERS, EQUIPMENT AND OTHER ITEMS 

Sec. 62-161. - Parking and storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, equipment and other items. 
(a)  Any person may park or store recreational equipment and/or recreational vehicles as defined herein in any one-family residential district, multifamily residential district as defined in the city zoning ordinance, chapter 74, subject to the conditions contained in this section. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles and equipment defined. 
(1)  When used in this section, "recreational equipment" shall include: 
a.  Boats and boat trailers which shall include boats, watercraft, floats and rafts, plus the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway; 
b.  Folding tent trailer of canvas or solid sides which is a folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation; 
c.  Pickup camper which is a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use; 
d.  Travel trailer which is a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer; 
e.  Utility trailer which is an enclosed or open vehicle used to transport motorcycles, snowmobiles, go-carts, stock cars, materials, etc. 
(2)  When used in this section, "recreational vehicle" shall mean: 
a.  A motorized home which is a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; 
b.  An off-road vehicle that is not licensed for general operation on the public highways. 
(c)  Prohibited uses in all residential districts. 
(1)  Recreational equipment parked or stored shall not have fixed connections to electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities, and at no time shall this equipment be used for living or housekeeping purposes. 
(2)  Recreational equipment shall not be parked on municipal streets or alleyways for a period of longer than 48 hours. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles shall not be parked on municipal streets or alleyways for a period of longer than 48 hours. 
(4)  Recreational equipment and/or recreational vehicles shall not be parked on a private lot within three feet setback for side or rear yard storage. Side and rear yard are defined in the city zoning ordinance. Utility and equipment trailers may be parked for longer periods when used in conjunction with a valid building permit issued for that premises. 
(5)  Any front yard or driveway storage must not: 
a.  Interfere with clear vision at intersections of streets and driveways; and 
b.  Be closer than three feet to the side or front property lines. 
(6)  No person shall park or store any recreational vehicle in a residentially zoned property that is not carrying a current year license and/or registration. 
(d)  Additional prohibited uses in all residential districts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the following vehicles or items to be parked or stored in an open area in any residential district: 
a.  Commercial highway tractors except when making a delivery or moving furniture or furnishing to or from the residence; 
b.  Highway trucking trailers except when making a delivery or moving furniture or furnishing to or from the residence; 
c.  Junk motor vehicles; 
d.  Farm implements, whether or not motorized; 
e.  Power driven construction equipment whether or not operable; 
f.  Used or new lumber or building supplies except those necessary to complete construction pursuant to an extent building permit applicable to the property where such storage occurs; 
g.  Scrap metal in any quantity; 
h.  Salvageable or recyclable material of any sort in a quantity larger than one cubic yard. 
(e)  Additional prohibited uses in all districts. 
(1)  No trailer or recreational equipment may be parked in any municipal parking lot unattended, or unattached to a principle vehicle. 
(2)  No trailer or recreational equipment may be parked in any municipal parking lot for more than 72 hours. 
(3)  No recreational vehicle may be parked in any municipal parking lot for more than 72 hours. 
(4)  No trailer, recreational equipment, or recreational vehicle may be parked outside of the parallel lines of a parking stall. 
(5)  All trailers, recreational equipment, and recreational vehicles shall follow the parking restrictions for vehicles defined in the City of Iron Mountain Ordinance subdivision III, winter parking sections 62-151 through 62-155. 
(f)  Procedures and considerations for special conditions. 
(1)  Special condition appeals shall be reviewed by the administration committee consisting of the: City manager, zoning administrator, and an appointed member of the planning commission. This committee shall have the authority to adjust requirements of this subdivision in the areas of: 
a.  The 48-hour limit on parking recreational vehicles on municipal streets: 
i.  When the committee finds special circumstances exist, a permit may be issued to extend the limit up to one week. 
b.  Setback limits in yard storage: 
i.  When a property owner demonstrates that consent has been given by the affected adjacent property owner, the committee may authorize a lesser setback limit. 
(g)  Penalty for violation. 
(1)  Any person who shall park or store or cause to be parked or stored anything that would violate the provisions of this section, or any person who shall own or occupy land upon which anything is parked or stored in violation of the provision of this section shall be guilty of a civil infraction in accordance with the provisions of city ordinance chapter 38, municipal civil infractions. 
(Ord. of 3-17-14) 
Secs. 62-162-62-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPRESSION BRAKES 

Sec. 62-171. - Purpose. 
    The city council of the City of Iron Mountain finds that the use of motor vehicles brakes which are activated or operated by the compression of the engine of a motor vehicle disturbs and disrupts the public peace and quiet and, therefore, finds that it would be in the best interest of the public health, safety and general welfare to prohibit the use of such brakes except in emergency situations. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Sec. 62-172. - Compression brakes prohibited. 
    No person shall use motor vehicle brakes within the city limits of the city which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any unity or part thereof. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that said compression brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection of persons and/or property. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Sec. 62-173. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall have committed a civil infraction. Penalty shall be $25.00 for first offense, $50.00 for a first repeat offense and $100.00 for any subsequent repeat offenses. 
(Ord. of 3-18-96) 
Secs. 62-174-62-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF OFF ROAD VEHICLES 

Sec. 62-181. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the ORVs Ordinance of the City of Iron Mountain. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § I) 
Sec. 62-182. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the operation of ORVs within the limits of the City of Iron Mountain; to provide for penalties for violation thereof, and except as otherwise provided herein, to incorporate and adopt the laws of the State of Michigan governing the use of ORVs, being Part 811 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994. 
    At the end of this article and marked Appendix A is a map of the City of Iron Mountain identifying the designated areas for the use of ORVs. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § II) 
Sec. 62-183. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words shall be defined as follows: 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Operate means to ride in or on and to control the operation of an ORV. 
    Operator means any person who operates or is in physical control of an ORV. 
    ORV means a motor driven off-road recreational vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It includes, but is not limited to, a multi-rubber tract or multi-wheel drive or low pressure tire vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushioned vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motor power from a source other than muscle or wind. ORV or vehicle does not include any vehicle originally manufactured for the purpose of road use, a snowmobile, unregistered motorcycle, a farm vehicle being used for farming, vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes, a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common functions, or a registered aircraft. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Right-of-way means that portion of a street or highway less the roadway and any shoulders. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § III) 
Sec. 62-184. - Operations. 
(a)  ORVs shall not be operated unless the operator and each passenger is wearing a crash helmet and protective eye wear approved by the United States Department of Transportation, unless the vehicle is equipped with a roof that meets or exceeds the standards for a crash helmet and the operator and each passenger is wearing a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt. 
(b)  No ORV shall be operated: 
(1)  Except in single file; 
(2)  in a careless or reckless manner, or operated in any way which endangers any person or any property; 
(3)  At a rate of speed greater than 25 mph; 
(4)  By anyone under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any controlled substance, or by anyone whose ability to operate said ORV may be impaired; 
(5)  By anyone transporting thereon a firearm, unless the same is securely encased; 
(6)  Except from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; 
(7)  On the unpaved portion of any roadway or public right-of-way unless that roadway is unpaved by design; 
(8)  Any person who violates any ordinance or state law relating to the operation of a motor vehicle within the City of Iron Mountain may be charged with violation of a city ordinance or state law; 
(9)  While towing of sleds, toboggans or other such device occupied by people. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § IV) 
Sec. 62-185. - Street crossings. 
    All ORVs shall come to a complete stop before proceeding, at right angles, across any public sidewalk, street or intersection. All ORVs shall yield the right-of-way to motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic. US-2, Carpenter Ave, M-95, and "H" Street may not be driven on and may only be crossed at the allowed intersections. US-2 may be crossed at Lake Antoine Road, Main Street, "A" Street, "B" Street, "F" Street and Michigan Ave. Carpenter Ave/M-95 may be crossed at "A" Street, "B" Street and "F" Street. "H" Street from US-2 to Carpenter Ave/M-95 may only be crossed at Cedar Ave and South Milwaukee Ave. See Appendix A at the end of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § V) 
Sec. 62-186. - Operations within city limits. 
(a)  An ORV may be operated upon the designated streets of the City of Iron Mountain as indicated on the Map of the City of Iron Mountain attached hereto and made a part hereof as Appendix A. 
(b)  No ORV shall be operated in any alley except to access and return from designated streets or for purposes of storage of the vehicle. 
(c)  There shall be no operations of ORVs on US-2, Carpenter Ave/M-95 or "H" Street from US-2 to Carpenter Ave/M-95 within the City of Iron Mountain. 
(d)  There shall be no operation of ORVs inside the boundaries of any city park. 
(e)  No ORV shall park on any street or highway within the city limits. They must be parked on private property off of the roadway with property owner's permission. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § VI) 
Sec. 62-187. - Lighted headlamp and tail light required. 
    ORVs shall not be operated unless they are displaying a lighted headlamp and lighted tail light at all hours. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § VII) 
Sec. 62-188. - Age restrictions. 
    A person under 18 years of age shall not operate an ORV pursuant to this section unless that person is under the direct supervision of a parent or guardian and the person is at least 16 years of age and has a valid driver's license in their possession. The requirements of this subsection are in addition to any applicable requirements of state law. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § VIII) 
Sec. 62-189. - Duty to stop. 
    Upon request or signal of a police officer, an ORV operator shall immediately stop his or her ORV in a safe place and outside the flow of traffic. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § IX) 
Sec. 62-190. - Stock mufflers, lights, helmet. 
    All ORVs must be equipped with stock mufflers in good operating condition, except for special events authorized by special proclamation of the city council. All ORVs shall be operated within the city with headlights on and working, and all operators and passengers shall wear helmets during operation. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § X) 
Sec. 62-191. - Responsibility. 
    The operator of an ORV involved in any accident resulting in any property damage, personal injury or death shall report such accident to the local police immediately. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § XI) 
Sec. 62-192. - Parental responsibility. 
    Any parent or guardian who knowingly permits or allows any minor to operate an ORV in violation of any provisions of this article shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § XII) 
Sec. 62-193. - Impoundment of ORVs. 
    A law enforcement officer may impound any ORV used or operated in violation of any provisions of this article for a period not to exceed 30 days, and the owner or operator of the ORV shall be responsible to pay for all costs involved in the storage and/or removal of the impounded ORV. If the operator of the impounded ORV is not the owner, the law enforcement officer shall notify the owner of such impoundment by telephone, letter or personal contact as soon as practical. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § XII) 
Sec. 62-194. - Penalty-Civil infraction/misdemeanor. 
    A person responsible for activity that violates this article shall be responsible of a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor, or as provided below: 
(1)  A person found responsible for a violation involving an ORV shall be guilty of a civil infraction as defined by MCLA 600.113, punishable by civil fine according to the following schedule: 
a.  First offense within one year, $50.00 plus court costs; or 
b.  Second offense within one year, $100.00 plus court costs. 
(2)  Any person who commits three or more ORV-related violations within one year shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.00, and/or imprisoned for not more than 93 days; plus, court costs. The ORV shall be impounded for 30 days. The offender will pay a $10.00 daily fee for the first 30 days; thereafter, a $25.00 daily impoundment fee shall be paid. Payment of all impoundment fees shall be made to the City of Iron Mountain for release of the ORV. Failure to do so will result in a continued impoundment fee of $25.00 daily until all fees are paid in full. If after 90 days the fees are not paid the city may consider the vehicle abandoned. 
(3)  For purposes of computing the one-year period, time shall run from the date the first ticket was issued. 
(Ord. of 12-5-16(1), § XIV) 
APPENDIX A 

Chapter 66 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 66-26-66-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WELLS 

Sec. 66-36. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to prohibit private wells within a certain area of the City of Iron Mountain so as to implement a corrective action plan for closure of a former City of Iron Mountain underground storage tank site in an area of the City of Iron Mountain described hereafter for which area it has been determined that, as of the date of this division, no private wells are presently in existence and if any had existed, said wells have been properly abandoned. 
(Ord. of 3-17-97) 
Sec. 66-37. - No private wells. 
(a)  No private wells may be drilled, dug, developed or otherwise created or improved within that geographic area of the City of Iron Mountain consisting of a parcel of land bounded on the south by East "A" Street, on the west by Carpenter Avenue, on the north by Wells Street, extended to the imaginary northerly extension of Madison Street, and on the east by Madison Street, in the City of Iron Mountain, County of Dickinson, more particularly described as: Part of Sections 25 and 36, Township 40 North, Range 31 West, and Sections 30 and 31, Township 40 North, Range 30 West, described as follows: Commencing at the section corner common to Sections 25 and 36, T40N, R31W, and Sections 30 and 31, T40N, R30W; thence west along the north line of Section 36, T40N, R31W, 330 feet; thence north parallel to west line, Section 36, 125 feet; thence easterly and parallel to the north section line of Section 36, T40N, R31W, 1156 feet; thence south parallel to the west line of Section 36, T40N, R31W, 1565 feet; thence westerly parallel to the north line of Section 36, T40N, R31W, 1156 feet; thence northerly parallel to the west line of Section 36 to the Point of Beginning. 
(b)  The prohibition for the area described in subsection (a) of this section is absolute and is specifically enacted so as to implement a corrective action plan for closure of a former City of Iron Mountain underground storage tank site in agreement with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(c)  In the area described in subsection (a) of this section, all water utilized shall be through the City of Iron Mountain municipal water system only. 
(d)  Provided, however, that in any locations of the city, other than specified in subsection (a) above, no private wells may be drilled, dug, or developed, or otherwise created or improved unless specifically approved by the majority of the city council. The applicant must demonstrate hardship or unique circumstances before any application is approved. 
(e)  If any applicant is approved by the city council, the applicant must still conform to any and all regulations established by any state, federal or local agency with jurisdiction over this type of activity. 
(Ord. of 3-17-97; Ord. of 11-7-11) 
Sec. 66-38. - Division modification. 
    No modification whatsoever shall be made as to the terms and conditions of this division, nor should the terms and conditions thereof lapse or be revoked without prior notice being given to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 30 days in advance of any such contemplated action. 
(Ord. of 3-17-97) 
Sec. 66-39. - Recordation. 
    It is provided that a true and correct copy of this division be filed with the Dickinson County Register of Deeds as an ordinance affecting multiple properties. 
(Ord. of 3-17-97) 
Sec. 66-40. - Penalty for violation of this division. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit, but not to exceed 60 days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. Should said person continue any violation beyond the time limit provided, said person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court for each violation. Each day in which such violation shall continue, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-17-97) 
Secs. 66-41-66-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other places of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance amendable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and, in fact, does remove such pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Debt service charge means charges levied to customers of the wastewater system and which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. The debt service charge shall be in addition to the user charge. 
    Federal grant means a grant in aid in construction of wastewater treatment works provided under PL 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Incompatible pollutants means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial cost recovery means recovery by the local agency from industrial users of the treatment works, or that portion of the federal grant amount allowable to the construction of facilities for the treatment of wastes from such users, pursuant to 40 CFR 35.928. 
    Industrial waste means the wastewater discharges from industrial, manufacturing trade or business processes, as distinct from their employees' domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Local agency means the city or its designated official of the department. 
    Major contributing industry means any industrial users of the publicly owned treatment works that: 
(1)  Have a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday; 
(2)  Have a flow greater than five percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; 
(3)  Have in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in the standards issued under section 307(a) of the Act; or 
(4)  Is found by the permit issuance authority in connection with the issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality or effluent from that treatment works. 
All major contributing industries shall be monitored. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System prescribed in U.S. Public Law 92-500. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, or group or corporation. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    PL 92-500 means the federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 being Public Law 92-500 of the 92nd Congress and adopted on October 18, 1972. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by the local agency. 
    Replacement means the replacement in whole or in part of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer service charge means the sum applicable of the user charge, surcharges, industrial cost recovery and debt service charges. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Surcharge means as a part of the service charge, any customer discharging wastewater having strength in excess of 250 mg/l BOD and 300 mg/l SS shall be required to pay an additional charge to cover the cost of treating such excess strength wastewater. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    The Clean Water Act means the federal Pollution Control Act of 1972 (Public Law 92-500), as amended, by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (PL 92-217). 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of sewage works pursuant to section 204b of PL 92-500, and includes the cost of replacement. 
    User class means the kind of user connected to sanitary sewers including, but not limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental. 
    Residential user means a user of the treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, or permanent multifamily dwellings. Transit lodging is not included, it is considered commercial. 
    Industrial user means any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works which discharges more than 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste or a volume of process waste, or combined process and sanitary waste equivalent to 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste. Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals create a public nuisance or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. 
    Commercial user means an establishment listed in the Office of the Management and Budget's Standard Industrial Classification Manual (1972 edition) involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the local agency, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary convenience and which is not a residential user or an industrial user. 
    Institutional user means any establishment listed in the "SICM" involved in a social, charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a determination by the local agency, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Governmental user means any federal, state or local government user of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1982, § 3-201) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-52. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this division except section 66-57, shall be served by the local agency with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit (not exceeding 60 days) for the satisfactory correction of the violation. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, for each violation. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the local agency for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1982, § 3-208) 
Sec. 66-53. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the local agency, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(c)  Except as provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  Mandatory connection requirements. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the local agency and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer is hereby required at his expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 3-202) 
Sec. 66-54. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 66-53(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system, complying with county health department regulations. 
(b)  At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 66-53(d), direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned for sanitary use, filled with suitable material and sealed. 
(c)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the local agency. 
(Code 1982, § 3-203) 
Sec. 66-55. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or openings into, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the local agency. No building sewer shall be covered until after it has been inspected and approved by the authorized official. 
(b)  Costs and expenses borne by owner. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer connection shall be borne by the owner. 
(c)  Each building requires sewer. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. 
(d)  Old sewer use. Old building sewers may be used in connection with the new buildings only when they are found on examination and test to meet all requirements of this division. 
(e)  Specifications. A newly constructed building sewer shall be schedule 40 PVC, cast iron, vitrified clay sewer pipe or asbestos cement pipe. Joints shall be tight and waterproof; materials and joints shall be as approved by the local agency. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that the nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle. Transitions or connections will be constructed only with fabricated connection fittings approved by the local agency. 
(f)  Size and slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the local agency, but in no event shall the diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. 
(g)  Grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in a straight line. 
(h)  Lifting. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by a pumping system approved by the local agency and discharged to the building sewer. 
(i)  Required capacity for treatment determined before connection. No sewer connection will be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of BOD and suspended solids. 
(Code 1982, § 3-204) 
Sec. 66-56. - Prohibited discharges; exceptions. 
(a)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains, or roof water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection except as otherwise provided in this division. Downspouts and roof leaders shall be disconnected from sanitary sewers within one year of the date of this division. 
(b)  Exceptions. Stormwater, groundwater, water from footing drains and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet, except as otherwise provided in this division. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon application and approval of the local agency and the appropriate state agency to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(c)  Discharing to public sewer. Except as provided in this section, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer. 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (66 degrees Celsius) or lower than 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive, liquid, solid, or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having corrosive properties capable of causing drainage hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters with pH lower than 6.5 or greater than 9.5. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the treatment plant. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(10)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(11)  No industrial waste will be permitted into the sanitary sewers that may cause a deviation from the NPDES permit requirements, pretreatment standards and all other state and federal regulations. 
(d)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when liquid wastes contain grease in excessive amounts, amounts greater than what would be anticipated for normal residential use, or other harmful ingredients, and are always required for any commercial or business establishment wherein food is prepared for public sale and/or consumption; except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the local agency and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted into place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(e)  Maintenance of interceptors. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(f)  Pretreatment facilities. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes containing more than 250 mg/l of BOD or 300 mg/l of suspended solids, containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in subsection (c) of this section, or having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily flow of the local agency, shall be subject to review and approval of the local agency. Preliminary treatment shall be provided at no expense to the local agency as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to 250 mg/l and suspended solids to 300 mg/l, or to reduce objectionable characteristics for constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (d) of this section, or control the quantity and rates of discharges of such waters or wastes. A person may be required to remove, exclude or require pretreatment of any industrial waste, in whole or in part, for any reasons deemed to be in the interest of the local agency. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval, and no construction of any facility shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. The local agency may elect to treat industrial wastes, discharged in excess of normal domestic concentrations, on a basis prescribed by written agreement and for an established surcharge to cover the added cost. 
(g)  Control manhole; location; construction; maintenance. The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the local agency. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(h)  Measurements, tests and analyses. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which references are made shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater" and "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants," federal regulation 40 CFR 136, published in the Federal Register on October 16, 1973, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in subsection (g) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(i)  Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the local agency and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided such agreement shall not violate NPDES requirements, and provided user charges, surcharges and industrial cost recovery payments, as provided in this division, are agreed to in the agreement. 
(Code 1982, § 3-205; Ord. of 7-17-95) 
Sec. 66-57. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1982, § 3-206) 
Sec. 66-58. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
    Duly authorized employees or representatives of the local agency bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 3-207) 
Sec. 66-59. - User screening requisites and procedures. 
    Any industry or structure discharging process flow to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or receiving stream shall file the material listed in this section with the local agency. The local agency may require each person who applies for or receives sewer service, or through the nature of the enterprise creates a potential environmental problem, to file the material listed as follows: 
(1)  File a written statement setting forth the nature of the enterprise, the source and amount of water used, the amount of water to be discharged, with its present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical, radioactive, or other pertinent characteristics of the wastes. 
(2)  Provide a plan map of the building, works, or complex, with each outfall to the surface waters, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural watercourse, or groundwaters noted, described and the waste stream identified. 
(3)  Sample test, and file reports with the local agency and the appropriate state agencies on appropriate characteristics of wastes on a schedule, at locations, and according to methods approved by the local agency. 
(4)  Place waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste streams, or other potential waste problems under the specific supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as properly qualified to supervise such facilities. 
(5)  Provide a report on raw materials entering the process or support systems, intermediate materials, final products, and waste byproducts as those factors may affect waste control. 
(6)  Maintain records and file reports on the final disposal of specific liquid, solid, sludges, oils, radioactive materials, solvents, or other wastes. 
(7)  If any industrial process is to be altered as to include a process waste or potential waste, written notification shall be given to the local agency, subject to approval. 
(Code 1982, § 3-209) 
Sec. 66-60. - Excessive usage; surcharge provisions. 
(a)  If the character of the sewage of any manufacturing of industrial plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose any unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the system or upon the sewage treatment plant in excess of a maximum limit prescribed in this division, then an additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates, or the local agency shall require that such sewage be treated by the person responsible therefor, being emptied into the sewer or the right to empty such sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part of the system. Surcharges required shall be computed as the prorated share of the annual costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, attributable to treating a substance, multiplied by the ratio of weight of surchargeable excess of the discharges substance to the total weight of such substance that is treated in that year. This amount shall be collected on the basis of estimated surchargeable amounts with each billing and shall be adjusted annually to reflect actual operation, maintenance and replacement costs. If any premises connected to the system discharge a large portion of total water used into the storm sewer and not into the sanitary sewer, all such discharges shall comply with the requirements of state and federal agencies. 
(b)  Any wastewater discharged into the sewer system having a substance in excess of those prescribed in section 66-56 shall be permitted only if provided for in a special agreement with the industrial concern discharging the wastewater, only if such agreement provides for the payment by the industrial concern for the full cost of treating such excess constituents in the wastewater. 
(Code 1982, § 3-210) 
Sec. 66-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 16, 2009 repealed § 66-61, which pertained to industrial cost recovery system charges and derived from Code 1982, § 3-211. 
Sec. 66-62. - Operational year. 
    The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30. 
(Code 1982, § 3-212) 
Sec. 66-63. - Records, record requisites and insurance. 
(a)  Annual audit. The local agency shall maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the system. The local agency will cause an annual audit of such books of record and account for the preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent certified public accountant, and will supply such audit report to authorized public officials on request. 
(b)  Review of sewer charge system. In conjunction with the audit there shall be an annual review of the sewer charge system for adequacies meeting expected expenditures for the following year. 
(c)  Review of industrial user classifications. Classification of old and new industrial users should also be reviewed annually. 
(d)  Insurance. The local agency will maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of the system, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems. All moneys received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed. 
(Code 1982, § 3-213) 
Sec. 66-64. - Rates and charges. 
    The rates and charges for use of the utilities shall be as set by resolution of the city council from time to time. They shall be on file in city hall. 
Secs. 66-65-66-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY OWNERS CONTIGUOUS TO CITY BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 66-76. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to permit, under certain conditions, a connection of contiguous property owner's sewer lines to the city sewer system for the discharge of regulated amounts of sanitary sewage discharge as may be determined by the city council if the service does not adversely impact sanitary sewer service within the city and is deemed to be in the interest of the city and also to regulate the connection thereof along with the establishment of appropriate rates for the service. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-77. - Property owner status. 
    This division applies only to property contiguous to, but outside of, the municipal boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-78. - Eligibility requirements. 
(a)  A property owner contiguous to, but outside, the municipal boundaries of the city, in order to apply for sanitary sewer service from the city must first meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The interested party must first satisfy the city council that feasible alternatives are not available and a significant hardship exists. 
(2)  The interested party must have secured prior written approval from the Iron-Mountain-Kingsford Joint Sewer Authority and the City of Kingsford, as co-owners, for processing any generated waste as a result of this service. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-79. - Application process-Engineering study. 
(a)  Upon satisfaction of the city council that the conditions here before provided have been met, the interested party may submit to the city council an application requesting permission for connection to the city's sewer transport system. Said application shall include an engineering study prepared in accordance with rules and regulations established by the city manager, with the approval of the city council, fully analyzing the capability and capacity of the city's sewers' transport system to accept the proposed applicant's discharge. Said engineering study shall address those issues as requested by the city council and shall include: 
(1)  The total amount of applicant's proposed sewage disposal; 
(2)  An analysis as to the immediate impact, as well as the future impact, applicant's proposed discharge shall have on the city's sewer system; 
(3)  A determination and recommendation as to any upgrades required to the city's sewer transport system that may be required at that time or in the future to accommodate applicant's discharge; 
(4)  A determination as to the average daily discharge limit (ADDL) and adequate assurances that applicant's proposed discharge shall not exceed said levels. 
(b)  Said engineering study shall be conducted by an engineering firm approved by the city, but at applicant's cost. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-80. - Application consideration. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an engineering study satisfactory to the city council and responsive to its requirements and needs, the city council shall make a determination as to whether or not it is in the best interest of the city to approve the application. If the application is approved, the city will then enter into an agreement with the applicant for sewage disposal. 
(b)  Said approval and the agreement to be entered into between the city and the applicant will be granted upon the terms and conditions appropriate to the particular circumstances of the service to be provided, and shall, in any event, contain the following: 
(1)  An incorporation by reference of all terms and conditions of this division and any other city ordinance now enacted or to be enacted in the future regulating sewer service within or without the city; 
(2)  A commitment in respect to undertaking the responsibility for any upgrades to the city's sewer transport system as determined by the city council and that any cost associated with any upgrade to be the responsibility of the applicant. Any upgrades required to be completed prior to service shall be completed in full before any connection shall be permitted. 
(3)  The total daily sewage flow capacity to be permitted from the outside user. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-81. - Responsibility for sewage system and meters. 
(a)  It is provided that those portions of the city's system within the city limits shall remain the sole and exclusive responsibility of the city for all operations, maintenance, expansions, additions, improvements, and administration, including review and revision of the charge for transport, subject to applicant user's responsibility for costs associated therewith pursuant to those provisions provided under capital improvements. 
(b)  It is provided that the applicant user shall be solely and exclusively responsible for all operations, maintenance, expansions, additions, improvements, and administration in respect to that portion of its system to the point of its connection with the city system. 
(c)  At the point of connection of the applicant's system, hereinafter referred to as "outside system", to the city system, a meter and associated structures to house same shall be installed by the applicant at the applicant's expense, which meter shall be of a type as approved by the city. Each meter shall be read by the city each month for billing purposes. The city may make such necessary repairs or replace the meter if necessary at applicant user's expense. It is understood that said meters shall be under the control and only accessible by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-82. - Rates. 
(a)  Applicant users, hereinafter referred to as "outside users" will be metered for actual sewage discharge. 
(1)  Base rate: The base rate established as of the date of this division is $2.60 per 1,000 gallon. Base rate, as distinguished from capital improvement, is applicable only to routine maintenance and operation of the distribution system in the same manner as for resident users. 
(2)  The base rate will increase annually in an amount equal to the state equalized value increase for the same class of property in the city and other factors consistent with inflationary increases in cost of sewage transmission. 
(b)  If the outside user's discharge exceeds the cumulative average daily discharge limit (EG.ADDL times 30 days) during a monthly billing cycle, the excess amount will be billed at twice the base rate in effect at the time. 
(c)  If the outsider user's discharge exceeds the cumulative average daily discharge limits for a period greater than 90 days, the city council shall have the right to terminate any agreement for service entered into between the parties upon the giving of a 30-day notice or, in the alternative, the right to impose appropriate controls necessary to ensure the maximum limit is not exceeded. It will be the responsibility of the outside user to implement any required controls at its expense. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-83. - Costs of capital improvements. 
    It is anticipated that the city sewage transport system will, in the future, require improvements to its collection system which may involve that portion of the system utilized by the outside user in transporting its sewage to the sewage treatment plant. Cost allocation of said future improvements will be based on a percentage of outside user's discharge capacity as compared to the total capacity utilized in that portion of the system. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-84. - Assurance of continuation of service. 
(a)  It is further provided that any outside user connecting to the city's sewer transport system will, for all purposes, have an expectation to a continuation of said service, subject to its violation of the terms and conditions of either this division or other applicable ordinances, or the terms and conditions of the agreement to be entered into between the city and the outside user, and so as to assure the outside user continuation of service, it is hereby provided that said outside user, in respect to its right to rely upon the continuation of service, shall be of the same standing and status as a resident of the City of Iron Mountain. 
(b)  It is provided that the outside user shall have the ability to assign its rights under any agreement entered into between the parties pursuant to this division, subject, however, to the approval of the city and said approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. It shall be a requirement, however, of any assignment that the city be reasonably satisfied that the assignee shall be capable of meeting any and all financial commitments which are required in respect to the payment for the service and subsequent improvements which may be required from time to time to the city's sewer transport system. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Sec. 66-85. - Breach-Termination. 
    The city reserves the right to terminate any agreement entered into with an outside user in the event of outside user's breach of any term or condition set forth in the agreement between the parties and/or the provisions of this division. In the event of breach by any party, and the failure of the parties to reach agreement or equable adjustment within 12 months of the breach, the agreement may be enforced, to include its termination rights, by action in a court of competent jurisdiction and in accordance with the laws of the State of Michigan. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97) 
Secs. 66-86-66-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 66-106. - Operation. 
    The operation, repair and management of the water supply system, and the acquiring of the authorized public improvements shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager, subject to overall control by the city council. The city council may make such rules, orders and regulations as it may deem necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-107. - Fiscal year. 
    The water supply system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing July first and ending on the last day of the following June. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-108. - Records; annual statement by city manager. 
    The city manager shall cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record and account, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the water supply system. Not later than three months after the close of each fiscal year, the city manager shall cause to be prepared a statement in reasonable detail, showing the cash income and disbursements of the system at the beginning and close of the operating year and such other information as may be necessary to enable any taxpayer of the city or user of the service furnished to be fully informed as to all matters pertaining to the financial operation of the system during such year. Such annual statement shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, where it shall be open to public inspection. Such books of record and account shall be audited annually by a certified public accountant, to be designated by the city council, and a certified copy of such audit shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-109. - Right to prohibit use of system. 
    If the character of use from any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose an unreasonable additional burden upon the water supply system, then an additional charge may be made over and above the regular rates. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-110. - Free service prohibited. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the water supply system to any person. The city shall pay for all services furnished to it or to any of its departments at the established rates, fees and charges, or any revision thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-111. - Rules, regulations, fees and charges promulgated by city council. 
(a)  The city council shall make such rules and regulations it deems necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. By such rules and regulations, the city council shall establish all rates, fees, and charges to be paid in connection with water service as well as the manner in which such rates, fees and charges shall be paid. 
(b)  No person shall violate any such rule or regulation promulgated in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-112. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  The rates, charges and deposits to be charged for water service furnished by the water supply system shall be as presently established or as changed from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  The city council may also establish, upon recommendation of the city manager, rates, fees and charges for supplying water service to premises located outside the corporate limits of the city pursuant to the administrative policy for selling water to nonresidents and any amendments or changes that may be implemented to said policy by the council. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-113. - Collection of rates and charges; lien upon premises; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  In addition to other remedies possessed by the city for the collection of water rates, assessments, charges or rentals for the use of the water supply system by any house or building or any premises, lot, or lots, or parcel, or parcels of land, the city shall have as security for the collection thereof a lien upon such house or other building, and upon the premises or lot, or lots, or parcel, or parcels of land, upon which such house or other building shall be situated, or to which such water has been supplied. Such lien shall become effective immediately upon service to the premises or property, and the official records of the city shall constitute notice of the pendency of such lien. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens, except taxes and special assessments, whether or not such liens have accrued or were recorded, prior to the lien herein created. 
(b)  All water supply charges which upon the first day of April of each year have been due and unpaid for three months or more shall be reported by the city manager to the city council at its first meeting in April. The city council shall thereupon order the publication in a newspaper published in the city of a notice to all owners of property within the city that all unpaid charges, which have been due and unpaid for a period of three months or more, as of the first day of April, and which are not paid by the thirtieth day of April of such year, will be transferred to the tax roll and assessed upon the city's tax roll against the property to which the water was furnished, in the same manner as city taxes. All unpaid water charges which are reported by the city manager to the city council as having been due and unpaid for a period of three months or more on the first day of April of each year and which remain unpaid on the following thirtieth day of April of such year shall be transferred to the city's tax roll and assessed against the property to which service was supplied or furnished. Such unpaid charges shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes are collected. If the same shall remain delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in the warrant for the collection of taxes levied in such roll, such charges shall be returned to the county treasurer to be collected in the same manner as city taxes on the delinquent tax roll of the city. 
(c)  In addition to other remedies provided, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises, pursuant to regulations adopted by the city council for the nonpayment of water supply fees and charges when due. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-114. - Application for service; deposit. 
(a)  When installation of service pipe is desired from the water distribution system, an application in writing shall first be made to the water department. Such application shall set forth the true legal description of the premises to be served, the size of the service desired, and such other pertinent data as may be required. The applicant shall answer truthfully all questions regarding such application which may be put to such applicant by an officer or employee of the water department. 
(b)  Connection to the distribution mains shall be installed only by the city and then only upon the prepayment of fees established by the city council. The fee established, which shall be known as the connection fee, shall include the cost of excavation and backfill, making the tap, furnishing and installing service pipe from the main to a point between the curb and the sidewalk, and furnishing and installing the service box and curb stop. 
(c)  After the service pipes have been installed to the premises, application may be made for the use of water provided such application is made in writing at the office of the water department on such forms as shall be prescribed, and provided further, that the applicant agrees to be bound by all legally established rules and regulations of the water department. The use of water shall thereupon be granted. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-115. - Installation of service. 
(a)  The water department will not be required to grant connection permits at any time when in the judgment of the water department the making of connections will endanger the mains from frost or other damage. 
(b)  All service pipe hereafter laid shall have a minimum internal diameter of one inch and shall be of copper or approved equivalent, and shall conform to the specifications of the American Waterworks Association. The minimum depth of cover for service lines shall be six feet below the surface of the ground or the established street grade, whichever is lower. No service shall be laid along the outside wall of any building or in any position where there is danger of freezing. Every service shall be furnished with a valve with waste on the influent side of the meter below the action of frost and on large services a valve shall be placed on the effluent side of the meter also. Service pipe laid in the same trench with a sewer shall be at least 24 inches distant from the sewer horizontally, and if the sewer is laid at a greater depth, the service pipe shall be shelved into the bank to a solid bottom. In no case shall a service pipe be laid on a fill. 
(c)  Every building shall have a separate connection with the street main. 
(d)  No person shall make any attachment or connection with the water distribution system or make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any fixtures connected with the system unless such connection, repairs, additions, extensions or alterations are in accord with the code approved by the state, and with any additional rules and regulations regulating the installation of plumbing which the city council may from time to time adopt. All work performed in making additions, connections, repairs, extensions or alterations of any fixtures connected with the distribution system shall be subject to inspection by a representative of the water department, who shall have authority, hereby granted, to order any part of such work discontinued or changed in order that the same shall comply with the rules and regulations of the department. 
(e)  All right, title and ownership to the street portion of the service, including the corporation stop, curb stop, service box and service pipe, shall be vested in the city. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-116. - Adoption of water supply cross-connection rules of the state. 
    The city does hereby adopt by reference the water supply cross-connection rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties serviced by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city water department, and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(2)  The representative of the city water department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
(3)  The city water department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: "Water Unsafe For Drinking" 
(5)  This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and city plumbing code. 
(6)  Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, or any other written order of the city water department, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this section shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-117. - Maintenance of service. 
    Every person having service from the city water distribution system shall at such person's own cost and expense keep in repair that portion of the service between the service box and the meter. In case such service be permitted to remain out of repair, the water department may shut off the water from the premises served. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-118. - Regulations concerning meters. 
(a)  All connections hereafter made with the water mains with the exception of fire hydrant and fire protection sprinkler systems shall be through a meter, and no water shall be supplied to any inhabitant of the city unless such water shall be measured by a water meter of a design approved and installed by the water department. The department will not be required to furnish meters of a larger size than in the judgment of the water department appears to be necessary. 
(b)  Water for automatic sprinkler systems will be furnished at the rates provided under section 66-111. No person shall use any water from the sprinkler system except in case of fire. 
(c)  All meters must be set in a clean, dry, sanitary place which is easily accessible. They shall not be set in closets or places that are locked, or in places difficult of access. Where practical, meters shall be installed within the building served. 
(d)  Actual placing of the meter shall be done by the water department after the property owner has provided a suitable place, at such property owner's own expense, for setting the meter. If an application for water service is filed and no provision is made for the meter, the water department shall not be required to set the meter until a suitable place has been provided. 
(e)  Meters shall be furnished by the water department. All right, title and ownership of the meter shall remain in the city. 
(f)  The city shall maintain all meters and make all necessary replacements caused by wear through normal usage but the consumer shall be held responsible for care and protection of the meter and for injury to the same by any person. Any damage which may occur to any water meter while in the care of the tenant, owner or agent of the property on which such water meter is placed shall be paid for by such person upon representation of a statement of damages. 
(g)  The accuracy of the meter on any premises will be tested by the water department upon written request of the owner accompanied by a fee established in accordance with section 66-112. If on such test the meter shall be found to register over four percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter shall be substituted therefor, the fee refunded to the owner and the water bill adjusted in such manner as may be fair and just. If on such test the meter shall be found to register less than four percent more water than actually passes through it, the fee shall not be refunded, and no adjustment in the water bill shall be made. 
(h)  In case a meter reading does not appear to be consistent or in case the meter has ceased to register, the amount of water charged for shall be the amount established by the water department. In making such estimates, previous quantities of water used by the same consumer shall be used as a basis for estimates, but special conditions found, such as leaking fixtures or abnormal demand for water may also be considered. When it appears that abnormal use of water has resulted from leakage or carelessness on the part of the consumer no deduction or adjustment shall be made. 
(i)  All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a meter from any service connection. No person shall break, remove, tamper with, or shall cause or suffer to be broken, removed or tampered with any seal which is placed on any meter or service box by an employee of the water department. No person shall place or cause or suffer to be placed any device which shall serve to allow any water to be used which does not pass through the meter. 
(j)  It shall be the duty of the water department to read all meters periodically and to render statements for the amounts due as shown by such reading. Statements shall be payable as determined by this article but in no event shall failure to receive a statement excuse any consumer for nonpayment thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-119. - Discontinuance of service. 
    Any discontinuance of service shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-120. - Access to property. 
(a)  The water department through its authorized representative shall have access to the meter and all water plumbing fixtures at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting the plumbing used in connection with the water supply system, and no such meter or auxiliary equipment shall be covered or fenced in such a way as to be inaccessible. 
(b)  When the water department determines in its sole judgement that access to the meter is required, and the water department has not been granted access, then the water department shall terminate the water supply to the premises after following the notification procedures in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  The notification procedures for termination of water supply under this section are as follows: 
(1)  A notification shall be sent regular first class mail to the address listed upon the water billing account advising the customer to contact the water department to grant access to the meter. 
(2)  If the customer does not grant access within 30 days of the mailing date of the notice in subsection (1) above, then the water department shall post upon the premises a notice indicating the water supply with be terminated seven days from the date of posting. 
(3)  If the customer does not grant access within seven days stated in the shut-off notice, then the water supply shall be terminated until access is granted and all the fees established under section 66-119 shall have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-121. - Use of hydrants. 
(a)  No person shall, without written authority, draw water from any public hydrant or any other public connection with the water supply system except in emergency cases for the purpose of extinguishing fire, or fire practice by the regularly organized fire department. Permits to use hydrants shall be approved by the water department. 
(b)  Any person holding permission from the water department to use fire hydrants shall keep a written permit at the place of use and such permit shall be displayed to any city official upon request. 
(c)  Persons desiring service from a fire hydrant shall place on deposit such a sum of money as provided in section 66-111 which sum shall be held until all charges incurred have been fully paid and all water department equipment returned in good condition. The department shall have the right to use any portion of such sum to repair or replace any equipment damaged through carelessness, neglect or misuse by the consumer or by reason of its use thereof. 
(d)  Before use of water from a hydrant is allowed, the discharge port shall first be fitted with a valve and meter under the direction of the water department. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Sec. 66-122. - Tampering with property prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tap any pipe, open or close any hydrant, valve or stopcock, or interfere in any manner or tamper with any part of the city system of waterworks, or to use water which does not pass through a meter except as provided herein, and any costs associated with damage resulting from such unlawful interference, or tampering with such system of waterworks, may be recovered by the city in appropriate legal action. In addition, any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this section shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-23-98) 
Chapter 70 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; municipal civil infractions, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Care of trees and shrubs, MCL 247.241 et seq.; control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS WEEDS 

Sec. 70-26. - Prohibited growths; enumeration. 
    No person occupying and/or owning any premises, and no person owning any unoccupied premises within the inhabited corporate city limits of the city shall permit or maintain on any such premises any growth of noxious weeds; nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than ten inches, nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush. Noxious weeds shall include Canada thistle, dodders, curly dock, mustards, (charlock, black mustard, and Indian mustard), wild carrot, goldenrod, milkweed, tansy, oxeye daisies, hoary alyssum, ragweed, poison ivy, and Indian paint brush, or any other plant which is declared by the city council to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(6), § 5-1002; Ord. of 7-5-11) 
Sec. 70-27. - Duty of occupant and owner. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant and owner of every occupied premises and the owner of unoccupied premises within the inhabited corporate city limits to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all such weeds, grass, and rank vegetation, as often as may be necessary, to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(6), § 5-1003; Ord. of 7-5-11) 
Sec. 70-28. - Enforcement of article; penalty for violation of article; civil infraction; declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  Notice. The chief of police is hereby charged with the enforcement of this article. No person being the owner or person in charge of or occupant of any private premises shall allow or permit the existence of noxious weeds, grass, and rank vegetation prohibited by the provisions of this article to exist on such property. When any such property is in violation of the provisions of this article, the enforcing officer, or his authorized representative, may notify the owner, person in control, or occupant of such private premises to correct the violation within five days after being put on notice of the violation. 
(b)  Failure to abate; abatement by officer; costs; lien. If the owner, person in charge, or occupant of any premises notified to abate a nuisance resulting from a violation of the provisions of this article shall fail to abate the same within five days from being put on notice of a violation, the enforcing officer, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized to enter upon such private premises and abate the nuisance by correcting the violation. The cost of abating the nuisance, plus an additional 15 percent for overhead and other expenses, shall constitute a lien against the private premises and shall be charged to the occupant or owner thereof, or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If not paid within 60 days after the bill for such charges is rendered, such charges may be collected as a single lot assessment against the premises in the manner provided by special assessment ordinances, or in any other manner authorized for collection of debts owed the city. Should the city elect to remove or abate a nuisance in the manner stated in this subsection, such action, on the part of the city, does not preclude enforcement of this article by the issuance of a municipal civil infraction as herein provided in section 70-28(c). 
(c)  Civil infraction citations and notices. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The penalty for the first offense shall be $50.00 and for the first repeat offense, $150.00. (Repeat offenses shall be determined as defined in chapter 38.) For any second or subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be no more than $500.00. It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city, or his authorized representative, to enforce the provisions of this article. If, after investigation, the chief of police, or his authorized representative, determines that a violation of this article exists, he shall be authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice and/or municipal civil infraction citation to any person that is responsible for violating the provisions of this article. Service of the civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with chapter 38. 
(d)  Violation on private premises; nuisance per se; not exempted from enforcement provisions. Permitting a violation of the article on private premises is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and enjoined. The enforcement of this article by abatement of any nuisance by the enforcing officer or by application to any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement by judicial decree or writ shall not preclude enforcement of this article by the issuance of a municipal civil infraction and the imposition of fine and costs, complaint for violation of this article and the imposition of fine or imprisonment, as provided in this section. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(6), § 5-1004) 
Sec. 70-29. - Exemptions. 
    Exempted from the provisions of this article are flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens, small grain plots, and forested areas, left uncultivated in keeping with the natural character of the residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 4-17-95(6), § 5-1008) 
Secs. 70-30-70-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES 

Sec. 70-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park trees means all trees, shrubs, and all other plants in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, on which the public has free access as a park. 
    Street trees means trees, shrubs, and all other plants on land lying on all street rights-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-600; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-57. - Creation of tree board. 
(a)  Composition. This article hereby gives the responsibility to the city council to establish a city tree board for the city. The board shall consist of five members, citizens and residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Terms of members. The term of the five persons shall be three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, the successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(c)  Compensation. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan. The plan will deal with the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and other public areas. The plan will be presented annually to the council and, upon its acceptance, shall constitute the comprehensive city tree plan for the city. When requested by the council, the board shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. It shall further have the responsibility to ensure that all street tree species conform to the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Operation. The board shall choose its own officers, promulgate its own rules and regulations subject to city council approval, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of its members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-601; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-58. - Permit required; allowable tree sizes established. 
(a)  Prior to planting any street or park tree species, written permission from the tree board shall be required, and planting without written permission will constitute a municipal civil infraction, penalties for which are specified in section 70-66. The tree board shall, in its rules and regulations, establish an official street tree species list for the city. Such list shall be available for public inspection at the city hall. No species other than those listed in such rules and regulations may be planted as street trees. Any person that obtains permission to plant a street or park tree pursuant to this article, shall be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of such tree. 
(b)  The following categories of tree size are hereby established: 
(1)  Small, 20 feet or less at mature height. 
(2)  Small to intermediate, 15 feet to 30 feet height, at maturity. 
(3)  Medium size, 30 feet to 50 feet height, at maturity. 
(4)  Large, 50 feet plus height, at maturity. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-602; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-59. - Spacing. 
(a)  Proximity to each other. The spacing of trees will be in accordance with the tree size classes listed in section 70-58. No trees will be planted closer together than the following: Small to intermediate trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect/designer. 
(b)  Distance from curb and sidewalk. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk line than the following: small trees, three feet; medium trees, four feet; large trees, eight feet. 
(c)  Distance from street corners and fire hydrant. No tree shall be planted closer than 25 feet to any street corner. No trees shall be planted closer than ten feet from a fire hydrant. 
(d)  Utilities. No trees other than those designated as small trees by the tree board may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire. No trees, other than those designated as small trees by the tree board, shall be planted over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. This does not include trees planted in concrete, wooden, or similar aboveground level planters that prohibit entangling of roots with the utilities listed in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-603; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-60. - Tree topping. 
(a)  Prohibited generally; defined. It shall be prohibited for anyone to top any street or park tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(b)  Exemption. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the tree board. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-604; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-61. - Pruning; corner clearance. 
    The city or its duly contracted representative has the responsibility to maintain trees on public property, including site distance or obstructions at street intersections and streetlight clearance and clearance above streets or sidewalks. The city shall also remove all dead, broken, or decaying limbs on any tree which constitutes a menace to public safety. Tree board approval is not required under this section. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-605; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-62. - Tree removal. 
    Removal of trees on public land shall only be done upon tree board approval, except as provided in section 70-61. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-606; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-63. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground to a depth of at least four inches. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-607; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-64. - Arborist license and bond. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license from the city. The license fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. However, no license shall be required for a city employee or public service company doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors as long as it is done in accordance with good arboricultural practices and follows all sections of this article. Prior to city issuing such license, an applicant must have proof of proper knowledge, arborist certification, and any and all required licenses, to the satisfaction of the city. 
(b)  Prior to the city issuing a license, the applicant must obtain liability insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 and property damage coverage in the amount of $500,000.00. The city shall be an additional named insured. The applicant must also enter into an agreement to hold the city harmless from any and all liability and damages associated with work performed. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-608; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-65. - Private trees. 
(a)  Defined; exempt from other provisions of article. Private trees are those planted on private property by property owners and are not regulated by terms of this article, except for the provisions in this section. 
(b)  Removal and treatment by city in certain instances. The city shall have the right to cause the removal or proper treatment of trees on private property which harbor insects or disease and which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal or treatment shall be done by such owners, at their own expense, within a reasonable period of time as prescribed by the city, but, in no case, not more than 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have authority to remove or treat such trees and charge the cost of removal or treatment to such owners in the manner provided by special assessment ordinances, or in any other manner authorized for collection of debts owed the city. 
(c)  Pruning and corner clearance. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or rights-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and so that there will be a clear space of 14 feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owners shall remove all dead, broken, or decaying limbs which constitute a menace to the public safety. 
(d)  Planting of the following species or cultivars is prohibited in the city limits of Iron Mountain: 
Acer negundo-Box Elder 
Acer saccharinum-Silver Maple or varieties thereof 
Ailanthus altissima-Tree of Heaven 
Populus Species-Poplars 
Ash Species 
Willows 
(e)  It is recommended that all trees which would fall within the large tree category including those listed in official street tree species list are not to be planted within a lateral distance of 25 feet to the city sidewalk and/or property line or 35 feet later distance of power lines: medium trees: 15 feet and 25 feet respectively. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-609; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Sec. 70-66. - Enforcement and penalty for violation of article; civil infraction. 
    The city tree board is hereby charged with the enforcement of this article. It shall have the responsibility for investigating potential violations of this article. If, after investigation, the tree board determines that a person has violated a provision of this article, it shall report its findings to the city zoning administrator, who, if satisfied that a violation does exist, shall be authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction. Provided, however, that he may first issue a written warning prior to issuing any formal civil infraction. Service of such civil infraction citation or civil infraction notice shall be made in accordance with chapter 38 and be assessed the following penalties: 
(1)  Fifty dollars for the first offense; 
(2)  One hundred fifty dollars for first repeat offense (repeat offenses shall be determined as defined in chapter 38); and 
(3)  No less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for any second or subsequent repeat offense. 
(Ord. of 5-15-95, § 8-610; Ord. of 3-19-12) 
Chapter 74 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- City or village districts or zones, MCL 125.581 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Iron Mountain Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-1-1) 
Sec. 74-2. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the state, this chapter has been established for the purposes of: 
(1)  Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(2)  Protecting the character and the stability of the residential and commercial areas within the incorporated city and promoting the orderly and beneficial development of such areas. 
(3)  Providing adequate light, air and privacy and reasonable access to property. 
(4)  Regulating the intensity of use of land and lot areas and determining the area of open spaces surrounding buildings and of structures necessary to provide adequate light and air and to protect the public health. 
(5)  Lessening and avoiding congestion on the public highways and streets. 
(6)  Promoting healthful surroundings for family life in residential areas. 
(7)  Preventing the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of buildings and structures so far as possible and appropriate in each zoning district by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them. 
(8)  Enhancing social and economic stability in the city. 
(9)  Enhancing the aesthetic desirability of the environment throughout the city. 
(10)  Conserving the expenditure of funds for public improvements, energy and other services to conform with the most advantageous uses of land. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 74-3. - Rules of construction. 
    The following rules shall apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)  All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such as may have a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)  The particular shall control the general. 
(3)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(4)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(5)  When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense shall include the future and words in the singular number shall include the plural. 
(6)  The word "building" includes the word "structure" and the word "dwelling" includes the word "residence." The word "building" or "dwelling" includes any part thereof. 
(7)  The words "used" and "occupied" include the words "intended," "designed" or "arranged" to be used or occupied. 
(8)  The word "person" includes any firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, corporation or similar entity, as well as an individual. 
(9)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." 
(10)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(11)  Every word importing the singular number only may extend to and embrace the plural number, and every word importing the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number. Every word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females as well as males. 
(12)  Whenever a reference is made to several sections and the section numbers are connected by the word "to," the reference includes both sections whose numbers are given and all intervening sections. 
(13)  In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 74-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, words pertaining to access, buildings, property, land use, building use, building measurement and enforcement shall have the following meaning: 
    Access means a way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian entrance or exit to a property from an abutting property or a public roadway. 
    Access management means the process of providing and managing reasonable access to land development while preserving the flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, and speed on the abutting roadway system. 
    Access point means: 
(1)  The connection of a driveway at the right-of-way line to a road. 
(2)  A new road, driveway, shared access or service drive. 
    Accessory building means a building or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure and located on the same lot as the principal building. 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot as the principal use. 
    Alley means a public or legally established private thoroughfare, other than a street, affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders; or any change which may be referred to in this chapter as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartment means a dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling as defined in this chapter. 
    Automobile repair garage means premises where the following services may be carried out in a completely enclosed building: general repairs, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; and painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Automobile service station means a building or premises used primarily for the sale and installation of major automobile accessories, such as tires, batteries, radios, air conditioners and mufflers, plus such services as brake adjustment and wheel alignment and balancing; but excluding any major mechanical repairs, collision work, undercoating or painting. Sale of gasoline, stored only in underground tanks, shall be incidental to the activities enumerated in this definition. 
    Awning and canopy mean any covered structure made of cloth, metal or other material with supporting frames attached to a building which projects beyond the building wall or is carried by a frame supported by the building, ground or sidewalk below it. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast operation means a use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling as a single-family detached dwelling unit in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and breakfast in return for payment. The maximum stay of any one guest shall not exceed 14 days per stay. 
    Berm means a manmade, formed earth mound of definite height and width used for obscuring purposes, the purpose of which is to provide a transition between uses of differing intensity. 
    Billboard means any structure or portion thereof or sign used as an outdoor display by painting, posting or affixing on any surface on which lettered, figured or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes, unrelated to the premises or the nature of the business conducted thereon or the products primarily sold or manufactured thereon. For further definitions relating to signs and billboards see section 74-512. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets crossing or terminating, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or stream, or between any of these and any other barrier to the continuity of development or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Boardinghouse and roominghouse mean any dwelling where meals or lodging or both are provided for compensation to persons outside of the family members. 
    Buffer and bufferyard mean a strip of land, including any specified type and amount of planting or structures, which may be required to protect one type of land use from another, or minimize or eliminate conflicts between them. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns and walls, for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property. When such a structure is divided into separate parts by one or more unpierced firewalls extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building, except for minimum side yard requirements as provided in this chapter. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 
    Building line means a line parallel to the front lot line; for purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as the minimum required front setback line. 
    Canopy. See Awning . 
    Carport means a partially open structure intended to shelter one or more vehicles. Such structures shall comply with all yard requirements applicable to private garages. 
    Carwash means a lot or building where motor vehicles are washed or waxed either by the patron or by others, using machinery specially designed for that purpose. 
    Church means a building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship which is used only for that purpose, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory buildings and uses primarily associated with such primary purpose. 
    Clinic means a place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick or injured persons, and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention. A clinic may incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies incidental or necessary to its operation or to the service of its patients, but may not include facilities for inpatient care or major surgery. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, literature, politics or similar activities, but not operated for profit and open only to members and not the general public. 
    Comprehensive plan means the statement of policy by the city relative to the agreed upon and officially adopted guidelines for a desirable physical pattern for future community development. The plan consists of a series of maps, charts and written material representing in summary form the soundest concept for community growth to occur in an orderly, attractive, economical and efficient manner thereby creating the very best community living conditions. 
    Convalescent home means a structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited medical care. 
    County primary shall include the following primary roads under the jurisdiction of the Dickinson County Road Commission means within the City of Iron Mountain. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied space other than a yard and bounded on at least two sides by a building. A court extending to the front lot line or front yard, or to the rear lot line or rear yard, is an outer court. Any other court is an inner court. 
    Curb level means the grade elevation, as established by the city, of the curb in front of the center of the building or proposed building, or the elevation at the center of the traveled street in case no curb exists. 
    Day care center. See Nursery school . 
    District means an area of land for which there are uniform regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, density of development, yard requirements and height regulations. 
    Drive-in means a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependant on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure, or to provide self-service for food carryout. 
    Driveway means any entrance or exit used by vehicular traffic to or from land or buildings abutting a road. 
    Driveway offset means the distance between the centerline of two driveways on opposite sides of an undivided roadway. 
    Driveway, shared means a driveway connecting two or more contiguous properties to the public road system. 
    Dry cleaning plant means a building, portion of a building or premises used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel or articles of any sort by immersion and agitation, or by immersion only, in volatile solvents, including, but not by way of limitation, solvents of the petroleum distillate type or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the process incidental thereto, including, but without limitation, spotting, wet cleaning and finishing. 
    Dwelling, duplex means a building designed or modified to contain two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means a building used or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a detached building, designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. See also, Single-family dwelling . 
    Dwelling, two-family means a detached building, designed for or occupied by two families living independently of each other. See also, Two-family dwelling . 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms connected together with principal kitchen and bathroom facilities designed as a unit for use by only one family or one functional family for living and sleeping purposes, constituting a separate independent housekeeping unit, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which might be in the same structure. 
    Efficiency apartment means a dwelling unit with a bathroom and principal kitchen facilities designed as a self-contained unit for living, cooking and sleeping purposes and having no separate designated bedroom. 
    Erected includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, communication, telephone, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, or collection, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories in connection therewith which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general public health, safety, convenience or welfare, but not including office buildings, substations, structures which are enclosures or shelters for service equipment, or maintenance depots. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground except common household gardening and general ground care. 
    Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or parents, along with their direct lineal descendants and adopted or foster children, including domestic employees, or a group not to exceed two persons not related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single housekeeping unit with single cooking facilities. Every additional group of two or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this chapter. This definition shall not apply in instances of group care centers, or state-licensed residential facilities as established under Act No. 395 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 125.286a), as amended. 
    Family, functional means a group of persons which does not meet the definition of "family" in this section, living in a dwelling unit and intending to live together as a group for the indefinite future. This definition shall not include any fraternity, sorority, club, hotel or other group of persons whose association is temporary or commercial in nature. 
    Fence means an artificially constructed barrier of wood, metal, stone or any manufactured materials erected for the enclosure of yard areas. 
    Filling means the depositing or dumping of any matter into or onto the ground except common household gardening and general maintenance. 
    Floor area, gross means the sum of all gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the outside dimensions of the structure. Unenclosed porches, courtyards or patios, whether covered or uncovered, shall not be considered as a part of the gross floor area unless used for commercial purposes such as nursery beds or sales of outdoor equipment. 
    Floor area, usable, for purposes of computing parking requirements, means that area to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, for hallways, stairways and elevator shafts, or for utilities or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from the computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal area of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
    Frontage road or front service drive means a local street/road or private road typically located in front of principal buildings and parallel to an arterial for service to abutting properties for the purpose of controlling access to the arterial. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building, or portion of a principal building, designed or used solely for the storage of noncommercial motor vehicles, boats and similar items or equipment, and having no public sales or shop services in connection therewith. 
    Gasoline service station means a structure used for the retail sale or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles, and including space for storage, minor motor repair or servicing, but not including bumping, painting, refinishing or conveyor-type carwash operations. 
    Grade means a ground elevation established for the purpose of controlling the number of stories and height of any structure. The building grade shall be determined by the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of any structure if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the structure. 
    Greenbelt means a strip of land of specified width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip. 
    Home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not involve any alteration of the structure or change the character thereof. Home occupations shall satisfy the following conditions: 
(1)  The nonresidential use shall only be incidental to the primary residential use. 
(2)  The home occupation shall utilize no more than 25 percent of the floor area on any one floor of the principal building. 
(3)  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the premises. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not involve persons other than those members of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
(5)  All activities shall be carried on indoors, only in the principal building. No outdoor activities or storage shall be permitted. 
(6)  There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, other than one announcement sign, not exceeding 300 square inches in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building. 
(7)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
(8)  The permission for home occupations as provided in this chapter is intended to secure flexibility in the application of the requirements of this chapter; but such permission is not intended to allow the essential residential character of residential districts, in terms of use and appearance, to be changed by the occurrence of nonresidential activities. 
(9)  Garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales and similar activities may be conducted for no longer than three days and no more than two times per calendar year on the same property. 
(10)  Limited retail sales may be permitted on the premises, as a part of or in conjunction with a home occupation. 
(11)  Application for a home occupation shall be made to the planning commission on a form prescribed by it, describing the proposed activity. The commission shall review the application at its next regular meeting following filing and shall hold the necessary hearings according to this chapter and state law. The planning commission shall, after the necessary hearings, recommend approval or denial to the city council, which shall make the decision on whether or not to approve the application. Home occupation requests shall be reviewed in terms of the requirements and standards listed in this definition. 
(12)  The home occupation shall not constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to transient guests. 
    House of worship. See Church . 
    Household pet means animals that are customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment. Household pets shall include but are not limited to domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds and rodents. 
    Housekeeping unit means a dwelling unit organized as a single entity in which the members share common kitchen facilities and have access to all parts of the dwelling. 
    Housing for the elderly means an installation other than a hospital, hotel or nursing home which provides dwelling units for persons primarily 60 years of age or older, and conforming to the requirements of the state and federal programs for elderly care. 
    Junk means any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise with parts missing, or scrap metals or other scrap materials that are damaged or deteriorated. 
    Junkyard means any land or building used for abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting or baling of paper, rags, scrap metals, or other scrap or discarded materials, or for abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in normal running condition, machinery or parts thereof. 
    Kennel, commercial means any lot or premises used for the commercial sale, boarding or treatment of dogs, cats or other domestic pets. 
    Kennel, private means any lot or premises used for the private maintenance of more than three dogs, cats or other household pets, four months of age or older, not involving any commercial activities. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lodginghouse means a building, other than a motel, in which lodging for three or more persons is provided for compensation. 
    Lot means land occupied or to be occupied by a building, structure, land use or group of buildings together with such open spaces or yards as are required under this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    Lot, corner means a lot which has at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a street for their full length. 
    Lot, depth of means the mean distance from the front lot line of the lot to its opposite rear line measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
    Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line means any of the lines bounding a lot. 
(1)  Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, it is that line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, it is that line separating the lot from either street. In the case of a corner lot, the shorter street line shall be considered the front lot line, except, in the case of both street lines being equal, the choice may be made by the property owner. Once declared and so indicated on the building permit application, the designated front lot line shall remain as such. 
(2)  Rear lot line. That lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line not less than ten feet in length, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county, or a parcel or lot described by metes and bounds, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county, prior to May 1, 1995. 
    Lot, through means a double-frontage lot, not a corner lot, having a street for both front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, width of means the straight line horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where the building line, or setback line, intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, zoning means a tract or parcel of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built on as a unit, under single ownership or control. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate area and the region beyond. 
    Marquee means a roof-like structure of a permanent building nature projecting from the wall of a building. 
    Mobile home means a moveable or portable dwelling which is constructed to be towed on its own chassis, is capable of being connected to public utilities, and is designed for yearround living as a single-family dwelling unit without the necessity for a permanent foundation. The term shall not include pickup campers, travel trailers, motor homes, converted buses, or tent or pop-up trailers. 
    Modular housing unit means a dwelling unit constructed solely within a factory, as a single unit, or in various sized modules or components, which are then transported by truck or other means to a site where they are assembled on a permanent foundation to form a single-family dwelling unit, and meeting all codes and regulations applicable to conventional single-family home construction. 
    Motel means a series of attached or detached rental units containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging, are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public travelling by motor vehicle. 
    Nonconforming building or structure means a building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing on May 1, 1995, that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter relative to height, bulk, area, placement or yards for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use of a building or structure or of a parcel or tract of land, lawfully existing on May 1, 1995, that does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. 
    Nuisance means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as: 
(1)  Noise. 
(2)  Dust. 
(3)  Smoke. 
(4)  Odor. 
(5)  Glare or light. 
(6)  Objectionable effluent. 
(7)  Flashes. 
(8)  Vibration. 
(9)  Fumes. 
(10)  Noise of a congregation of people, particularly at night. 
(11)  Passing traffic. 
(12)  Invasion of street frontage by traffic generated from an adjacent land use which lacks sufficient parking and circulation facilities. 
    Nursery school and day care center mean a public or private school, kindergarten or child care facility wherein day care, or day care and education, is provided for five or more minors. 
    Nursing home means an installation, other than a hospital, having as its primary function the rendering of nursing care for extended periods of time to persons afflicted with illness, injury or infirmity. 
    Open space, required means the yard space of a lot which is established by and between the street or the lot lines and required setback line, and which shall be open, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or any part thereof except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Overlay zone or overlay district means a zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements beyond those required for the underlying zone. 
    Parking space means an area of not less than 180 square feet in area, exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and which shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Planned unit development means a tract of land on which are located two or more principal buildings, developed under single ownership or management, the development of which is unique, and which may contain a mix of housing types and uses. Such development shall be based on an approved site plan which allows flexibility of design not available under normal zoning district requirements. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission of the City of Iron Mountain. 
    Principal building means an individual structure on a lot or site which contains the main use. 
    Public utility means any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public the following services: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Rear service drive means a local street/road or private road typically located behind principal buildings and parallel to an arterial for service to abutting properties for the purpose of controlling access to the arterial. 
    Recreation area, private means all lands and structures which are owned and operated by private individuals, a business or a corporation, and provide for outdoor recreation activities. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle for the transportation of people primarily for recreational purposes and which may permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place, such as motor homes, camper trailers, pickup campers and similar camping type vehicles. 
    Restaurant means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their food and beverages by a restaurant employee, at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed. 
(2)  The establishment is a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building. 
    Restaurant, fast food means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food or beverages in a ready-to-consume state, for consumption: 
(1)  Within the restaurant building; 
(2)  Within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or 
(3)  Off the premises as carryout orders; 
and whose principal method of operation includes the following characteristics: food and beverages are usually served in edible containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers. 
    Right-of-way means a street, alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles or the location of utilities. The right-of-way is delineated by legally established lines or boundaries. 
    Satellite dish antenna means a parabolic antenna greater than 24 inches in diameter designed as an earth-based station for the reception of radio, television or microwave communications, or other signals from orbiting satellites or other sources, together with other incidental transmission equipment related to such purpose. 
    Screen means a structure providing enclosure such as a fence, and a visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property. A screen may also be nonstructured, consisting of shrubs or other growing materials. 
    Setback means the minimum required unoccupied distance between the lot line and the principal and accessory buildings, as required in this chapter. 
    Setback, front means the minimum required unoccupied distance, extending the full lot width, between the principal building and the front lot line. 
    Setback, rear means the minimum required unoccupied distance, extending the full lot width, between the principal and accessory buildings and the lot line opposite the front lot line. 
    Setback, side means the minimum required unoccupied distance, extending from the front setback to the rear setback, between the principal and accessory buildings and the side lot line. 
    Shopping center means a business or group of businesses which provides a variety of merchandise or services which requires a location on a major road and a large parking area to accommodate vehicular traffic. Such a center may be a small neighborhood center, a discount store or a mall, though this does not limit such use to be one or any or these. 
    Sight distance means the distance of unobstructed view for the driver of a vehicle, as measured along the normal travel path of a roadway to a specified height above the roadway. 
    Sign means a name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land, which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business and is visible to the general public. 
    Single-family dwelling means a detached building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. In the case of a mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling for purposes of this chapter and shall comply with the provisions in this chapter relative to dwellings. Garage space, whether in an attached garage or detached garage, shall not be considered part of a dwelling for meeting area requirements. A dwelling shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The dwelling shall meet the minimum square footage requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  The minimum width across any front, side or rear elevation shall be at least 20 continuous feet of exterior wall. 
(3)  The dwelling shall comply in all respects with the applicable building codes and regulations in force at the time of construction. 
(4)  The dwelling shall be placed upon and secured to a permanent foundation in accordance with the applicable building codes and regulations in force at the time of construction. The area between the grade elevation of the lot and the structure shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions as the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable code for single-family dwellings. 
(5)  If a dwelling is a mobile home, each mobile home shall be installed with the wheels removed. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism under the carriage or chassis. 
(6)  All dwellings abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer and public water supply shall connect to the public sewer and water supply, or, if not available, then to such private facilities as approved by the local health department. 
(7)  The dwelling shall contain a storage area in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever is greater. 
(8)  The dwelling shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity; shall have a roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively shall have windowsills and roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling; shall have not less than two exterior doors, with the second one being on either the rear or side of the dwelling; and shall contain permanently attached steps connected to the exterior door areas or to porches connected to the door areas where a difference in elevation requires such steps. 
(9)  The dwelling shall contain no additions or rooms or other areas which are not constructed with similar quality workmanship or materials as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required in this definition. 
(10)  The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the zoning administrator upon review of the plans. which may include elevations or photographs submitted for a particular dwelling, subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the zoning board of appeals within a period of 30 days from the receipt of notice of the zoning administrator's decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth in this definition as well as the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks within 2,000 feet of the subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than 20 percent of the lots situated within such area; or, where the area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the city. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed home. 
(11)  The dwelling shall conform to all pertinent building and fire codes in effect at the time of construction. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to the mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
(12)  Subsections (1) through (11) of this definition shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the ordinances of the city pertaining to mobile home parks. 
    Site plan means a plan showing all salient features of a proposed development, so that it may be evaluated in order to determine whether it meets the provisions of this chapter. 
    Special use permit means a permit issued by the city council to a person intending to undertake the operation of an activity upon land or within a structure and for those uses not specifically mentioned in this chapter which possess unique characteristics and are found to be not injurious to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
    Spouse abuse shelter means a home for the temporary residence of victims of domestic abuse. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or, if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A story, thus defined, shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent by cubic content is below the height level of the adjoining ground. 
    Story, half means that part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, such part having a finished floor area which does not exceed one-half of the floor area of a full story. 
    Street means a public dedicated right-of-way which affords traffic circulation and the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means any constructed, erected or placed material or combination of materials in or upon the ground, and attached to something having a permanent location on or in the ground, including, but not by way of limitation, billboards and signs, buildings, mobile homes, radio towers, sheds, signs and storage bins, but excluding sidewalks and paving on streets, driveways, parking areas and patios. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. The meaning of the term "subdivision" shall not, however, apply to the partitioning or dividing of land into tracts or parcels of land of more than ten acres. 
    Swimming pool means any artificially constructed pool or structure, erected in connection with or appurtenant to one or more private residences, either above or below or partly above or below grade, located either in part or wholly outside of a permanently enclosed and roofed building, designed to hold water to a depth, in any place in the pool or structure, greater than 24 inches when filled to capacity, and intended to be used for swimming and wading. 
    Throat length means the distance parallel to the centerline of a driveway to the first on-site location at which a driver can make a right-turn or a left-turn. On roadways with curb and gutter, the throat length shall be measured from the face of the curb. On roadways without a curb and gutter, the throat length shall be measured from the edge of the paved shoulder. 
    Throat width means the distance edge-to-edge of a driveway measured at the right-of-way line. 
    Trip generation means the estimated total number of vehicle trip ends produced by a specific land use or activity. A trip end is the total number of trips entering or leaving a specific land use or site over a designated period of time. Trip generation is estimated through the use of trip rates that are based upon the type and intensity of development. 
    Two-family dwelling means a building containing two separate dwelling units designed for residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set for single-family dwellings. 
    Underlying district means the base zone below an overlay zone, that establishes the fundamental permitted uses, densities and dimensional regulations applicable to lands subject to a zoning ordinance. 
    Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted when strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. 
    Yards. 
(1)  Yard, front means an open space extending the full width of the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building. 
(2)  Yard, rear means an open space extending the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building. 
(3)  Yard, side means an open space between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
    Zoning administrator means the official of the city or his authorized representative charged with the responsibility of administrating this chapter. 
    Zoning board of appeals means the board authorized to grant a variance or modification of the literal provisions of this chapter when, in its judgment, the strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-3-2; Ord. of 3-20-06, § II; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-5. - Illustrations. 
    The following illustrations shall be applicable for purposes of this chapter: 
LOTS AND AREAS 
ADD FIGURE 
YARDS 
ADD FIGURE 
SIDE YARDS ABUTTING A STREET 
ADD FIGURE 
BUILDING LINE 
ADD FIGURE 
FLOOR AREA 
ADD FIGURE 
BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS 
ADD FIGURE 
BUILDING HEIGHT 
ADD FIGURE 
BASEMENT AND STORY 
ADD FIGURE 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 74-6. - Interpretation of chapter. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. Unless specifically provided for, it is not intended by this chapter to repeal, invalidate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with the existing and unrepealed provisions of law or ordinance or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or land; provided, however, that, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, structures or land or upon the courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-29-1) 
Sec. 74-7. - Severability. 
    Sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and, should any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-29-2) 
Sec. 74-8. - Repeal of existing ordinances. 
    All ordinances and amendments thereto enacted or adopted by the city or the city council by virtue of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended, and all ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, are hereby repealed, as of May 31, 1995. The repeal of existing ordinances or parts of ordinances and their amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-29-3) 
Sec. 74-9. - Vested rights. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district or zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-29-4) 
Sec. 74-10. - Violations; penalties; nuisances. 
(a)  Violations generally. Whenever by the provisions of this chapter the performance of any act is required, or the performance of any act is prohibited, or wherever any regulation, dimension or limitation is imposed on the use of any land, or upon any land, or on the erection or alteration or the use or change of occupancy of structure, a failure to comply with such provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Every day on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation and a separate offense. 
(b)  Civil fine. Any person, or any other acting in behalf of such person, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto, or who fails to perform any act required under this chapter or does any prohibited act, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to investigate, administer and enforce these regulations. If, after investigation, the zoning administrator or his authorized representative determines that a person is in violation of this chapter, he is authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction notice or municipal civil infraction citation to the alleged violator. Service of the civil infraction notice or civil infraction citation shall be made in accordance with section 38-1 et seq. A civil fine shall be imposed as follows: $50.00 for a first offense, $150.00 for a first repeat offense, and $250.00 for any second or subsequent repeat offense. Each and every day on which any violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a repeat offense, subject to the fines established in this subsection. Additionally, any violation of these regulations is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and the imposition of any fines shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Violations declared nuisance. Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and the city may institute proceedings in the circuit court for the county for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-29-5) 
Sec. 74-11. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect following adoption and upon publication of a notice of adoption, published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, within 30 days after adoption. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-29-6) 
Sec. 74-12. - Fees in escrow for professional reviews. 
(a)  Any application for rezoning, site plan approval, a special land use permit, planned unit development, variance, or other use or activity requiring a permit under this chapter above the following threshold, may also require the deposit of fees to be held in escrow in the name of the applicant. An escrow fee shall be required by either the zoning administrator or the planning commission for any project which requires a traffic impact study under Article IX of this chapter, or which has more than 20 dwelling units, or more than 20,000 square feet of enclosed space, or which requires more than 20 parking spaces, or which involves surface or below surface mining or disposal of mine materials. An escrow fee may be required to obtain a professional review of any other project which may, in the discretion of the zoning administrator or planning commission create an identifiable and potentially negative impact on public roads, other infrastructure or services, or on adjacent properties and because of which, professional input is desired before a decision to approve, deny or approve with conditions is made. 
(b)  The escrow shall be used to pay professional review expenses of engineers, community planners, and any other professionals whose expertise, the city values to review the proposed application and/or site plan of an applicant. Professional review shall result in a report to the planning commission indicating the extent of conformance or nonconformance with this chapter and identify any problems which may create a threat to public health, safety or the general welfare. Mitigation measures or alterations to a proposed design may be identified where they would serve to lessen or eliminate identified impacts. The applicant will receive a copy of any professional review hired by the city and a copy of the statement of expenses for the professional services rendered, if requested. 
(c)  No application for which an escrow fee is required will be processed until the escrow fee is deposited with the treasurer. The amount of the escrow fee shall be established based on an estimate of the cost of the services to be rendered by the professionals contacted by the zoning administrator. The applicant is entitled to a refund of any unused escrow fees at the time a permit is either issued or denied in response to the applicant's request. 
(d)  If actual professional review costs exceed the amount of an escrow, the applicant shall pay the balance due prior to receipt of any land use or other permit issued by the city in response to the applicant's request. Any unused fee collected in escrow shall be promptly returned to the applicant once a final determination on an application has been made or the applicant withdraws the request and expenses have not yet been incurred. 
(e)  Disputes on the costs of professional reviews may be resolved by an arbitrator mutually satisfactory to both parties. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 1) 
Secs. 74-13-74-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-41. - Administration generally. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the city council in accordance with the City Zoning Act, Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended. The city council shall employ or appoint a zoning administrator to effectuate administration of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall have all the powers of a public officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-25-1) 
Sec. 74-42. - Duties of zoning administrator. 
(a)  The zoning administrator or his agent shall have the power to issue zoning permits, and to make inspections of premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the zoning administrator to approve plans or issue zoning permits for any construction or use until he has inspected such plans and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall not vary, change or grant exceptions to any terms of this chapter, or to any person making application under the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  The zoning administrator shall issue a permit when the conditions of this chapter are complied with by the applicant, regardless of the effect of such a permit on contracts such as deed covenants or private agreements. 
(e)  If the zoning administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuation of illegal uses of land, buildings or structures, and removal of illegal work being done, or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions. 
(f)  The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all approved preliminary and final site plans. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-25-2) 
Sec. 74-43. - Zoning compliance permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a zoning compliance permit has been issued by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  A building permit for erection, alteration, moving, enlargement or repair of any building shall not be issued until an approved zoning permit has been issued therefor. Issuance of the permit shall indicate that the uses and plans for which the permit is requested comply with this chapter. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all permits issued, and the record shall be open to public inspection. Failure to obtain a zoning permit shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  For any building other than a single-family and two-family dwelling, two complete sets of building plans shall accompany an application for a zoning permit. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-25-3) 
Sec. 74-44. - Building permit. 
(a)  No building permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any building shall be issued until a zoning permit has been issued. 
(b)  No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered or demolished without a building permit issued by the Dickinson Area Construction Code Commission. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued by the Dickinson Area Construction Code Commission except in conformity with this chapter, unless the commission receives a written order from the zoning board of appeals or the zoning administrator in the form of an administrative review or a variance, as provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Plans submitted in an application for a building permit shall contain information necessary for determining conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-25-4) 
Sec. 74-45. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No building, structure or lot for which a zoning and building permit have been issued shall be used or occupied until the Dickinson Area Construction Code Commission has, after final inspection, issued a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance has been made with all provisions of the applicable building codes. 
(b)  A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the Dickinson Area Construction Code Commission, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-25-5) 
Secs. 74-46-74-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 74-71. - Creation; membership. 
    There is hereby established a zoning board of appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and justice done. The board shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. Appointments shall be for a period of three years. All members shall be legal residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-1) 
Sec. 74-72. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide only those matters which it is specifically authorized to hear by Public Act and this chapter, and decide such matters as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  The zoning board of appeals shall not alter or change the zoning district classifications of any property, or make any change in the terms of this chapter, and shall not take any action which results, in effect, in making such legislative changes. 
(d)  Decisions of the zoning board of appeals shall become effective immediately, following the final hearing and ruling of the board. The board shall, however, decide all applications and appeals within 30 days after completion of its final hearing thereon. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-2) 
Sec. 74-73. - Organization, meetings and rules of procedure. 
(a)  Officers; adoption of rules of procedure. The zoning board of appeals shall annually elect from its membership a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary and such other officers as it may deem necessary. Rules and regulations prescribing procedure for the performance of its authorized powers and duties shall be adopted by the board. The procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. 
(b)  Required vote. The concurring vote of three-fifths of the members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision or interpretation of the zoning administrator, or to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon which the board is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in this chapter. 
(c)  Quorum. Three members of the board present at a meeting shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. 
(d)  Meeting dates. Meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may specify in its rules of procedure. 
(e)  Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of each meeting, and the zoning board of appeals shall record into the minutes all findings, conditions, facts and other relevant factors, including the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and all of its official actions. 
(f)  Meetings and records to be open to public. All meetings and records shall be open to the public. All minutes shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk, or his agent, shall act as recording secretary to the zoning board of appeals, including recording the minutes, legal notices and property notices. 
(g)  Assistance by city departments. The board may call on any city departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the responsibility of such departments to render such assistance as may reasonably be required. 
(h)  Adjournment. The board may adjourn any meeting held for purposes of reviewing an application, or hearing an appeal, in order to allow the obtaining of additional information or to cause such further notice as it deems necessary to be served upon such other property owners as it decides may logically be concerned with the application or appeal. In the case of an adjourned hearing, persons previously notified and persons already heard need not be notified of the time of resumption of the hearing unless the board so decides. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-3; Ord. of 10-6-97) 
State Law reference- Board of appeals, MCL 125.585. 
Sec. 74-74. - Hearings. 
(a)  The chairman of the zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time and date for a public hearing, not to exceed 30 days from the date of filing any application with the city clerk. 
(b)  On behalf of the board, the clerk shall give due notice of the hearing by regular mail to the parties of interest and to property owners within 300 feet of the subject property as shown in the most recent assessment roll of the city. 
(c)  All zoning board of appeals hearings shall be noticed in a newspaper of general circulation. All notices of hearing shall be mailed and published not more than 15 days and not less then five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be held. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-4) 
Sec. 74-75. - Administrative review. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirements, permit, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in enforcing any provision of this chapter, as follows: 
(1)  The zoning board of appeals, on appeal, shall interpret zoning district boundaries according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals, on appeal, shall classify a use which is not specifically mentioned as part of the use regulations of any zoning district so that it conforms to a comparable permitted or prohibited use in accordance with the purpose and intent of each district. 
(3)  The zoning board of appeals, on appeal, shall determine the off-street parking and loading space requirements of any use not specifically mentioned in article VI of this chapter either by classifying it with one of the groups listed in article VI or by an analysis of the specific need. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-5) 
Sec. 74-76. - Variances. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals may, upon appeal, authorize specific variances from site development requirements, regulations and conditions, parking and loading requirements and advertising structure provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that all the required findings listed in this subsection are met, and that the spirit of this chapter is observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done: 
(1)  That compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk or density would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. 
(2)  That a grant of the variance applied for would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district, or whether a lesser relaxation than that applied for would give substantial relief to the owner of the property involved and be more consistent with justice to other property owners. 
(3)  That the plight of the landowner is due to the unique circumstances of the property. 
(4)  That the problem is not self-created, resulting from the actions of the applicant. 
(b)  A nonconforming use of land or a structure or building shall not solely constitute grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(c)  The zoning board of appeals shall further find that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that it is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(d)  The zoning board of appeals shall further find that granting of the variance will be in harmony with the intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public interest. 
(e)  In granting any variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, to be made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, the breach of which shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(f)  In exercising the powers mentioned in this section, the board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the public official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(g)  Each variance granted under the provisions of this chapter shall become null and void unless the construction or occupancy authorized by such variance or permit has been commenced within one year after the granting of such variance and pursued diligently to completion. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-6) 
Sec. 74-77. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals concerning interpretation and administration of this chapter shall be made by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof with the city clerk within a period of 30 days from the occurrence of the contested action. The clerk shall transmit to the zoning board of appeals copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the Dickinson Area Construction Code Commission or the zoning administrator certifies to the board that a stay would, in its or his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings should not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the courts. 
(c)  Appeals may be filed by any person or agency felt to be aggrieved. 
(d)  Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The zoning board of appeals shall decide upon all matters within the required time limit. The decision of the board of appeals shall be on a special form for that purpose, which contains a record of its findings and its determination along with a record of the vote. The time limit may be extended by written agreement between the applicant and the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-7) 
Sec. 74-78. - Presentation of questions to zoning administrator; recourse from decisions of board. 
    All questions concerning application of the provisions of this chapter shall first be presented to the zoning administrator. Such questions shall be presented to the zoning board of appeals only on appeal from the decisions of the zoning administrator. Recourse from decisions of the zoning board of appeals shall be to the circuit court of the county, as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-26-8) 
Secs. 74-79-74-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 74-101. - Designation; powers and duties. 
    The city planning commission is hereby designated the commission specified in chapter 7, section 7.9(A), of the Charter, with such powers and duties as are given to the commission by the Charter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-27-1; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Secs. 74-102-74-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 74-121. - Intent. 
    For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the territorial limits of the city, this chapter shall not be amended except to correct an error in this chapter, or, because of changed or changing conditions in a particular area in the city generally, to rezone an area, to extend the boundary of an existing district, or to change the regulations and restrictions thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-28-1) 
Sec. 74-122. - Initiation. 
    Subject to the limitations of the statement of intent in section 74-121, an amendment to this chapter text or a map may be initiated by the city council on it own motion, or by petition of any person desiring an amendment or change. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-28-2) 
Sec. 74-123. - Referral of petition to planning commission. 
    Upon receipt of a petition to amend this chapter, the city clerk shall refer the petition to the planning commission for study and recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-28-3; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-124. - Action by planning commission. 
    The planning commission shall make a complete study of a petition to amend this chapter. The commission shall recommend to the city council such action as the commission deems proper. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-28-4; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-125. - Action by city council; review criteria. 
(a)  A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adoption of any proposed amendment to this chapter. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publishing the notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, stating the time and place of such hearing and the substance of the proposed amendment. This notice shall appear in the newspaper at least 15 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. Notice shall be given by ordinary mail to each public utility or railroad company owning and operating any public utility or railroad within the districts or zones affected, that registers its name with the city clerk for purposes of receiving such notice. 
(b)  In reviewing any petition for a zoning amendment, the planning commission and the city council shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition. The facts to be considered by the planning commission and city council include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Whether or not the requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or by an error in the original ordinance. 
(2)  The precedents, and the possible effects of such precedents, which might result from approval or denial of the petition. 
(3)  The capability of the city or other government agencies to provide any services, facilities and programs that might be required if the petition were approved. 
(4)  Effect of approval of the petition on the condition and value of property in the city. 
(5)  Effect of approval of the petition on adopted development policies of the city. 
All findings of fact shall be made a part of the public records of the planning commission and city council. An amendment shall not be approved unless these and other identified facts are affirmatively resolved in terms of the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-28-5; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-126. - Contents of petition. 
    All petitions for amendments to this chapter, without limiting the right to file additional material, shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  The petitioner's name, address and interest in the petition, as well as the name, address and interest of every person having a legal or an equitable interest in the land covered by the petition. 
(2)  The nature and effect of the proposed amendment. 
(3)  If the proposed amendment would require a change in the zoning map, a fully dimensional map showing: 
a.  The land which would be affected by the proposed amendment. 
b.  The legal description of such land. 
c.  The present zoning classification of the land. 
d.  The zoning classification of all abutting districts. 
e.  All public and private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the land under consideration. 
(4)  The alleged error in this chapter, if any, which would be corrected by the proposed amendment, together with a detailed explanation of such error in this chapter which is alleged, and detailed reasons as to how the proposed amendment will correct the error. 
(5)  The changed or changing conditions, if any, in the area or in the municipality generally, which make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary. 
(6)  All other circumstances, factors and reasons which the applicant offers in support of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-28-6) 
Sec. 74-127. - Comprehensive review of zoning regulations. 
    The planning commission, at intervals of not less than three years, shall examine the provisions of this chapter and shall submit a report to the city council recommending changes, if any, deemed desirable in the interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-28-7; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Secs. 74-128-74-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 74-151. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to require site plan review approval for certain buildings, structures and uses that can be expected to have a significant impact on natural resources, traffic patterns, adjacent parcels and the character of future development. The regulations contained in this division are intended to provide and promote the orderly development of the city; safe and convenient traffic movement, both within a site and in relation to access streets; the stability of land values and investments, by preventing the impairment or depreciation of land values and development by the erection of structures or additions or alterations thereto without proper attention to setting or to unsightly or undesirable appearances; harmonious relationships of buildings, other structures and uses, both within a site and with adjacent sites; and the conservation of natural amenities and resources. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-24-1) 
Sec. 74-152. - Applicability. 
    Site plan review approval is required as follows: 
(1)  For those uses requiring special use permit review, as specified. 
(2)  For all land uses, excepting single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings and nonresidential uses requiring less than five parking spaces. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-24-2) 
Sec. 74-153. - Procedure. 
(a)  Submission of application; payment of fee. Application for site plan review shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on a special form for that purpose. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in accordance with the duly adopted schedule of fees to cover the costs of processing the application. No part of any fee shall be refundable. 
(b)  Required information and data. Every application should be accompanied by the following information and data: 
(1)  The special form supplied by the zoning administrator filled out in full by the applicant. 
(2)  A site plan, plot plan or development plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, showing: 
a.  Date, north point and scale. 
b.  The actual dimensions of all lot and property lines, as shown by a licensed surveyor, with the survey stakes visible, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
c.  Size, shape and location of existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
d.  The location of parking areas, all parking spaces and driveways. 
e.  Existing public rights-of-way and private easements. 
f.  Watercourses and water bodies, including surface drainageways. 
g.  A stormwater drainage plan, to include elevation contour lines not exceeding five feet showing existing and proposed grades and drainage systems and structures. 
h.  Existing significant vegetation. 
i.  A landscaping plan indicating locations of proposed planting and screening, fencing, signs and advertising features. 
(c)  Review by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the site plan to determine compliance with permitted land use, density of development, general circulation and other provisions of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall respond to the applicant within 45 days of filing, and, if the application is denied, shall cite the reasons for denial. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-24-3) 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584d. 
Sec. 74-154. - Standards for approval. 
(a)  All elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and type of lot, the character of adjoining property and the type and size of buildings. The site will be so developed as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this chapter. 
(b)  The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and by topographic modifications which result in maximum harmony with adjacent areas. 
(c)  Special attention shall be given to proper site surface drainage so that removal of stormwater will not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
(d)  The site plan shall provide reasonable visual and sound privacy for all dwelling units located therein. Fences, walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and for the privacy of its occupants. 
(e)  All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle access by some practical means to all sides. 
(f)  Every structure or dwelling unit shall have access to a public street, walkway or other area dedicated to common use. 
(g)  There shall be provided a pedestrian circulation system which is insulated as completely as reasonably possible from the vehicular circulation system. 
(h)  All loading and unloading areas and outside storage areas, including areas for the storage of trash, which face or are visible from residential districts or public thoroughfares, shall be screened by a vertical screen consisting of structural or plant materials no less than six feet in height. 
(i)  Exterior lighting shall be so arranged that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and so that it does not impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets. Flashing or intermittent lights shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-24-4) 
Sec. 74-155. - Action by zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall have the function, duty and power to approve or disapprove, or to approve subject to compliance with such modifications or conditions as he may deem necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations, the design and site plan of all proposed buildings or structures, or the development of the entire property, the specifications of all exits, entrances, streets, highways or other means of ingress and egress, the proposed timing of construction, the proposed manner of dedication to the public or maintenance of such facilities, and the construction of appropriate screens or buffers. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-24-5) 
Sec. 74-156. - Modifications. 
    Once site plan approval has been granted by the zoning administrator, changes to the approved site plan shall require a resubmission and payment of fees. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-24-6) 
Sec. 74-157. - Appeals. 
    Any person considering himself aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator in granting or denial of site plan approval shall have the right to appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals. The appeal shall be exclusive and must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the decision of the zoning administrator. Appeals of a decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-24-7) 
Secs. 74-158-74-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-181. - Establishment of districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts, which shall be known by the following respective symbols and names: 
Residential Districts R-1 Single-Family Residential R-2 Moderate Density Residential R-3 Multiple-Family Residential Nonresidential Districts O-S Office Service B-1 Neighborhood Business B-2 General Business I-1 Light Industrial I-2 General Industrial O-R Open Space Conservation/Recreation  
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-4-1) 
Sec. 74-182. - District map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the zoning districts listed in section 74-181 are hereby established as shown on the zoning map of the city which accompanies the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which map, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described in this chapter. 
(b)  One copy of the official zoning map is to be maintained and kept up to date by the zoning administrator, accessible to the public, and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of properties in the city. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-4-2) 
Sec. 74-183. - Scope of district regulations. 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, every building and structure erected, every use of any lot, building or structure established, every structural alteration or relocation of an existing building or structure occurring, and every enlargement of or addition to an existing use, building and structure occurring after May 31, 1995, shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable in the zoning district in which such use, building or structure shall be located. 
(b)  Uses are permitted by right only if specifically listed as uses permitted by right in the various zoning districts. Where not specifically permitted, uses are thereby prohibited, unless construed by the zoning administrator to be similar to a use expressly permitted by this chapter. 
(c)  Accessory uses are permitted as indicated for the various zoning districts, and if such uses are clearly incidental to the permitted principal uses. 
(d)  The uses permitted subject to special conditions are recognized as possessing characteristics of such unique and special nature, relative to location, design, size, etc., as necessitating individual standards and conditions in order to safeguard the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-4-6) 
State Law reference- Regulation of buildings, authority to zone, MCL 125.582. 
Sec. 74-184. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Wherever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-4-7) 
Sec. 74-185. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Any area annexed to the city shall, immediately upon such annexation, be automatically classified as an R-1 district, until a zoning map for the area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend appropriate zoning for such an area within three months after the annexation becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-4-8; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-186. - Exemptions. 
    The location of pipes, wires, poles, and generating and transmission equipment of public utilities or railroad tracks regulated by the state or by the United States are exempt from regulation under this chapter. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential services by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, communication, telephone, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, or collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories in connection therewith which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general public health, safety, convenience or welfare, shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city and upon filing of an application for administrative review of the proposed activity with the city manager. While the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential services is exempted from the application of other provisions as contained in this chapter, such exemption shall not extend to utility buildings, substations, communication, microwave or wind generation towers, structures which are enclosures or shelters for service equipment, or maintenance depots. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-4-9) 
Secs. 74-187-74-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-211. - Purpose. 
    A single-family residential district implies a predominance of dwelling structures located on individual lots of land and housing only one family or household group. The R-1 single-family residential districts are designed to be the most restrictive of all residential zoning districts in the city. It is the purpose of this division to create districts providing stability to the essential characteristics of these residential areas and to promote and encourage a suitable and safe environment for family life. Regulations contained in this division also provide for the development of certain limited residentially related facilities which can provide convenient services to residential areas yet still preserve the residential character of the district. In order to avoid intrusion of undesirable uses and to foster all possible benefits for continued high quality of the residential environment, all nonresidential land and structure uses are classified as being permitted by special use permit. Such uses present a potential injurious effect upon residential and other property unless authorized under specific imposed conditions. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-5-1) 
Sec. 74-212. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In the R-1 single-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: single-family detached dwellings. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-5-2) 
Sec. 74-213. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 district: 
(1)  Accessory structures, subject to the requirements of section 74-420, normally associated with single-family dwellings, such as a private garage, shed for yard tools, playhouse, boathouse and the like. 
(2)  Automobile parking, subject to the requirements of article VI of this chapter. 
(3)  Pens or enclosures for household pets. A maximum of three household pets per household are allowed in the R-1 district. 
(4)  Portable buildings such as ice-fishing shacks and storage buildings not attached to a permanent foundation, which are allowed in the rear yard only, subject to the regulations in section 74-420. 
(5)  Swimming pools (refer to section 74-558). 
(Ord. of 9-18-95(2)) 
Sec. 74-214. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the R-1 district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)  Religious institutions: churches, synagogues, houses of worship, convents and other housing for religious personnel. 
(2)  Educational and social institutions: public or private elementary and secondary schools, institutions for higher education, auditoriums and other places for assembly and centers for social activities, public libraries, museums and art galleries, and nursery schools and day care centers. 
(3)  Recreational facilities: public and private parks, playgrounds, community centers, parkways, golf courses and similar recreational facilities. 
(4)  Radio and television towers, public utility towers and microwave towers and attendant facilities. Such towers shall be situated only within the following property descriptions: 
a.  Northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 31, Township 40 North, Range 30 West. 
b.  Northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township 40 North, Range 30 West. 
c.  Northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township 40 North, Range 30 West. 
d.  Northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 40 North, Range 30 West. 
(5)  Planned unit residential developments (refer to section 74-557). 
(6)  Home occupations. 
(7)  Radio and television satellite dish antennas over 24 inches in diameter (refer to section 74-560). 
(8)  Private kennels. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-5-4) 
Sec. 74-215. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the R-1 district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. No structures shall be established on any parcel, nor shall any lot be subdivided, providing less than 9,000 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 80 feet for single-family dwellings. 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by all buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed 35 percent. 
(4)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The required front yard setback shall be not less than 30 feet, or equal to the established setback line of existing homes on the same side of the street within 100 feet. 
b.  Side yard. The side yard setback shall be in accordance with the following schedule, except, in the case of a corner lot where the side yard abuts a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be ten feet where there is a common rear yard. In the case of a rear yard abutting the side yard of an adjacent lot, the side yard abutting the street shall not be less than the required front yard of that district. 
1.  On lots of less than 100 feet of street frontage, the minimum side-yard setback shall be ten percent of the width of the lot measured at the front setback line. 
2.  On lots of more than 100 feet of street frontage, the minimum side-yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
d.  Setback from right-of-way or water body. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
(5)  Maximum height. 
a.  No residential structure shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet, measured from the average finished grade at the front setback line. Accessory buildings shall not exceed one story, or a height of 18 feet, on any residential lot. 
(6)  Minimum building floor area. Every dwelling erected shall have a minimum gross living space per dwelling unit of not less than 1,000 square feet on the first floor, if one story, or 800 square feet on the first floor level if two stories. In any case, the total living area shall not be less than 1,000 square feet exclusive of basements, garages, porches and breezeways. 
(7)  One principal building permitted per lot. No more than one principal building may be permitted on a lot or parcel located in the R-1 district. 
(8)  Nuisances prohibited. No use in this district shall constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-5-5; Ord. of 7-16-01(1)) 
Secs. 74-216-74-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-2 MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-231. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-2 district is to achieve the same character, stability and sound residential environment as intended for the R-1 district, yet at a slightly higher density of population. This is to be accomplished through the construction and occupancy of single-family dwellings on slightly smaller lots and also by permitting two-family dwellings. There is no intent to promote, by these requirements, a residential district of lower quality than the R-1 district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-6-1) 
Sec. 74-232. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In an R-2 moderate density residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-6-2) 
Sec. 74-233. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses: those accessory uses as permitted in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-6-3) 
Sec. 74-234. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the R-2 district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)  Those special uses as permitted in section 74-214. 
(2)  Spouse abuse shelters. 
(3)  Administrative offices accessory to an approved special use. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-6-4) 
Sec. 74-235. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the R-2 district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings shall require a minimum parcel size of not less than 6,000 square feet of lot area. 
b.  Two-family dwellings shall require a minimum parcel size of not less than 7,200 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. 
a.  The minimum lot width for single-family detached dwellings shall be 50 feet. 
b.  The minimum lot width for two-family dwellings shall be 60 feet. 
(3)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The required front yard setback shall not be less than 25 feet, or equal to the established setback line of existing homes on the same side of the street within 100 feet. 
b.  Side yards. Side yard setbacks are as follows: 
1.  On lots of less than 100 feet of street frontage, the minimum side-yard setback shall be ten percent of the width of the lot measured at the front setback line. 
2.  On lots of more than 100 feet of street frontage, the minimum side-yard setback shall be ten feet. 
c.  Rear yard. Rear yard setbacks are as follows: 
1.  Single-family: 30 feet. 
2.  Two-family: 40 feet. 
d.  Setback from right-of-way or water body. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
(4)  Maximum height requirements. 
a.  No residential structure shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet, measured from the average finished grade at the front setback line. 
b.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed one story or a height of 18 feet on any residential lot. 
(5)  Minimum building floor area. 
a.  Single-family dwelling: See section 74-215(6). 
b.  Minimum gross living space in a two-family dwelling shall not be less than 1,800 square feet, and neither living unit shall contain less than 800 square feet of living area, exclusive of basements, garages, porches and breezeways. 
(6)  One principal building permitted per lot. No more than one principal building shall be permitted on a lot or parcel located in the R-2 district. 
(7)  Nuisances prohibited. No use in this district shall constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-6-5; Ord. of 7-16-01(2)) 
Secs. 74-236-74-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-251. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the R-3 district to accommodate a mixture of housing types, including multiple-family residential uses, occurring at a higher density than in the single-family district, but at no lower standards of quality. Multiple-family residential development is to be located near major utility and transportation corridors, and major concentrations of natural and social amenities. In certain instances this district may act as a buffer area between single-family residential and nonresidential uses. This district is further provided to serve the residential needs of persons desiring the apartment type of accommodation with central services and minimal maintenance, as opposed to the residential patterns found in the single-family districts. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-7-1) 
Sec. 74-252. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In the R-3 multiple-family district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses). 
(3)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
(4)  Multiple-family dwellings (apartments) of three stories or less. 
(5)  Lodginghouses or boardinghouses. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-7-2) 
Sec. 74-253. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 district: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses listed in section 74-252. 
(2)  Accessory buildings or uses developed to service only the residents of an apartment complex, including swimming pools, community buildings, recreation areas and other similar uses. 
(3)  Those uses allowed in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-7-3) 
Sec. 74-254. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the R-3 district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)  Those special uses as permitted in the R-2 moderate density residential district. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings (apartments) in structures of three stories or more. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast operations. 
(4)  Nursing or convalescent homes. 
(5)  Multiple-family low rent family public housing and multiple-family low rent senior citizen housing. 
(6)  Mobile home parks. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-7-4) 
Sec. 74-255. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the R-3 district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings shall conform to section 74-215. 
b.  Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses) shall require a minimum parcel size of not less than 6,000 square feet. 
c.  Two-family dwellings shall require a minimum parcel size of not less than 7,200 square feet of lot area. 
d.  Multiple-family dwellings (apartments) shall require a minimum parcel size of 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. 
a.  The minimum lot width for single-family detached dwellings shall be 50 feet. 
b.  The minimum lot width for single-family attached dwellings (townhouses) shall be 100 feet of public road frontage. 
c.  The minimum lot width for multiple-family dwellings (apartments) shall be 100 feet of public road frontage. 
(3)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The required front yard setback shall be not less than 25 feet for one- or two-story buildings, with an additional one-foot setback required for each additional one foot the building exceeds 40 feet. 
b.  Side yards. 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings. The side yard shall not be less than eight feet. 
2.  Three-family to ten-family dwellings. The side yard shall not be less than 15 feet. 
3.  Greater than ten-family dwellings. The side yard shall not be less than 25 feet from the property line for one- or two-story buildings, with an additional foot required for each additional foot of height of the building over 40 feet. 
4.  Setback from right-of-way. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way. 
c.  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be 40 feet from the property line for one- or two-story buildings, with an additional foot required for each additional foot of height of the building over 40 feet. 
d.  Other yard dimensions. 
1.  No multiple-family building designed, erected or used for ten or more families shall be located closer than 50 feet to any single-family residential zone line. 
2.  No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
3.  No single building or connected buildings may exceed 200 feet in any one dimension. All buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle access, by some practical means, to all sides. 
4.  The distance of separation between grouped buildings shall be a minimum of 30 feet. 
5.  No entrance to a multiple-family structure shall be located closer to any street, access road, driveway or parking area than 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum living space. 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings. Minimum gross living space in a single-family detached dwelling shall comply with section 74-215(6). 
b.  Two-family dwellings. Minimum gross living space in a two-family dwelling shall comply with section 74-235(5)b. 
c.  Townhouses and multiple-family dwellings. The minimum gross living space in a single-family attached dwelling (townhouse) or multiple-family dwelling shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Square Feet Efficiency   350 One-bedroom unit   600 Two-bedroom unit   800 Three-bedroom unit 1,000  
(5)  Nuisances prohibited. No use in this district shall constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-7-5) 
Secs. 74-256-74-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - O-S OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-271. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the O-S district to permit the integration of office, personal service and limited business uses. This district is specifically designed for applications where existing residential uses are experiencing redevelopment pressures. Among the purposes of the O-S district is the development of various office uses performing administrative, professional and personal services, and very limited commercial ventures. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-10-1) 
Sec. 74-272. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In an O-S office service district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Office establishments which perform services on the premises. 
a.  Financial institutions. 
b.  Insurance offices. 
c.  Real estate offices. 
d.  Offices for attorneys, accountants, architects, engineers and similar professionals. 
e.  Photographic studios. 
f.  Other office establishments similar to and compatible with such uses. 
(2)  Professional service establishments, medical offices and clinics providing human health care on an outpatient basis. 
(3)  Miscellaneous business service establishments. 
a.  Consumer credit reporting agencies. 
b.  Mailing list and stenographic services. 
c.  Business management consulting services. 
d.  Duplicating services. 
e.  Other establishments similar to and compatible with such uses. 
(4)  Governmental offices and libraries. 
(5)  Churches and related facilities. 
(6)  Offices of nonprofit organizations, such as professional membership organizations, labor unions, civic, social and fraternal associations and political organizations. 
(7)  Mortuaries and funeral homes, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Sufficient off-street automobile parking and assembly area shall be provided for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. The assembly area shall be provided in addition to the otherwise required off-street parking area. 
b.  Loading and unloading areas used by ambulances, hearses or other such service vehicles shall be obscured from view with an opaque fence or wall not less than six feet in height. 
(8)  Hospitals. 
(9)  Nursing or convalescent homes. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-10-2) 
Sec. 74-273. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the O-S district: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal use. 
(2)  Signs, subject to the regulations established in article VII of this chapter. 
(3)  Off-street parking as required by article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-10-3) 
Sec. 74-274. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the O-S district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: establishments customarily related to medical and dental uses when located in a medical or dental building or complex and when intended primarily to serve the occupants of the building or complex in which they are located. 
(1)  Pharmacies. 
(2)  Medical, dental and optical laboratories. 
(3)  Stores offering supportive or corrective garments and prosthetic appliances. 
(4)  Other establishments similar to and compatible with such uses. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-10-4) 
Sec. 74-275. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the O-S district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. No structure shall be established on any parcel providing less than 5,000 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(3)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The required front yard setback shall be not less than 30 feet, or equal to the established setback line. 
b.  Side and rear yards. The side and rear yard setback shall be ten feet, except in the case of a corner lot, where the side yard shall not be less than the setback required for the front yard. 
c.  Side and rear yards adjacent to residential district. No structure shall be less than 20 feet from any residential district boundary line. 
d.  Setback from right-of-way or water body. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
(4)  Maximum height. Maximum height is 35 feet measured from the average finished grade at the front setback line, unless the required front yard is increased by one foot for every foot of height above 35 feet. 
(5)  Other requirements. 
a.  Landscaping shall be maintained in all required front, side and rear yards, in accordance with plans approved by the zoning administrator as a part of the site plan review. 
b.  Lighting shall be accomplished in a manner such that no illumination source shall adversely affect the welfare of an adjacent property. 
c.  Front, side or rear yards may not be used for storage. 
d.  Trash containers shall be enclosed by a covered structure on at least three sides. The property shall be maintained free from litter. 
e.  Air conditioning units, heating oil storage tanks or similar appurtenances shall be properly screened as approved by the zoning administrator. 
f.  In addition to the site plan requirements of article II, division 5, of this chapter, for all proposed office or commercial uses in the O-S district, an elevational drawing and complete set of construction plans shall be submitted for approval. 
(6)  No use in this district shall constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-10-5) 
Secs. 74-276-74-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-291. - Purpose. 
    The neighborhood business district is intended to encompass businesses which cater to the retail and service needs of the surrounding neighborhood, but which do not require large areas of land. These districts are encouraged to develop in clusters with common parking areas. The regulations and conditions contained in this division are designed to promote residential and commercial uses such as small stores and service establishments which serve primarily the people of the immediate neighborhood and which can thrive without drawing patrons from a large part of the city and creating the traffic congestion which results therefrom. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-11-1) 
Sec. 74-292. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In a B-1 neighborhood business district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted by right in the R-2 district. 
(2)  Retail establishments marketing convenience goods, such as groceries, fruit, meats, dairy products, produce, baked goods and alcoholic beverages, and stores selling drugs, hardware, novelties and gifts, flowers, books, stationary, tobacco and sundries and small household articles, all of which primarily serve the immediate neighborhood. 
(3)  Personal service establishments performing services on the premises such as barbershops and beauty shops, shoeshine and shoe repair shops, self-service laundries, branch banks, professional offices and studios. 
(4)  Eating and drinking establishments where food or alcoholic beverages are served within a completely enclosed building. Fast food and drive-up restaurants are not included in this district. 
(5)  Bed and breakfast operations. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-11-2) 
Sec. 74-293. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-1 district: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal use. 
(2)  Signs, subject to the regulations in article VII of this chapter. 
(3)  Off-street parking as required in article VI of this chapter. 
(4)  Those uses permitted in the R-2 district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-11-3) 
Sec. 74-294. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the B-1 district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)  The same special uses as permitted in the R-2 moderate density residential district. 
(2)  Automobile service stations. 
(3)  Wholesale establishments involved with the processing, packaging and treatment of food products. 
(4)  Open air businesses such as retail sales of nursery stock, lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies, provided the total sales and storage area is fenced or otherwise enclosed in a permanent manner. 
(5)  Temporary outdoor uses or sales, incidental to the business conducted on the premises. 
(6)  Utility and public service buildings. 
(7)  Veterinary clinic and/or animal hospital. 
(8)  Greenhouses. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-11-4; Ord. of 3-17-08; Ord. of 7-7-08) 
Sec. 74-295. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the B-1 district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. No structure shall be established on any parcel providing less than 5,000 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(3)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The required front yard setback shall be not less than 20 feet, or equal to the established setback line. 
b.  Side and rear yards. 
1.  The side and rear yard setback shall be ten feet, except in the case of a corner lot, where the side yard shall not be less than the setback required for the front yard. 
2.  The side yard may be eliminated under the following conditions: 
i.  The side walls are of a fireproof construction in compliance with applicable building codes in effect at the time of construction and are wholly without opening. 
ii.  The adjacent property is not residential in nature. 
c.  Setback from right-of-way or water body. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
(4)  Maximum height. Maximum height is 35 feet measured from the average finished grade at the front setback line, unless the required front yard is increased by one foot for every foot of height above 35 feet. 
(5)  Other requirements. 
a.  Landscaping shall be maintained in all required front, side and rear yards, in accordance with plans approved by the zoning administrator as a part of the site plan review. 
b.  Lighting shall be accomplished in a manner such that no illumination shall adversely affect the welfare of an adjacent property. 
c.  Side or rear yards may not be used for storage, except in accordance with a special use permit issued under section 74-294(4). 
d.  Trash containers shall be enclosed by a covered structure on at least three sides. The property shall be maintained free from litter. 
e.  Air conditioning units, heating oil storage tanks or similar appurtenances shall be properly screened as approved by the zoning administrator. 
f.  Where a B-1 district is located adjacent to a residential district, a greenbelt buffer, vertical screen, solid fence or berm shall be provided along the side and rear yard as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Nuisances prohibited. No use in this district shall constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-11-5) 
Secs. 74-296-74-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-311. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the B-2 district to provide a district and area within the city where a wide range of commercial and business facilities can be centralized to most efficiently and effectively serve the community. These regulations are intended to ensure harmonious relationships with surrounding land uses and in particular have minimal impact on surrounding residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-12-1) 
Sec. 74-312. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In a B-2 general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted by right in the B-1 neighborhood business district, except single-family residences and duplexes. Residential occupancy is permitted above the ground floor. Residential occupancy is only permitted on the ground floor if required to comply with barrier-free access requirements under state or federal law, but no greater occupancy shall be allowed than that required to comply. 
(2)  General retail establishments whose principal activity is the sale of new merchandise to the public, including but not limited to household appliance stores, furniture stores, office supply stores, gift stores, hardware stores, banks, restaurants, cocktail lounges, supermarkets, bakeries, delicatessens, variety stores and other retail establishments similar to and compatible with such uses, except those in which the required repair and service facilities occupy more than 50 percent of the total floor area. 
(3)  Personal service establishments and studios, such as beauty shops and barbershops, dressmakers, tailors, upholsterers, offices of lawyers, doctors or dentists, photo shops and similar service establishments. 
(4)  Theaters, excepting outdoor or drive-in theaters. 
(5)  Automobile service stations, automobile repair garages, automatic and self-service carwash establishments and tire shops. 
(6)  Art or antique shops, secondhand stores and pawnshops. 
(7)  Amusement enterprises, including billiard or pool halls, bowling alleys, dancehalls, nightclubs, skating rinks and the like, if conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(8)  Hotels, motels, motor hotels, and bed and breakfast operations. 
(9)  Printing, publishing, photographic reproduction, blueprinting and related trades and arts. 
(10)  Other retail or service uses similar to such uses. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-12-2) 
Sec. 74-313. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-2 district: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal use. 
(2)  Signs, subject to the regulations in article VII of this chapter. 
(3)  Off-street parking as required in article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-12-3) 
Sec. 74-314. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the B-2 district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)  Shopping malls or similar development. 
(2)  Outdoor display and sales of motor vehicles, boat sales, recreational vehicles and the like provided the outdoor area is paved and properly drained, and otherwise complies with all licensing and regulatory requirements set forth in MCL 257.248, et seq, of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, and provided no dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof are stored outside. 
(3)  Temporary structures, tents, greenhouses or fruit and vegetable stands erected for a period of more than 72 hours; provided that all wiring, plumbing, fire protection and exits are approved by the fire chief and building inspector. 
(4)  Adult entertainment (refer to section 74-561). 
(5)  Drive-in or fast food restaurants (refer to section 74-562). 
(6)  The same special uses as listed for the R-3 district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-12-4; Ord. of 9-4-01) 
Sec. 74-315. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the B-2 district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. There are no minimum requirements for lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. There are no minimum requirements for lot width. 
(3)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be 20 feet, or equal to the minimum distance established by existing buildings within 200 feet of a proposed principal building location. 
b.  Side and rear yards. 
1.  The principal building may be constructed on the side property line provided that access is available to the rear yard by means of a drive or an alley; but if side yards are provided they shall be ten feet in width. 
2.  If side yards are eliminated, the following conditions must be met: 
i.  The side walls shall be of a fireproof construction in compliance with applicable codes in force at the time of construction and shall be wholly without opening. 
ii.  The adjacent property shall not be residential in nature. 
c.  Setback from right-of-way or water body. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
d.  Side and rear yards adjacent to residential district. No structure shall be less than 20 feet from any residential district boundary line. 
(4)  Maximum height. Maximum height is 40 feet, measured from the average finished grade at the front setback line. 
(5)  Other requirements. 
a.  Lighting shall be accomplished in a manner such that no illumination shall adversely affect the welfare of an adjacent property. 
b.  Side or rear yards may not be used for storage. 
c.  Trash containers shall be enclosed by a covered structure on at least three sides. The property shall be maintained free from litter. 
d.  Air conditioning units, heating oil storage tanks or similar appurtenances shall be properly screened as approved by the zoning administrator. 
e.  Where a B-2 district is located adjacent to a residential district, a greenbelt buffer, vertical screen, fence or berm shall be provided along the side and rear yard as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Nuisances prohibited. No use in this district shall constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-12-5) 
Secs. 74-316-74-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-331. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the I-1 district to encourage and facilitate the development of research, warehouse, light industrial and wholesale activities in a setting conducive to public health; economic stability and growth; protection from blight, deterioration and nonindustrial encroachment; and efficient traffic movement, including both employee and truck traffic. These enterprises will be characterized by the absence of objectionable external effects and the potentiality of attractive industrial architecture. Regulations for this district are designed to promote the development of industrial areas which will be compatible with one another and with adjacent or surrounding districts. Further, the regulations contained in this division are intended to prohibit residential or commercial uses as being incompatible with the primary permitted uses, as well as being adequately provided for in other districts. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-13-1) 
Sec. 74-332. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In an I-1 light industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any use allowed in the B-2 district. 
(2)  Nonmanufacturing research and development establishments, including: 
a.  Laboratories, offices and other facilities for research, both basic and applied, conducted by or for any individual, organization or concern. 
b.  Production of prototype products, limited to the scale necessary for full investigation of the merits of the product. 
(3)  Wholesale and warehousing: the sale at wholesale or warehousing of automotive equipment, dry goods and apparel, groceries and related products, raw farm products except livestock, electrical goods, hardware, plumbing, heating equipment and supplies, machinery and equipment, tobacco and tobacco products, beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages, paper and paper products, furniture and home furnishings, and any commodity the manufacture of which is permitted in this district, also storage or transfer buildings, recycling centers, commercial laundries or cleaning establishments, frozen food lockers and miniwarehouses or self-store warehousing. 
(4)  Industrial establishments, including: 
a.  The assembly, fabrication, compounding, packaging, manufacture or treatment of such articles as food products, candy, drugs, cosmetics and toiletries, musical instruments, toys, novelties, electrical instruments and appliances, radios and phonographs, pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, furniture cabinets and related products. 
b.  The assembly, fabrication, compounding, packaging, manufacture or treatment of such products from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, felt, fiber, glass, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheetmetal, ferrous or nonferrous metals, shell, textiles, wax, wire, wood (excluding sawmills), yarn and paint. 
c.  Tool and die shops: metalworking machine shops involving the use of grinding or cutting tools, such as manufacturing tools, dies, jigs and fixtures, publishing, printing, or forming of box, carton, and cardboard products. 
(5)  Retail sales typically incidental to contractors' establishments which require a workshop and retail outlet or showroom as accessory uses, including: 
a.  Plumbing and electrical contractors. 
b.  Building material suppliers and wholesalers such as lumberyards and other similar uses. 
c.  Carpenter shops, including door, sash or trim manufacturing. 
d.  Jobbing and repair machine shops. 
e.  Commercial garages, bump shops, or automobile repair garages. 
f.  Plastic products forming and molding. 
g.  Printing and publishing. 
h.  Trade and industrial schools. 
i.  Air conditioning and heating dealers, including incidental sheetmetal work. 
j.  Furniture reupholstering and refinishing establishments. 
k.  Sign painting establishments. 
l.  Establishments producing and selling monuments, cut stone, stone and similar products. 
m.  Other uses similar to and compatible with such uses. 
(6)  Communications facilities with buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations, communication and relay stations, but not including towers. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-13-2) 
Sec. 74-333. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-1 district: 
(1)  Any use customarily incidental to the permitted principal use. 
(2)  Living quarters of a watchman or caretaker employed on the premises. 
(3)  Dispensaries and clinics on the premises of and clearly incidental to any business, trade or industry. 
(4)  Restaurant or cafeteria facilities for employees. 
(5)  Signs, subject to the regulations established in article VII of this chapter. 
(6)  Off-street parking as required by article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-13-3) 
Sec. 74-334. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the I-1 district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)  Planned research or industrial parks. 
(2)  The storage of trucks, trailer coaches, campers, buses and recreational vehicles. 
(3)  Commercial kennels. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-13-4) 
Sec. 74-335. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the I-1 district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. No structure shall be established on any parcel providing less than 12,000 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(3)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The required front yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Side and rear yards. The side and rear yard setback shall be ten feet, except in the case of a corner lot, where the side yard shall not be less than the setback required for the front yard. 
c.  Side and rear yards adjacent to residential district. No structure shall be located less than 25 feet from any residential district boundary line. 
d.  Setback from right-of-way or water body. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
(4)  Maximum height. Maximum height is 40 feet, measured from the average finished grade at the front setback line, unless each required yard setback is increased by one foot for every foot of height above 40 feet. 
(5)  Other requirements. 
a.  The storage of materials or equipment is permitted in the side and rear yards, but all storage areas shall be effectively screened by a solid, uniformly finished wall or fence with solid entrance and exit gates. The wall or fence shall in no case be lower than the enclosed storage. 
b.  Landscaping shall be maintained in all required front yards, in accordance with plans approved by the zoning administrator as a part of the site plan approval. 
c.  Lighting shall be accomplished in a manner such that no illumination source shall adversely affect the welfare of adjacent properties. 
d.  Trash containers shall be enclosed by a structure covered on at least three sides. The property shall be maintained free from litter and in a sanitary condition. 
e.  Air conditioning units, heating oil storage tanks or similar appurtenances shall be properly screened as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-13-5) 
Sec. 74-336. - Performance standards. 
    It shall be unlawful to carry on or permit to be carried on any activity or operation or use of any land, building or equipment that produces irritants to the sensory perceptions greater than the measures established in this section, which are hereby determined to be the maximum permissible hazards to humans or human activities. Such measures may be supplemented by other measures which are duly determined to be maximum permissible hazards to humans or to human activity. 
(1)  Noise. The intensity level of sounds shall not exceed the decibel levels listed in section 30-26 et seq. 
(2)  Vibration. All machinery shall be so mounted and operated as to prevent transmission of ground vibration to neighboring property. 
(3)  Odor. The emission of noxious, odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited. 
(4)  Gases. The escape of or emission of any gas which is injurious or destructive or explosive shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated. 
(5)  Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view from any point along the lot line, except during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied. 
(6)  Light. Exterior lighting shall be so installed and shall be so arranged as far as practical to reflect light away from any residential use. 
(7)  Electromagnetic radiation. Applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission in regard to propagation of electromagnetic radiation are hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(8)  Smoke. It shall be unlawful to discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever any air contaminator which is: 
a.  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as no. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart. The Ringelmann Chart, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the standard. However, the umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringelmann Chart. A Ringelmann Chart shall be on file in the office of the zoning administrator. 
b.  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the smoke described in subsection a. of this subsection, except when the emission consists only of water vapor. 
(9)  Drifted and blown material. The drifting or airborne transmission to areas beyond the lot line of dust, particles or debris from any open stock pile shall be unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated. 
(10)  Radioactive material. Radioactive materials shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, as amended from time to time. 
(11)  Sewage wastes. No industrial sewage wastes shall be discharged into any storm or sanitary sewers that will cause chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials of construction so as to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures, cause mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures, cause restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures, cause placing of unusual demands on the sewage treatment equipment or process, cause limitation of the effectiveness of the sewage treatment process, cause danger to public health and safety, or cause obnoxious conditions contrary to the public interest. Industrial sewage discharges shall meet all applicable state and federal requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-13-6) 
Secs. 74-337-74-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-351. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the I-2 district to encourage sound industrial development by providing and protecting an environment exclusively for such development, subject to regulations necessary to ensure the purity of the air and groundwater or surface water, and the protection of adjacent uses from hazards or nuisance factors. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-14-1) 
Sec. 74-352. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In an I-2 general industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted by right in the I-1 light industrial district are permitted. 
(2)  Any industrial, manufacturing or repair use may be permitted, provided the nature or manner of operation is in compliance with section 74-336, pertaining to performance standards. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-14-2) 
Sec. 74-353. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-2 district: those accessory uses as permitted in the I-1 light industrial district, except those uses identified with the B-2 general business district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-14-3) 
Sec. 74-354. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
    The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in this district by the application for and the issuance of a special use permit as provided for in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)  Those special uses as permitted in the I-1 light industrial district. 
(2)  The storage of used materials, including rags, wastepaper, waste products or similar materials, and open storage or salvage yards. 
(3)  Petroleum bulk stations and terminals. 
(4)  Breweries and distilleries. 
(5)  Millwork, lumber mills (sawmills) and planing mills. 
(6)  Metal stamping, punching, buffing, plating and hammering. 
(7)  Chemical processes and manufacture. 
(8)  Foundries. 
(9)  Railroad terminal facilities. 
(10)  Legally licensed manufacturers and/or distributors of medical marijuana. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-14-4; Ord. of 10-1-14) 
Sec. 74-355. - Site development standards. 
    The following maximum and minimum standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the I-2 district: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. No structure shall be established on any parcel providing less than 15,000 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(3)  Yard and setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. The required front yard setback shall not be less than 25 feet. 
b.  Side and rear yards. The side and rear yard setback shall be 10 feet, except in the case of a corner lot, where the side yard shall not be less than the setback required for the front yard. 
c.  Setback from right-of-way or water body. No building or structure, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way, or closer than 75 feet to any body of water. 
d.  Side and rear yards adjacent to residential district. No structure shall be located less than 50 feet from any residential district boundary line. 
(4)  Maximum height. Maximum height is 40 feet, measured from the average finished grade at the front setback line, unless each required yard setback is increased by one foot for every foot of height above 40 feet. 
(5)  Other requirements. 
a.  The storage of materials or equipment is permitted in the side and rear yards, but all storage areas shall be effectively screened by a solid, uniformly finished wall or fence with solid entrance and exit gates. The wall or fence shall in no case be lower than the enclosed storage. 
b.  Landscaping shall be maintained in all required front yards, in accordance with plans approved by the zoning administrator as a part of the site plan review. 
c.  Lighting shall be accomplished in a manner such that no illumination shall adversely affect the welfare of adjacent property. 
d.  Trash containers shall be enclosed by a structure covered on at least three sides. The property shall be maintained free from litter and in a sanitary condition. 
e.  Air conditioning units, heating oil storage tanks or similar appurtenances shall be properly screened as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-14-5) 
Sec. 74-356. - Performance standards. 
    Those requirements as contained in section 74-336, pertaining to performance standards, shall be complied with by all activities permitted in the I-2 general industrial district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-14-6) 
Secs. 74-357-74-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - O-R OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION/RECREATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 74-371. - Purpose. 
    The O-R district is intended to provide for permanent open spaces in the community, and designed for undeveloped or low intensity developed public and private recreational uses, and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents by limiting development in areas where police and fire protection, protection against flooding, high water table or stormwater, and dangers from excessive erosion is not possible without excessive costs to the city. The regulations and conditions contained in this division are designed to promote development that can be compatible with the preservation of natural amenities and open space areas and to prohibit development which might detract from, injure, harm, impair or destroy the natural or existing character of these areas. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 15-17-1) 
Sec. 74-372. - Uses permitted by right. 
    In an O-R open space conservation/recreation district, no building or land shall be used and no building erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Public and private conservation areas, including structures used in the development, protection and maintenance of open space, watersheds, and water, soil, forest and wildlife resources. 
(2)  Public or private parks or recreation areas, including but not limited to playgrounds, playfields, golf courses, hiking or skiing trails, fishing sites, parks, parkways or preserves. 
(3)  Public marinas or boat launching facilities and fishing piers. 
(4)  Public and private utilities and services, providing the facilities do not detract from the natural appearance of the area or have a potential for causing erosion. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 15-17-2) 
Secs. 74-373-74-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 74-411. - Scope of article. 
    The special provisions in this article establish miscellaneous regulations which have not been specifically provided for in other portions of this chapter, yet are applicable to all zoning districts unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, art. XIX) 
Sec. 74-412. - Unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent compliance with an order by an appropriate authority to correct, improve or strengthen, or restore to a safe condition, any building or any part of a building declared to be unsafe. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-1) 
Sec. 74-413. - Number of principal buildings on lot. 
    No more than one principal building may be permitted on a lot or parcel located in the R-1 or R-2 district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-2) 
Sec. 74-414. - Access to street. 
    A lot of record created before May 31, 1995, without any frontage on a street shall not be occupied without access to a street provided by an easement or other right-of-way no less than 20 feet wide. No more than one lot may be served by such an access route. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-3) 
Sec. 74-415. - Grading. 
    The finished surface of the ground areas outside the walls of any building constructed or altered after May 31, 1995, shall be so designed that surface waters shall flow away from the building walls in such a direction and collected so that inconvenience or damage to adjacent properties shall not occur. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-4) 
Sec. 74-416. - Water supply and sanitary sewerage facilities. 
    Any structure erected for human occupancy after May 31, 1995, and used for dwelling, business, industrial or recreational purposes shall be provided with a safe, sanitary and potable water supply, and with a safe and effective means of collection, treatment and disposal of human, commercial or industrial wastes. All such installations shall comply with the requirements of the state, the county health department and the city, and all applicable codes in force at the time of application. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-5) 
Sec. 74-417. - Moving buildings. 
    No existing building or other structure within or outside the city shall be relocated upon any parcel or lot within the city unless the building design and construction are compatible with the general architectural character, design and construction of other structures located in the immediate area of the proposed site, the building and all materials therein are in conformity with all applicable building codes, and the building or structure can be located upon the parcel and conform to other requirements of the respective zoning district. A moving permit shall be issued by the building inspector upon evidence of compliance to the requirements in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-6) 
Sec. 74-418. - Prior building permits. 
    Any building permits issued prior to May 31, 1995, shall be valid even though not conforming to the provisions of this chapter, provided that construction is commenced within 90 days after the date of permit issuance and carried on diligently without interruption for a continuous period of 90 days. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-7) 
Sec. 74-419. - Fences, walls and screens. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or install, or cause to be constructed or installed, any fence, wall or screen of any material other than plant material upon any property within the city, except in accordance with the requirements and the restrictions provided in this section. 
(1)  Permit. Any person desiring to build or install, or cause to be built or installed, a fence, wall or screen upon any property in the city shall first apply to the office of the zoning administrator for a permit to do so. Application for such permit shall contain any and all information, including drawings, as may be required and necessary for the determination as to whether the erection of such fence, wall or screen would be in compliance with these regulations or the laws of the state, including identification of property stakes to show actual lot lines on the affected property. A fence permit fee shall be paid to the city. 
(2)  Restrictions. 
a.  Fences, walls or screens shall not exceed six feet in height in residential districts, except for sports facilities such as tennis courts, backstops or similar uses, located along rear yard and side yard property lines, and shall not exceed a height of four feet and 60 percent solid or opaque in construction along front yard property lines, subject to the provisions in this section. Fences, walls and screens shall not exceed eight feet in height, except for sports facilities such as tennis courts, backstops or similar uses, in commercial and industrial districts located along front, rear and side property lines. 
b.  A fence, wall or screen shall be erected at least one foot from the property line of the requestor and parallel to the property line unless the abutting property owner consents in writing to erecting the fence, wall or screen on the property line. However, no fence; wall or screen shall be constructed nearer than five feet to any public street or alley right-of-way; provided, however, that ornamental and decorative wood or metal fences that are not in excess of 60 percent solid or opaque, and retaining walls or screens that do not exceed four feet in height may be erected on the lot lines of the front and side yards in residential districts adjacent to any public street or alley right-of-way provided the design has been approved by the zoning administrator. 
c.  Fences on residential lots of record shall not contain barbed wire or be electrified or chain link type fences with sharp wire exposed. Front yard fencing shall exclude: T type posts, snow fence, slack wire and chicken wire type fences. 
d.  The construction design and construction materials for the building of fences shall be in accordance with all applicable building codes in force at the time of construction. All fences shall be constructed with the finished side facing out. 
e.  The requirements for fences, walls and screens are not intended to restrict landscaping features that may be planted or exist as part of a beautification project of any premises. 
(3)  Clear vision requirements. 
a.  No fence, wall, sign or screen or any planting shall be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct vision or interfere with traffic visibility on a curve, or between a height of three and ten feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting two points which are located on those intersecting right-of-way lines 30 feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines. The three-foot height limit shall be measured from the lowest elevation of the segment of the intersecting road's centerline which lies between the point of intersection of the other centerline and the extension of the line drawn through the points 30 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
b.  No fence, wall, sign, screen or any planting shall be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct vision between a height of three and ten feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of a street right-of-way and a driveway and a line connecting two points which are located on the right-of-way line and the driveway 20 feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way line and driveway. The three-foot height limit shall be measured from the lowest elevation of the segment of the intersecting road and driveway's centerline which lies between the point of intersection of the centerline and the extension of the line drawn through the points 20 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way and driveway. 
(4)  Maintenance of fences, walls and screens. 
a.  Fences, walls and screens shall be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. 
b.  Any fence, wall or screen which, through lack of repair, type of construction or otherwise, endangers life or property is hereby declared a nuisance as defined in this chapter. (See the definition of nuisance.) 
c.  If unsafe conditions exist in regard to a fence, wall or screen, the zoning administrator shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the property upon which the fence, wall or screen is located a written notice describing the unsafe conditions and specifying the required repairs or modifications to be made to render the fence, wall or screen safe, or requiring the removal of the fence, wall or screen if such repairs or modifications are not done, and shall provide a time limit for such repair, modification or removal. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-8; Ord. of 9-18-17) 
Sec. 74-420. - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  An accessory building, including carports attached to the principal building, shall be made structurally a part thereof, and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal building. Breezeways, as an attachment between the garage or carport and the main building, shall be considered a part of the main building, but shall not be considered livable floor area. 
(2)  An accessory building, unless attached to and made structurally a part of the principal building, shall not be closer than ten feet to any other structure on the lot. 
(3)  No accessory building shall be closer than three feet to any interior side or rear lot line, and no structure shall be constructed closer than ten feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way. 
(4)  Accessory buildings are subject to all setback requirements from the street applying to the principal building, except for the rear setback; provided, however, when topographic conditions prevent compliance with this subsection the zoning board of appeals may vary the requirements of this subsection in such a manner as to contribute to the public safety and general welfare. 
(5)  No detached accessory building in any residential district shall exceed one story or 18 feet in height. Detached accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in such districts, subject to approval of the zoning board of appeals, if the building exceeds one story or 18 feet in height. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-9; Ord. of 7-16-01(3)) 
Sec. 74-421. - Variance of requirements for lots of record. 
    Any residential lot created and recorded prior to May 31, 1995, may be used for residential purposes, even though the lot area or dimensions are less than those required for the district in which the lot is located; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements of the district, not involving lot area or width, are met. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-10) 
Sec. 74-422. - Allocation of lot area. 
    No portion of a lot may be used more than once in complying with the provisions for lot area and yard dimensions for construction or alteration of buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-11) 
Sec. 74-423. - Permitted yard encroachments. 
    The following elements of structures may extend or project into a required yard area in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Certain architectural features such as cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, bay windows, balconies and similar features may project three feet into the required front setback, six feet into required rear setback areas and two feet into the required side yard setback areas. 
(2)  Unenclosed porches, patios, paved terraces and decks may project into a required front setback area for a distance not to exceed eight feet, into the required rear setback area for a distance not to exceed 15 feet, and into a required side setback area for a distance not to exceed three feet, but in no case shall such a structure be placed closer than five feet to any lot line. 
(3)  Fire escapes or open stairways may project into a side yard not more than three feet, or six feet into the required rear yard. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-12) 
Sec. 74-424. - Front setback reduction or increase. 
    Any front setback area in any district may be reduced below the minimum requirements only when the average front setback of existing principal buildings within 100 feet of a proposed principal building location is less than the minimum required, in which case the zoning administrator shall establish the required average. Where the established setback is greater than the required minimum, the required setback for the proposed building shall be the average of the existing buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-13) 
Sec. 74-425. - Rear setback reduction. 
    When a lot of record in any single-family residential district has a depth of less than 120 feet prior to May 31, 1995, the rear setback area of such a lot may be reduced one-quarter of the distance of the lot depth less than 120 feet, except that no rear setback area shall be reduced to a depth less than 20 feet, and except further that, if a rear lot line abuts an existing or proposed street, the zoning administrator may establish the required minimum rear setback, based on the average procedure set forth in section 74-424. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-14) 
Sec. 74-426. - Rear yards for lake frontage lots. 
    Residential lots having water frontage shall maintain the required rear yard open space on the water side as an open unobscured space, except that a covered or uncovered boat well shall be permitted after review and approval of plans by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-15) 
Sec. 74-427. - Double-frontage lots. 
    In the case of double-frontage lots (interior lots having frontages on two streets) all sides of the lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage and front yards shall be provided as required. In the case of any plat approved after May 31, 1995, one street will be designated as the front street in the plat. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-16) 
Sec. 74-428. - Access through yards. 
    Access drives may be placed in the required front, rear or side yards so as to provide access to the rear yard or accessory or attached structures. Further, any walk or other pavement serving a like function shall not be considered a structure and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-17) 
Sec. 74-429. - Use of temporary buildings and structures. 
    Use of temporary buildings and structures is permitted as follows: 
(1)  Temporary buildings and structures incidental to construction work, except work on single-family residences. The temporary buildings shall be removed within 15 days after construction is complete. In no case shall the building or structure be allowed more than 12 months, unless expressly authorized after petition to the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Temporary buildings incidental to a house of worship, church or school, provided that all wiring, plumbing, fire protection and exits are approved by the fire chief and building inspector, and by relevant state agencies. Such uses shall be authorized by the zoning board of appeals, after application. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-18) 
Sec. 74-430. - Essential services. 
    The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential services by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, communication, telephone, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, or collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories in connection therewith which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general public health, safety, convenience or welfare, shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city and upon filing of an application for administrative review of the proposed activity with the city manager. While the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential services is exempted from the application of other provisions as contained in this chapter, such exemption shall not extend to utility buildings, substations, communication, microwave or wind generation towers, structures which are enclosures or shelters for service equipment, or maintenance depots. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-19-19) 
Sec. 74-431. - Swimming pools. 
    Private swimming pools shall be permitted in rear yards only, provided that they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Permit required; approval of plans. A swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall not be constructed, installed, enlarged or altered until plans have been approved and a permit issued by the zoning administrator. Plans shall accurately show dimensions and construction of the pool and appurtenances and properly established distances to lot lines, buildings, walks and fences, as well as details of the water supply system, drainage system and water disposal system, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detailed plans of structures, vertical elevations and sections through the pool showing depth shall be included. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  Private swimming pools shall not encroach on any front or side yard. A wall of a swimming pool shall not be located less than ten feet from any rear or side property line or ten feet from any street or alley line. There shall be a distance of not less than ten feet between the pool wall and a building located on the same lot. 
b.  No swimming pool shall be located under any power lines, or located within an easement. 
(3)  Enclosure. Every person owning land on which there is situated a swimming pool which contains 24 inches or more of water in depth at any point shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure either surrounding the property or surrounding the pool area, sufficient to make such body of water inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure, including gates therein, must be not less than four feet above the underlying ground. All gates must be self-latching and capable of being securely locked when not in use, with latches placed four feet above the underlying ground and otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. 
(Ord. of 3-13-01) 
Secs. 74-432-74-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 

Sec. 74-451. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures or uses to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. 
(b)  It is recognized that there exist, within the districts established by this chapter and subsequent amendments, lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before May 1, 1995, which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. 
(c)  Such uses are declared by this article to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this article that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after May 1, 1995. 
(d)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which construction was lawfully begun prior to May 31, 1995, and upon which actual construction has been diligently carried on. For purposes of this subsection, actual construction is defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that, where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-20-1) 
Sec. 74-452. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where, at May 31, 1995, lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at May 31, 1995. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at May 31, 1995. 
(3)  Nonconforming uses shall not be changed to another nonconforming use, except after approval of the zoning board of appeals. Before granting such approval, the zoning board of appeals shall determine that such change in use will have a less detrimental effect on neighboring properties than the existing nonconforming use. 
(4)  If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 consecutive days, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the nonconforming use. The time limit of discontinuance may be extended beyond the 90 days, for a period of time not to exceed one year, upon proper application to the zoning board of appeals within the 90-day period and upon presentation of evidence that an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty would exist should the 90-day limitation be strictly enforced. At the end of this period of abandonment, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a permitted conforming use. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-20-2) 
Sec. 74-453. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at May 31, 1995, that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Nonconforming structures shall not be altered or expanded without the prior approval of the zoning board of appeals, except that the following structural alterations may be permitted: 
a.  Structural alterations or extensions adding to the bulk of a residential structure which is nonconforming only by reason of lot size or lot width shall be permitted without prior approval of the zoning board of appeals; provided that such structure, alteration or extension shall not increase the extent of nonconformity and shall satisfy all other site development regulations which are applicable. 
b.  Structural alterations which do not add to the bulk of the structure or increase the intensity of use of the structure shall not require prior approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Nonconforming buildings and structures shall not be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the building or structure, unless the zoning board of appeals shall give its approval for the alteration of nonconforming buildings or structures. Only when it is determined that the proposed building or structure alteration or extension complies as nearly as is practical with the requirements of this chapter, and that the granting of the approval for the construction of the proposed structural alteration or extension will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring property, shall approval for the alteration by the zoning board of appeals be granted. 
(3)  Nonconforming structures shall not be reestablished in their nonconforming condition in any zoning district after damage or destruction of the nonconforming structure if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost of the entire building or structure exclusive of foundation. In cases where such cost does exceed 50 percent, the nonconforming structure shall not be replaced unless it shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  The estimated expense of reconstruction shall be determined by the city assessor. Persons aggrieved by the determination of estimated replacement cost by the city assessor may appeal such determination to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-20-3) 
Sec. 74-454. - Nonconforming uses of structures and land. 
    If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at May 31, 1995, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at May 1, 1995, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the zoning board of appeals, by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the zoning board of appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(4)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded or changed to a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located and shall not revert back to a nonconforming use. 
(5)  Where a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued for 90 consecutive days, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the nonconforming use. The time limit of discontinuance may be extended beyond the 90 days, for a period of time not to exceed one year, upon proper application to the zoning board of appeals within the 90-day period and upon presentation of evidence that an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty would exist should the 90-day limitation be strictly enforced. At the end of this period of abandonment, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-20-4) 
Sec. 74-455. - Repairs and maintenance. 
    Work may be done on any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming uses in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repairs or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at May 1, 1995, shall not be increased. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any buildings or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-20-5) 
Sec. 74-456. - Prior construction approval. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the completion of construction and use of a nonconforming building for which a building permit has been issued prior to May 31, 1995, provided that construction is commenced within 90 days after the date of issuance of the permit, that construction is carried on diligently and without interruption for a continuous period in excess of 30 days, and that the entire building shall have been completed according to the plans filed with the permit application within two years after the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-20-6) 
Sec. 74-457. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
    There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-20-7) 
Secs. 74-458-74-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-481. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article that parking space shall be provided and adequately maintained by each property owner in every zoning district for the off-street storage of motor vehicles used by the occupants, employees or patrons of each building constructed or altered under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-21-1) 
Sec. 74-482. - General requirements for parking facilities. 
    At the time any building or structure is erected, altered, enlarged or increased in capacity, or at any time when the use of any building, structure or land is altered or established, off-street parking spaces shall be provided as prescribed in this article and as follows: 
(1)  Submission of plans. Plans and specifications showing required off-street parking spaces, including the means of access and exit and interior traffic circulation, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review at the time of application for a zoning permit for the erection or enlargement of a building. 
(2)  Location of parking area. Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the building entrance to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, without crossing any major thoroughfare. 
(3)  Reduction of parking area. No parking area or parking space which exists at May 31, 1995, or which subsequently thereto is provided for the purposes of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall thereafter be relinquished or reduced in any manner below the requirements established by this chapter. 
(4)  Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts. Parking of commercial motor vehicles in residential districts shall be limited to vehicles under five tons GVW. The parking of any commercial vehicle over five tons GVW in a residential district, except those making deliveries or on business or those belonging to a use permitted by special use permit in the district and on such property, is prohibited. 
(5)  Prohibited uses and structures in parking areas. No commercial vehicle repair work, servicing or selling of any kind shall be conducted on any parking area except that which is specifically permitted by this chapter. No items such as plastic animals, streamers, cloth signs, children's play areas, mechanical entertainment devices or other similar devices shall be permitted in the parking area. 
(6)  Collective facilities. Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(7)  Dual function facilities. Where the owners of two or more buildings, or uses whose operating hours do not overlap, desire to utilize common off-street parking facilities, application shall be made to the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals may grant approval of such dual function off-street parking facilities, subject to a finding that the following conditions have been met: 
a.  The business hours of the buildings or uses in no way overlap, except for custodial personnel. 
b.  The common parking lot meets the off-street parking requirements of the largest building or use plus 15 percent. 
c.  The common parking lot meets all locational requirements of this chapter with respect to each building or use. 
(8)  Calculation of number of spaces. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one space. 
(9)  Single-family and two-family dwellings. Residential off-street parking spaces for single-family and two-family dwellings shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
(10)  Handicap parking. Handicap parking shall be provided in accordance with applicable state or national laws and codes. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-21-2) 
Sec. 74-483. - Schedule of parking requirements. 
    The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the zoning administrator considers as similar in type. 
Use Number of Minimum 
Parking Spaces per 
Unit of Measure (1) Residential uses: a. Residential one-family and two-family dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit. b. Residential multiple-family dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit. c. Housing for the elderly or similar uses 1 for every 2 dwelling units, and 1 for each employee. d. Boardinghouses 1 for each rental unit, plus 2 for owner/manager. (2) Institutional uses: a. Houses of worship 1 for each 3 seats or 6 feet of pews in the main unit of worship. b. Hospitals 11/2 for each 1 bed, plus 1 for each doctor, plus 1 space for each 50 square feet of medical clinic office, plus 1 space for each employee on the peak employment shift. c. Homes for the aged and convalescent homes 1 for each 4 beds, plus 1 for each employee on the peak employment shift. d. Elementary and junior high schools, middle schools 1 for each 1 teacher, employee and administrator, plus 1 for each classroom, plus required space for auditorium. e. Community centers or similar uses 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. f. Senior high schools and colleges 1 for each 1 teacher, employee or administrator, 1 for each classroom, and 1 for each 10 students, plus spaces for auditorium. g. Private clubs or lodges 1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by the fire marshal, plus 1 for each employee. h. Miniature golf courses 11/2 spaces per hole. i. Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs or other similar uses 1 for each 3 members. j. Stadium and sports arenas or similar outdoor places of assembly 1 for each 5 seats or 10 feet of benches, plus 1 for each employee. k. Theaters and auditoriums or similar uses 1 for each 4 seats, plus 1 for each employee. l. Libraries and museums or similar uses 1 per 500 feet of gross floorspace, plus 1 per employee. m. Public utilities 1 per employee. n. Nursery schools, day nurseries or child care centers 1 for each 350 square feet of usable floorspace. (3) Commercial uses: a. Amusement arcades or similar uses 1 for every 4 game tables or devices, plus off-street bicycle racks with capacity for 1 bicycle for every table and device. b. Auto wash, automatic and self-serve 4 spaces at the entry, plus 1 space at the exit, all on exteriors of the building shall be provided on the premises for each wash lane, plus 1 for each employee. c. Beauty parlors or barbershops 2 for each chair. d. Bed and breakfast establishments 1 per sleeping room, plus 2 for the manager/owner. e. Bowling alleys 5 for each lane, plus 1 for each employee, plus parking required for each auxiliary use such as a restaurant, lounge, etc. f. Convenience stores or similar uses 1 space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area. g. Dancehalls, roller rinks, exhibition halls and assembly halls without fixed seats, or similar uses 1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. h. Drive-in banks 4 waiting spaces for each drive-in window, in addition to normal parking required for banks. i. Drive-in restaurants 1 for every 3 seats or 1 for each 30 square feet of usable floor area, whichever is greater, plus 5 waiting spaces for each drive-up window. j. Furniture and appliances, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, electrician or similar trade, and other similar uses 1 for each 800 square feet of usable floorspace. k. Greenhouses, fruit and vegetable stands or similar uses 1 space for each 300 square feet. l. Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners 1 for every 3 machines. m. Mortuary establishments and funeral homes 1 for each 25 square feet of assembly room floor area. n. Motel or hotel 1 space for each rental unit, plus 1 additional space for each employee, plus required parking for each auxiliary use such as a restaurant, lounge, etc. o. Motor vehicle sales and service 1 for each 500 square feet of floor area of sales room, 2 for each auto service stall in the service room, plus 1 for each employee. A minimum of 3 customer spaces shall be provided. p. Retail stores less than 25,000 square feet, except as otherwise specified herein 1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor area. q. Planned commercial or shopping centers or discount department stores or grocery stores in excess of 25,000 square feet 6 per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. r. Restaurants, sit-down 1 for every 3 seats. s. Service stations, full-serve 2 for each lubrication rack or pit, and 1 for each gasoline pump; a service bay is not a parking space. t. Service stations, self-serve 2 for each gasoline pump. u. Taverns and cocktail lounges or similar uses 1 for each 100 square feet of usable floor area. (4) Offices: a. Banks 1 for each 200 square feet of usable floor area, plus 4 stacking spaces for each drive-up window, and a bypass lane shall be provided. b. Business offices or professional offices, except as otherwise indicated 1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor area. c. Professional offices of doctors, dentists and similar professions 1 for each 100 square feet of usable floor area in the waiting room, plus 2 for each examining room or dental chair, plus 1 for each doctor, dentist, or employee. (5) Industrial uses: a. Industrial or research facilities 5 spaces, plus 1 space on-site for every 2 employees in the largest working shift, or 1 space for every 500 square feet of usable floorspace, whichever is greater. b. Warehouses 1 per 500 square feet of floorspace.  
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-21-3) 
Sec. 74-484. - Parking facility development standards. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in section 74-483 require the building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lots shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  Approval of plans. Plans for all off-street parking lots providing spaces for more than four vehicles shall be submitted as part of the site plan review process and must be approved by the zoning administrator prior to construction. 
(2)  Size of spaces. Each off-street parking space for vehicles shall not be less than 180 square feet in area, exclusive of access drives or aisles. 
(3)  Marking of spaces. Each space shall be clearly marked and reserved for parking purposes. 
(4)  Access drive. There shall be provided a minimum access drive of 20 feet in width and so located as to secure the most appropriate development of the individual property. Where a turning radius is necessary, it shall be of an arc that reasonably allows an unobstructed flow of vehicles. 
(5)  Width of parking aisles. Parking aisles shall be of sufficient width to allow a minimum turning movement into and out of parking spaces. The minimum width of such aisles shall be in accordance with the following minimum regulations: 
Maneuvering 
Lane Width Total Width of 
2 Tiers of Spaces 
Plus Maneuvering Parking Pattern 1-way 
(feet) 2-way 
(feet) Parking Space Width 
(feet) Parking Space Length 
(feet) 1-way 
(feet) 2-way 
(feet) 0-degree parallel parking 11 18 8.5 25 28 35 30° to 53° 12 20 9 21 54 62 54° to 74° 13 22 9 21 55 64 75° to 90° 15 24 9.5 20 55 64  
(6)  Drainage and surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to eliminate surface water ponding and prevent drainage onto abutting properties. The surface of the parking lot, including drives and aisles, excepting landscaped areas, shall be constructed of asphaltic bituminous material two inches thick after compaction, or concrete with a minimum thickness of six inches, on a stable base four inches thick after compaction. The parking area shall be so surfaced prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector; however, paving may be delayed up to one year from the date of occupancy upon approval by the zoning administrator and submittal to the city of a financial guarantee equal to the total cost of surfacing or paving the parking area. The cost shall be determined by the zoning administrator. The financial guarantee shall be forfeited if the parking area is not fully completed within the one-year period. During this period, however, any unpaved parking area shall be kept in a dust-free condition by spraying with water or chemicals. 
(7)  Lighting. Any lighting fixtures used to illuminate off-street parking shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from any adjoining residential properties, institutional premises, or streets and highways, and shall be installed in such a manner as to allow for reduction of the amount of light after normal parking hours. 
(8)  Buffer adjacent to residential districts. Where a parking area with a capacity of four or more vehicles adjoins a residential district, a buffer at least ten feet wide shall be provided between the parking area and the adjoining property and a vertical screen shall be erected consisting of structural or plant materials no less than six feet in height. 
(9)  Buffer adjacent to public street. Where a parking area with a capacity of four or more vehicles adjoins a public street, a buffer at least ten feet wide shall be provided between the parking area and the adjacent street, provided that the buffer shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in relation to clear vision. 
(10)  Number of driveways. No more than two driveway approaches may be permitted from a major street, and no more than one driveway from a minor street. 
(11)  Landscaping. In addition to any landscaping required in any particular district, all parking areas for ten or more vehicles shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall be accomplished throughout the parking area on the basis of 100 square feet of grass and planted area (including trees) for each ten parking spaces. All landscaping shall be adequately maintained in a healthy condition. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-21-4) 
Sec. 74-485. - Loading and unloading space. 
(a)  Required for certain uses. On the same premises with every building, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department stores, wholesale stores, markets, laundries, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandising, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading service in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets, alleys or any required access aisles for off-street parking areas. 
(b)  Dimensions; paving; number of spaces. Such loading and unloading space, unless adequately provided for within a building, shall be an area ten feet by 50 feet, with a 15-foot height clearance, having paving suitable for the zoning district wherein located, and shall be provided according to the following schedule: 
Gross Floor Area 
  (square feet) Loading and Unloading Spaces 0-1,999 None 2,000-19,999 1 space 20,000-99,999 1 space, plus 1 space for each 20,000 square feet 
in excess of 20,000 square feet. 100,000-500,000 5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 50,000 square feet 
in excess of 100,000 square feet.  
(c)  Approval of design. The location and design of loading and unloading areas shall be reviewed at the time of site plan submission, to ensure adequate protection is afforded adjacent districts, especially residential districts, from noise and other disruptive elements normally associated with such facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-21-5) 
Secs. 74-486-74-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 

Secs. 74-511-74-550. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-3-13 repealed §§ 74-511-74-525, which pertained to signs and derived from Ord. of 5-1-95, §§ 8-22-1-8-22-15; Ord. of 1-6-97; Ord. of 4-5-10; Ord. of 6-6-11. For current sign provisions, see § 14-131 et seq. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Uses of land and structures, MCL 125.58. 

Sec. 74-551. - Purpose. 
(a)  Until recent years, the regulation of all uses of land and structures through zoning has been accomplished by assigning each use to one or more districts. However, the functions and characteristics of an increasing number of new kinds of land uses, combined with conclusive experience regarding some of the older, more familiar kinds of uses, call for a more flexible and equitable procedure for properly accommodating these activities in the community. It should be recognized that the forces that influence decisions regarding the nature, magnitude and location of such types of land use activities are many and varied, depending upon functional characteristics, competitive situations and the availability of land. Rather than assign all uses to special, individual and limited zoning districts, it is important to provide controllable and reasonable flexibility in requirements for certain kinds of uses that will allow practicable latitude for the investor, but that will, at the same time, maintain adequate provision for the security of the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community's inhabitants. 
(b)  In order to accomplish such a dual objective, provision is made in this chapter for a more detailed consideration of certain specified activities as each may relate to proposed conditions of location, design, size, operation, intensity of use, generation of traffic and traffic movements, concentration of population, processes and equipment employed, and amount and kind of public facilities and services required, together with many other possible factors. Land and structure uses possessing these particularly unique characteristics are designated as special uses and may be authorized by the issuance of a special use permit with such conditions and safeguards attached as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare. The following sections, together with references in other articles, designate what uses require a special use permit. With any exception noted, the procedures for obtaining such a permit apply to all special uses indicated. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-1) 
Sec. 74-552. - Application. 
(a)  Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application for one or more special use permits provided for in this chapter in the zoning district in which the land is situated. 
(b)  Applications shall be submitted through the city clerk to the planning commission. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in accordance with the duly adopted schedule of fees to cover costs of processing the application. No part of any fee shall be refundable. 
(c)  Every application shall be accompanied by the following information and data: 
(1)  A special form supplied by the city clerk filled out in full by the applicant. 
(2)  A site plan, plot plan or development plan, drawn to a readable scale, of the total property, showing the location of all abutting streets, the location of all existing and proposed structures, and the types of buildings and their uses. 
(3)  Preliminary plans and outline specifications of the proposed development. 
(4)  A statement with supporting evidence regarding the required findings specified in section 74-554. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-2; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-553. - Review and findings; issuance. 
(a)  Public hearing. The planning commission shall review the application for a special use permit at its next meeting following filing and shall set a date for public hearing within 30 days thereafter. The city clerk shall cause to be published one notice of the public hearing, not less than 15 days in advance of such hearing, and shall notify by regular mail the parties of interest and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property, as ownership is listed in the last printed assessment roll for the city. Such notice shall describe the nature of the request, indicate the property involved, state the time and place of the hearing, and indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(b)  Action by planning commission; issuance. Upon conclusion of the hearing procedures, the planning commission may recommend approval with conditions or disapproval of a special use permit to the city council. The city council shall either approve with conditions or deny the request, at the next council meeting after the public hearing by the planning commission. The city clerk shall be authorized to issue an approved special use permit, subject to site plan approval or other conditions as have been placed on the permit by the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-3; Ord. of 6-6-11; Ord. of 3-6-2017(1)) 
Sec. 74-554. - General standards for making determinations. 
    The planning commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposal under this article in terms of the following standards, and shall find adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will: 
(1)  Be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives or with any specific objectives of the comprehensive community plan of current adoption. 
(2)  Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such a use will not change the essential character of the same area. 
(3)  Not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses. 
(4)  Be a substantial improvement to property in the immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole. 
(5)  Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal or schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such service. 
(6)  Not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and shall not place demands on public services in excess of current capacity and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
(7)  Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors. 
(8)  Be consistent with the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-4; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-555. - Conditions and safeguards. 
(a)  Prior to granting any special use permit, the city council may impose any additional conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of the use authorized by the special use permit as in its judgment may be necessary for the protection of the public interest. Conditions imposed shall further be designed to protect natural resources, and the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being, of those who will utilize the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole, and be consistent with the general standards as established in this chapter and therefore be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Conditions and requirements stated as part of special use permit authorization shall be a continuing obligation of special use permit holders. The planning commission shall make periodic investigations of developments authorized by special use permit to determine compliance with all requirements. 
(c)  Special use permits may be issued for time periods as determined by the city council. Special use permits may be renewed in the same manner as originally applied for. 
(d)  In authorizing a special use permit, the city council may require that a cash deposit, certified check, bond or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city, of ample sum, be furnished by the developer to ensure compliance with such requirements as drives, walks, utilities, parking, landscaping and the like. The financial guarantee shall be deposited with the city clerk at the time of issuance of the permit authorizing the use or activity. As work progresses, the city council may authorize a proportional rebate of the financial guarantee upon completion of significant phases or improvements. 
(e)  Continuance of a special use permit by the city council shall be withheld only upon a determination by the city council that: 
(1)  Such conditions as may have been prescribed in conjunction with the issuance of the original permit included the requirement that the use be discontinued after a specified time period. 
(2)  Violations of conditions pertaining to the granting of the permit continue to exist more than 30 days after an order to correct has been issued. 
(f)  All plans, specifications and statements submitted with the application for a special use permit shall become, along with any changes ordered by the city council, a part of the conditions of any special use permit issued thereto. 
(g)  No application for a special use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the city council shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one year or more from the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be sufficient to justify consideration by the city council. 
(h)  The general standards in this section are basic to all special uses, and the specific requirements in the sections of this article relating to particular uses are in addition to and shall be required in all applicable situations. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-5; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-556. - Nonresidential structures and uses in residential districts. 
(a)  Uses requiring special use permit. The following uses of land and structures are permitted in one or more residential districts: 
(1)  Religious institutions: Churches, houses of worship, convents and other housing for religious personnel. 
(2)  Educational and social institutions: Public or private elementary and secondary schools, institutions for higher education, auditoriums and other places for assembly and centers for social activities, public libraries, museums and art galleries, and nursery schools and day care centers. 
(3)  Recreational facilities: Public and private parks, playgrounds, community centers, parkways, golf courses and similar recreational facilities. 
(4)  Public buildings and public service installations: Municipal administration or public service buildings; utility and public service facilities and uses, but excluding storage yards; and telephone exchange buildings, transformer stations and substations. 
(5)  Institutions for human care: Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, nursing or convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
(b)  General standards. Inasmuch as the nonresidential uses permitted in residential districts may have an adverse affect on residential properties if not properly located and designed, the following general standards must be met prior to development of such uses: 
(1)  Hazardous areas must be adequately fenced to avoid accidents. Such areas include public utility substations. 
(2)  Any permitted nonresidential structure should preferably be located at the edge of a residential district, abutting a commercial or industrial district, or a public open space. 
(3)  If possible, all permitted nonresidential uses should front on a major street (minor arterial or collector). 
(4)  Motor vehicle entrance and exit should be made on a major street to avoid the impact of traffic generated by the nonresidential use upon the residential area. 
(5)  Site locations should be chosen which offer natural or manmade barriers that would lessen the effect of the intrusion of a nonresidential use into a residential area. 
(6)  Nonresidential uses should not be located so as to cause costly public improvements. 
(c)  Specific standards. 
(1)  Public utility structures and substations. No building shall be erected to a height greater than that permitted in the district in which the proposed use would be located. Adequate planting materials to screen exposed facilities from view shall be required. Evergreens are recommended, however, selected deciduous trees may be used when appropriate. 
(2)  Golf courses. Development features, including the principal and accessory buildings and structures, shall be so located as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse affects upon adjacent property. This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall not be less than 200 feet from any abutting property line of residentially zoned lands; provided that, where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the city council may modify this requirement. 
(3)  Nursery schools and day care centers. There shall be provided a fenced outdoor play area of a size meeting the requirements of the current state regulations pertaining to such areas. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-6) 
Sec. 74-557. - Planned unit developments. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Permit more flexibility in the use and design of structures and land than is allowable under the districts of this chapter, where such modifications will not be contrary to the intent of this chapter. 
(2)  Require a higher degree of urban amenities, the preservation of natural scenic qualities and open spaces, and more creative and imaginative design of developments in return for such flexibility. 
(3)  Promote more efficient and economical use of land. 
(4)  Give the developer reasonable assurance of ultimate approval before expending complete design monies, while providing city officials with assurances that a project will retain the character envisioned at the time of agreement. 
(b)  Minimum PUD size. Minimum PUD size is as follows: 
(1)  Five contiguous acres, which may be divided by a public right-of-way. 
(2)  One contiguous acre in a platted subdivision in which at least 80 percent of the lots have been built on. 
(c)  Permitted uses; establishment of guidelines. 
(1)  Any use is permitted if the developer can demonstrate that the proposed PUD is of such a scale and is sufficiently well designed to accomplish the intent of this chapter with respect to adjoining land uses, both existing and anticipated. 
(2)  A mixture of uses is allowable within any PUD providing that the developer can demonstrate that such mixture is so designed as to meet the intent of this chapter in respect to both the uses within and the existing and anticipated uses adjoining the PUD. 
(3)  The planning commission shall recommend, with the concurrence of the city council, guidelines for determining the compliance of a PUD with the intent of this chapter. These guidelines include but are not limited to density, open space, outdoor livability space, traffic circulation, parking standards, environmental design and nonresidential development. 
(d)  Application procedure; approval. 
(1)  Consultation with zoning administrator. The developer shall consult with the zoning administrator concerning the requirements for application and guidelines set by the planning commission and the city council. 
(2)  Submission of preliminary development plan. The developer shall submit a preliminary development plan. This plan shall consist of written and graphic documents. 
a.  The written documents shall consist of: 
1.  A legal description of the total site proposed for development, including the present and proposed ownership. 
2.  A statement of the nature and character of the proposed development, and the methods to be used in achieving these goals. 
3.  A schedule of the approximate date, or dates if the development is to be divided into stages, when construction will begin and be completed. 
4.  A statement of the developer's intentions with regard to future ownership of all or parts of the development. 
5.  Quantitative data for the following: total number and type of dwelling and nonresidential units, the proposed floor area, ground coverage, outdoor livability and open space ratios, the proposed gross residential density, and the net residential density of any separate stages, the number of parking spaces for each use proposed, and any market or feasibility studies the developer wishes to submit in support of his plan. 
6.  Such additional documentation as may be required by the planning commission. 
b.  The graphic documents shall consist of: 
1.  A plan at scale of one to 1,200 (one inch equals 100 feet) showing the existing site conditions, including contours at an interval no greater than five feet, waterways or water bodies, unique natural features, rock outcroppings and vegetative cover. 
2.  A preliminary plat meeting the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and Ordinance, if the land is to be platted. 
3.  A site plan at a scale of one to 1,200 (one inch equals 100 feet) showing the location and floor area and use of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and improvements, including maximum heights, the location and size of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as outdoor livability space, recreational areas, school sites and similar public or semipublic uses, the proposed circulation system, including private and public streets, parking and loading areas, and pedestrian ways, and access to existing and proposed utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers and water, gas, electric, telephone and television cable lines, and a preliminary landscape plan. 
4.  A plan at an appropriate scale showing land areas adjacent to the proposed development, their uses, zoning and general character, and the effects of the proposed development on such land, including the treatment of the perimeter areas of the PUD. 
5.  Such additional material as may be required by the planning commission. 
(3)  Action on preliminary development plan. Within 60 days following the submission of a preliminary development plan, the zoning administrator shall submit an analysis of the plan to the planning commission, and the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the plan, and vote to approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the plan. If the planning commission action is for approval or approval subject to modifications, a recommendation for similar action shall be made to the city council, which shall then act within 30 days. Failure of either the planning commission or the city council to act within the specified times shall constitute disapproval of the plan. 
(4)  Notation on zoning map. If the preliminary development plan is approved, with or without modifications, by the city council, the official zoning map shall be changed to so signify. Such a change shall not constitute final approval of a plat, or authorization to issue building permits. 
(5)  Submission of final development plan. Within nine months following approval of the preliminary development plan, the developer shall submit to the zoning administrator a final development plan. At its discretion and for good cause, the planning commission may extend for six months the period for filing the final development plan. 
(6)  Failure to submit final development plan. If the developer fails to submit a final development plan for any reason within the time allowed, the tentative approval shall be revoked and all the area within the development for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to the original zoning. 
(7)  Action on final development plan. If the final development plan is in compliance with the preliminary development plan as determined by the application of standards adopted by the planning commission with the concurrence of the city council, it shall be approved by the planning commission within 30 days. Notice of such approval shall then be given to the city council, which shall approve the final development plan, and the plat involved, if any, within 30 days; providing that such approval shall not be given until the financial assurances of development required by the Subdivision Ordinance have been made. 
(8)  Modification of final development plan. If, subsequent to the start of construction, it becomes necessary to modify the final development plan, the zoning administrator may do so at his discretion to the limits established in the PUD guidelines. If greater modifications are requested by the developer, they shall be subject to approval by the planning commission, which shall act within 30 days. In granting such modifications, the planning commission shall not act so as to substantially change the character or nature of the final development plan. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-7; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.584b. 
Sec. 74-558. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2001, repealed § 74-558 which pertained to swimming pools and derived from Ord. of September 18, 1952(2). 
Sec. 74-559. - Mobile home parks. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide for the establishment in a residential district of comparable density, well-designed mobile home parks. The regulations and conditions contained in this section are designed to ensure that mobile home parks will provide a comfortable and pleasing environment for persons who seek mobile home residence. Regulations and conditions contained in this section are intended to ensure that mobile home park developments will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as access streets, public water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities, refuse disposal, schools, and police and fire protection. The city council may, by the issuance of a special use permit, authorize the establishment of a mobile home park in an R-3 district. Such authorization shall be granted only when all the applicable procedures and requirements stated in this section are complied with. 
(b)  General requirements, restrictions and standards. 
(1)  Project area. Minimum project area for a mobile home park development shall be 20 acres, with a maximum site size not to exceed 40 acres. 
(2)  Location. Mobile home parks may be located only in the R-3 multiple-family residential district, upon approval of the city council and in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  The site shall be adjacent to and serviced by a collector or arterial street as designated on the city transportation plan map. 
b.  The site shall be serviced by existing essential public facilities and services such as access streets, public water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities and fire protection. 
c.  Mobile home parks shall not abut single-family residential districts on more than two sides, and only with an intervening planted greenbelt at least 20 feet wide. A ten-foot-wide greenbelt shall be provided between a mobile home park and an R-3 district. 
(c)  Uses permitted. Only the following land and building uses may be permitted under the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Mobile homes as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  One office building exclusively for conducting the business operations of the mobile home park. 
(3)  Utility buildings for laundry facilities and auxiliary storage space for mobile home tenants. 
(4)  Recreation areas, community building, playground and open space for use by mobile home park tenants. 
(5)  Such additional accessory buildings and uses as are customarily incidental to mobile home park developments, except that this shall not include the sale of mobile home units other than by their individual resident owners or the servicing of mobile home units except as is required for normal maintenance by the individual resident owner or his contractors. 
(6)  Signs pertaining exclusively to the mobile home park. 
(d)  General development standards. The design and development of mobile home parks shall be subject to all current provisions of the mobile home commission general rules as adopted by the state mobile home commission, which are hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter. 
(e)  Operating standards. 
(1)  The operating and business practices of mobile home parks shall be subject to all current provisions of the mobile home commission general rules as adopted by the state mobile home commission, which are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this chapter. 
(2)  No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management of mobile home parks. 
(3)  Home occupations shall be prohibited from mobile home parks. 
(f)  Review and approval procedure. 
(1)  Application for approval. Applications shall be submitted through the city clerk to the planning commission; see section 74-552. 
(2)  Preliminary review. 
a.  In addition to those requirements set forth in section 74-552, the developer must submit the following for the initial phase of project review: 
1.  A development plan, drawn to a readable scale, of the total property involved, showing its location in the city and its relationship to adjacent property. 
2.  A site plan indicating the proposed location of mobile home units and the anticipated population density associated with the entire project. 
3.  A site plan indicating the location and purpose of all nonresidential structures, traffic circulation, parking layout and pedestrian pathways. 
4.  A site plan showing the acreage, nature and location of common open space, and a general statement as to the means by which the developer will guarantee its continuity and maintenance. 
b.  Following receipt and review of the application, the planning commission shall hold a legally advertised public hearing on the proposed development. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission will make a decision to approve or deny the plan based on the submitted information. 
c.  At the time of approval by the planning commission, the preliminary review of the project will be sent to the city council for its action. If approved, the project continues under the secondary review procedure. If denied, the city council shall so notify the applicant and the planning commission. 
(3)  Secondary review. 
a.  Prior to receiving secondary approval, the developer must submit the following to the planning commission for its review: 
1.  A site plan indicating engineering recommendations for water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, natural gas, electric and telephone systems. 
2.  A site plan indicating recommendations for road alignments, with provisions for dealing with topography and soil conditions. 
3.  A site plan indicating existing contours and the final topographic conditions proposed for the site after grading. 
4.  A detailed landscaping plan. 
5.  A specific schedule of the intended development and construction details, including phasing or timing as it relates to open space, recreational features, common use areas, utilities and screening requirements. 
b.  The planning commission will make a final recommendation to the city council to approve or deny the project based on the final detailed information specified in this subsection. 
(4)  Commencement and construction. The applicant shall commence construction for an approved mobile home park development within one year following secondary special use permit approval. Failure to do so will invalidate the permit. The applicant may request one extension for not more than one year from the city council, providing such request is received prior to the expiration of the original permit. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-9; Ord. of 6-6-11) 
Sec. 74-560. - Radio and television satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide regulations controlling the placement of satellite dish antenna systems. Satellite dish antennas, given their size and general appearance, may be perceived as having a significant impact on adjoining residents and the character of a given neighborhood, or, if widespread, the community as a whole. 
(b)  Special use permit required. No person shall construct or install a satellite dish antenna greater than 24 inches in diameter in the city without first obtaining a special use permit therefor in the manner provided for in this article. 
(c)  Height restrictions and location in residential districts. 
(1)  Satellite dish antennas shall be located in rear yards only. 
(2)  There shall be no more than one satellite dish antenna per lot and the antenna shall be no more than 12 feet in diameter. 
(3)  No advertising or word messages shall be permitted on the satellite dish antenna. 
(4)  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than 24 inches in diameter are prohibited in the residential districts of the city. 
(5)  Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(d)  Height restrictions and location in commercial and industrial districts. 
(1)  Location and height shall conform to the minimum yard requirements of either principal buildings or accessory structures as defined in the respective zoning district. 
(2)  No satellite dish antenna shall be used for nor contain a commercial or residential advertisement, or be painted or lighted or altered from its original form and condition at the time of its installation so as to resemble an advertising structure. 
(e)  Review and findings. Denial of a special use permit application for a satellite dish antenna which otherwise complies with the specific requirements of this section and of other applicable provisions of this chapter shall be based upon a finding that the installation would have a substantial detrimental effect upon one or more adjoining private or public properties or would otherwise be contrary to public health, safety or welfare, specifying the basis for such findings. The conditions which may be attached may relate to the following: location, size, elevation, color, screening, landscaping, fencing or other matters having an impact on adjoining properties. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-10) 
Sec. 74-561. - Adult entertainment activities. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide regulations controlling those uses which by their very nature are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics inducing a unwholesome impact on adjacent uses and areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that the anticipated adverse impacts will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. Uses subject to these controls include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motels, cabarets and massage parlors. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
(1)  Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade books, films, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult motel means a motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Cabaret means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  Massage parlor means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rubs, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service relating thereto exposes specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Sexual conduct means: 
a.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
b.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
c.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
(7)  Specified anatomical area means: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernible erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(c)  Standards for approval. The city council shall issue a special use permit for adult entertainment uses which comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  No such adult entertainment uses shall be located in any zoning district except the B-2 general business district. 
(2)  No such adult entertainment uses shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of another existing adult entertainment use. 
(3)  No such adult entertainment use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district. 
(4)  No such adult entertainment use shall be located within 1,000 feet of an existing church, school, park or playground. 
(5)  All other requirements applicable to special use permits, including the holding of a public hearing, shall be met. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-11) 
Sec. 74-562. - Drive-in and fast food restaurants. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide development regulations for drive-in and fast food restaurants which potentially present particular problems in their relationships to adjacent uses and traffic patterns in the districts in which they are permitted. 
(b)  Site development standards. The city council shall only issue special use permits for drive-in and fast food restaurants which comply with the following site development standards: 
(1)  The minimum site size shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  The minimum lot width shall be 125 feet. 
(3)  All points of entrance or exit for motor vehicles shall be no closer than 30 feet to the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets and no closer than ten feet to an adjacent property line. The minimum driveway width at the curbline shall be 30 feet. No more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted on any street frontage. 
(4)  The outdoor space used for parking and vehicle stacking shall be hard surfaced and adequately drained. 
(5)  All areas used for the storage of trash and rubbish shall be screened by a vertical screen consisting of structural or plant materials no less than six feet in height, with a view-obstructing door. 
(Ord. of 5-1-95, § 8-23-12) 
Sec. 74-563. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 11-6-17 repealed § 74-563, which pertained to medical marihuana provisioning centers and derived from Ord. of 10-20-14. 
Secs. 74-564-74-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ACCESS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 74-581. - Findings and intent. 
    Conditions along the major highways in Dickinson County are changing with increasing development and traffic. Continued development along US-2/US-141 and M-95 will further increase traffic volumes and introduce additional conflict points which will erode traffic operations and increase potential for traffic crashes. Numerous published studies document the positive relationship between well-designed access management systems and traffic operations and safety. Those studies and the experiences of many other communities demonstrate that implementing standards on the number, placement and design of access points (driveways and side street intersections) can preserve the capacity of the roadway and reduce the potential for crashes while preserving a good business environment and the existing investment in the highway. The conditions along US-2/US-141/M-95 and a series of access management recommendations are embodied in the US-2/US-141/M-95 Access Management Action Plan. Among those recommendations are the creation of an overlay zone along these highways within Dickinson County and the adoption of uniform access management standards by all the jurisdictions along the US-2/US-141/M-95 corridor which are based on the Michigan Department of Transportation access management standards and the Michigan Access Management Guidebook, provided to local governments by the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
    The provisions of this section are intended to promote safe and efficient travel on state highways within Dickinson County; improve safety and reduce the potential for crashes; minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflicts; ensure safe access by emergency vehicles; protect the substantial public investment in the highway and street system by preserving capacity and avoiding the need for unnecessary and costly reconstruction which disrupts business and traffic flow; separate traffic conflict areas by reducing the number of driveways; provide safe spacing standards between driveways, and between driveways and intersections; provide for shared access between abutting properties; implement the Comprehensive Use Plan and the US-2/US-141/M-95 Access Management Action Plan recommendations; ensure reasonable access to properties, although not always by the most direct access; and to coordinate access decisions with the Michigan Department of Transportation, the Dickinson County Road Commission, and adjoining jurisdictions, as applicable. 
    To these ends, the following provisions: 
(1)  Establish a highway overlay zone to regulate access points along the highway. 
(2)  Identify additional submittal information and review procedures required for parcels that front along US-2/US-141/M-95. 
(3)  Require demonstration that new parcels are accessible and in compliance with the access standards of this article to ensure safe accessibility as required by the Land Division Act. 
(4)  Restrict lots and parcels to a single access point except under certain circumstances. 
(5)  Require longer frontages or wider minimum lot widths than are required in underlying zoning districts to help achieve access management spacing standards. 
(6)  Require coordinated access among adjacent lands wherever feasible. 
(7)  Improve situations where existing development along the highways does not conform to the standards and intent of this article. 
(8)  Establish uniform standards to ensure fair and equal application. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(A)) 
Sec. 74-582. - Applicability. 
    The standards of this section apply to all lots and parcels that abut the highway right-of-way of US-2/US-141/M-95 and such other lands that front on intersecting streets within 350 feet of the US-2/US/141/M-95 right-of-way within the City of Iron Mountain. This area is referred to as the highway overlay zone. 
    The standards of this section shall be applied by the zoning administrator during site plan review and by the planning commission during site plan review, as is appropriate to the application. The planning commission shall make written findings of nonconformance, conformance, or conformance if certain conditions are met with the standards of this section prior to disapproving or approving a site plan per the requirements of section 74-585. The city shall coordinate its review of the access elements of a plot plan or site plan with the appropriate road authority prior to making a decision on an application (see section 74-584). The approval of a plot plan or site plan does not negate the responsibility of an applicant to subsequently secure driveway permits from the appropriate road authority, either the City of Iron Mountain, the Dickinson County Road Commission, or the Michigan Department of Transportation (depending on the roadway). Any driveway permit obtained by an applicant prior to review and approval of a plot plan or site plan as required under this article will be ignored, unless it is conditioned upon approval under this article. 
    These regulations apply in addition to, and simultaneously with, the other applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance. Permitted and special land uses within the highway overlay zone shall be as regulated in the underlying zoning district (as designated on the zoning map), and shall meet all the applicable requirements for that district, with the following additional provisions: 
(1)  The number of access points is the fewest needed to allow motorists reasonable access to the site. 
(2)  Access spacing from intersections and other driveways shall meet the standards within the highway overlay zone, and the guidelines of the applicable road agency (MDOT and/or Dickinson County Road Commission) and the recommendations of the US-2/US-141/M-95 Access Management Access Plan as appropriate. 
(3)  Where an applicant shares access with adjacent uses, either now or in the future, any shared access and maintenance agreements must be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(4)  No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be erected unless the highway overlay zone regulations applicable to the site are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement. 
(5)  No land division, subdivision or site condominium project for land within this highway overlay zone shall be approved unless compliance with the access spacing standards in this section is demonstrated. 
(6)  Any change in use on a site that does not meet the access standards of this highway overlay zone, shall be required to submit an application for approval by the planning commission and submit information to the MDOT, and/or county road commission as appropriate, to determine if a new access permit is required. See section 74-591 below. 
(7)  For building or parking lot expansions, or changes in use, or site redevelopment that cannot meet the standards of this article due to parcel size or configuration, the planning commission shall determine the extent of upgrades to bring the site into greater compliance with the access standards of this highway overlay zone. In making its decision, the planning commission shall consider the existing and projected traffic conditions, any sight distance limitations, site topography or natural features, impacts on internal site circulation, characteristics of the affected land uses, recommendations within the US-2/US-141/M-95 Access Management Action Plan, and any recommendations from the MDOT, and/or Dickinson County Road Commission as appropriate. Required improvements may include removal, rearrangement or redesign of driveways or other access. 
(8)  Where conflict occurs between the standards of this article and other applicable ordinances, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(B)) 
Sec. 74-583. - One access per parcel. 
(a)  All land in a parcel or lot having a single tax code number, as of the effective date of the amendment adding this provision to the article (hereafter referred to as "the parent parcel"), that shares a lot line for less than 600 feet with right-of-way on US-2/US-141/M-95 shall be entitled to one driveway or road access per parcel from said public road or highway, unless hereafter shared access or alternative access is provided to that parcel. 
(1)  All subsequent land divisions of a parent parcel, shall not increase the number of driveways or road accesses beyond those entitled to the parent parcel on the effective date of this amendment. 
(2)  Parcels subsequently divided from the parent parcel, either by metes and bounds descriptions, or as a plat under the applicable provisions of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, or developed as a condominium project in accord with the Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, shall have access by a platted subdivision road, by another public road, by an approved private road, frontage road or rear service drive. 
(b)  Parent parcels with more than 600 feet of frontage on a public road or highway shall also meet the requirements of C.1.a and C.1.b above, except that whether subsequently divided or not, they are entitled to not more than one driveway for each 600 feet of public road frontage thereafter, unless a registered traffic engineer determines to the satisfaction of the planning commission that topographic conditions on the site, curvature on the road, or sight distance limitations demonstrate an additional driveway within a lesser distance is safer or the nature of the land use to be served requires an additional driveway for improved safety. See also subsection 74-598(2)a. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(C)) 
Sec. 74-584. - Applications. 
(a)  Applications for driveway or access approval shall be made on a form prescribed by and available at the Michigan Department of Transportation and Dickinson County Road Commission as applicable. A copy of the completed form submitted to the applicable road authority shall be submitted to the zoning administrator as well. 
(b)  Applications for all uses requiring site plan review shall meet the submittal, review and approval requirements of Article V of the city zoning ordinance in addition to those of this article. In addition: 
(1)  Applications are strongly encouraged to rely on the following sources for access designs, the National Access Management Manual, TRB, 2003; National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP), "Access Management Guidelines to Activity Centers" Report 348, "Impacts of Access Management Techniques" Report 420; and the AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials) "Green Book" A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. The following techniques are addressed in these guidebooks and are strongly encouraged to be used when designing access: 
a.  Not more than one driveway access per abutting road. 
b.  Shared driveways. 
c.  Service drives: front and/or rear. 
d.  Parking lot connections with adjacent property. 
e.  Other appropriate designs to limit access points on an arterial or collector. 
(2)  As applicable, applications shall be accompanied by an escrow fee for professional review per the requirements of section 74-12. 
(3)  In addition to the information required in Article V of this chapter the information listed below shall also be submitted for any lot or parcel within the highway overlay zone accompanied by clear, scaled drawings (minimum of 1"=20') showing the following items: 
a.  Property lines. 
b.  Right-of-way lines and width, and location and width of existing road surface. 
c.  Location and size of all structures existing and proposed on the site. 
d.  Existing access points. Existing access points within 500 feet (250 in cities) on either side of the US-2/US-141/M-95 frontage, and along both sides of any adjoining roads, shall be shown on the site plan, aerial photographs or on a plan sheet. 
e.  Surface type and dimensions shall be provided for all existing and proposed driveways (width, radii, throat length, length of any deceleration lanes or tapers, pavement markings and signs), intersecting streets, and all curb radii within the site. 
f.  The site plan shall illustrate the route and dimensioned turning movements of any passenger vehicles as well as expected truck traffic, tankers, delivery vehicles, waste receptacle vehicles and similar vehicles. The plan should confirm that routing of vehicles will not disrupt operations at the access points nor impede maneuvering or parking within the site. 
g.  Size and arrangement of parking stalls and aisles. 
h.  The applicant shall submit evidence indicating that the sight distance, driveway spacing and drainage requirements of the Michigan Department of Transportation or Dickinson County Road Commission are met. 
i.  Dimensions between proposed and existing access points on both sides of the highway or road (and median cross-overs if applicable now or known in the future). 
j.  Design dimensions and justification for any alternative or innovative access design such as frontage roads, rear access or service drives, or parking lot cross-access. 
k.  Where shared access is proposed or required, a shared access and maintenance agreement shall be submitted for approval. Once approved, this agreement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
l.  Show all existing and proposed landscaping, signs, and other structures or treatments within and adjacent to the right-of-way. 
m.  Dumpsters or other garbage containers. 
n.  The location of all proposed snow storage from parking lots which must not interfere with clear sight distance when turning into or out of a site, or safely moving within a site. 
o.  Traffic impact study meeting the requirements of section 74-601 where applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(D)) 
Sec. 74-585. - Review and approval process. 
    The following process shall be completed to obtain access approval: 
(1)  An access application meeting the requirements of this article above shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on the same day it was submitted to the Michigan Department of Transportation and/or the Dickinson County Road Commission, as applicable. 
(2)  The completed application must be received by the zoning administrator at least 14 days prior to the planning commission meeting where the application will be reviewed. 
(3)  The applicant, the zoning administrator and representatives of the Dickinson County Road Commission, the Michigan Department of Transportation and the planning commission may meet prior to the planning commission meeting to review the application and proposed access design. Such a meeting shall occur for all projects where a traffic impact study is required. 
(4)  If the planning commission considers the application first, it shall recommend approval conditioned upon approval of the applicable road authority, or it shall recommend denial based on nonconformance with this article, or if necessary, table action and request additional information. The action of the planning commission shall be immediately transmitted to the applicable road authority. 
(5)  It is expected that if the Michigan Department of Transportation and/or the Dickinson County Road Commission, as applicable, review the application first, each entity will immediately send its decision on the application to the planning commission for their consideration. One of three actions may result; 
a.  If the planning commission and the Michigan Department of Transportation, and the road commission, as applicable, approve the application as submitted, the access application shall be approved. 
b.  If both the planning commission and the Michigan Department of Transportation and the road commission, as applicable, deny the application, the application shall not be approved. 
c.  If either the planning commission, Michigan Department of Transportation, or road commission, as applicable, requests additional information, approval with conditions, or does not concur in approval or denial, there shall be a joint meeting of the zoning administrator, a representative of the planning commission and staff of the Michigan Department of Transportation and/or the Dickinson County Road Commission, as applicable, and the applicants. The purpose of this meeting will be to review the application to obtain concurrence between the planning commission and the applicable road authorities regarding approval or denial and the terms and conditions of any permit approval. 
(6)  No application will be considered approved, nor will any permit be considered valid unless all the above-mentioned agencies, as applicable, have indicated approval unless approval by any of the above-mentioned agencies would clearly violate adopted regulations of the agency. In this case the application shall be denied by that agency and the requested driveway(s) shall not be constructed. Conditions may be imposed by the planning commission to ensure conformance with the terms of any driveway permit approved by a road authority. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(E)) 
Sec. 74-586. - Record of application. 
    The zoning administrator shall keep a record of each application that has been submitted, including the disposition of each one. This record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(F)) 
Sec. 74-587. - Period of approval. 
    Approval of an application remains valid for a period of one year from the date it was authorized. If authorized construction, including any required rear service road or frontage road is not initiated by the end of one year, the authorization is automatically null and void. Any additional approvals that have been granted by the planning commission or the zoning board of appeals, such as special land use permits, or variances, also expire at the end of one year. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(G)) 
Sec. 74-588. - Renewal. 
    An approval may be extended for a period not to exceed one-year. The extension must be requested, in writing by the applicant before the expiration of the initial approval. The zoning administrator may approve extension of an authorization provided there are no deviations from the original approval present on the site or planned, and there are no violations of applicable ordinances and no development on abutting property has occurred with a driveway location that creates an unsafe condition. If there is any deviation or cause for question, the zoning administrator shall consult a representative of the Michigan Department of Transportation and/or the Dickinson County Road Commission, as applicable, for input. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(H)) 
Sec. 74-589. - Re-issuance requires new application. 
    Re-issuance of an authorization that has expired requires a new access application form to be filled out, fee paid, and processed independently of previous action. See subsection 74-585(1). 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(I)) 
Sec. 74-590. - Maintenance. 
    The applicant shall assume all responsibility for all maintenance of driveway approaches from the right-of-way line to the edge of the traveled roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(J)) 
Sec. 74-591. - Change of use also may require new driveway. 
    When a building permit is sought for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or expansion of an existing site or a zoning or occupancy certificate is sought for use or change of use for any land, buildings, or structures, all of the existing, as well as proposed driveway approaches and parking facilities shall comply, or be brought into compliance, with all design standards as required by the Michigan Department of Transportation and/or the Dickinson County Road Commission as applicable, and as set forth in this article prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, and pursuant to the procedures of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(K)) 
Sec. 74-592. - Changes require new application. 
    Where authorization has been granted for entrances to a parking facility, said facility shall not be altered or the plan of operation changed until a revised access application has been submitted and approved as specified in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(L)) 
Sec. 74-593. - Closing of driveways. 
    Application to construct or reconstruct any driveway entrance and approach to a site shall also cover the reconstruction or closing of all nonconforming or unused entrances and approaches to the same site at the expense of the property owner, unless some other arrangement is agreed to by the road authority responsible for the road in question. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(M)) 
Sec. 74-594. - Inspection. 
    The zoning administrator shall inspect the driveway and any other required access elements during construction and following construction for conformance with the approved application prior to allowing occupancy. The zoning administrator may consult with MDOT and/or the county road commission as applicable, prior to making a determination of conformance or nonconformance with an approved application. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(N)) 
Sec. 74-595. - Performance bond. 
    The community may require a performance bond or cash deposit in any sum not to exceed $5,000.00 for each such driveway approach or entrance to insure compliance with an approved application. Such bond shall terminate and the deposit be returned to the applicant when the terms of the approval have been met or when the authorization is cancelled or terminated. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(O)) 
Sec. 74-596. - Reserved. 
Sec. 74-597. - Lot width and setbacks. 
(a)  Minimum lot width. Except for existing lots of record, all lots fronting on US-2/US-141/M-95 subject to this section, shall not be less than 300 feet in width, unless served by shared access or a service drive that meets the requirements of subsection 74-598(9), (10), or (11), in which case minimum lot width may be reduced to not less than 100 feet in width if a deed restriction is approved and recorded with the county register of deeds demonstrating an effective method for long term maintenance of the shared access, service drive and/or parking lot cross-access. 
(b)  Structure setback. No structure other than signs, as allowed in Article VII of the city zoning ordinance, telephone poles and other utility structures that are not buildings, transfer stations or substations, shall be permitted within 50 feet of the roadway right-of-way. 
(c)  Parking setback and landscaped area. No parking or display of vehicles, goods or other materials for sale, shall be located within 50 feet of the roadway right-of-way. This setback shall be planted in grass and landscaped with small clusters of salt tolerant trees and shrubs suitable to the underlying soils unless another design is approved under the landscape provisions of Article VI of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(Q)) 
Sec. 74-598. - Access management standards. 
    No road, driveway, shared access, parking lot cross-access, service road, or other access arrangement to all lots and parcels within the highway overlay zone shall be established, reconstructed or removed without first meeting the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Each lot/parcel with highway frontage on US-2/US-141/M-95 shall be permitted one access point. This access point may consist of an individual driveway, a shared access with an adjacent use, or access via a service drive or frontage road. As noted in sections 74-582 and 74-583, land divisions shall not be permitted that may prevent compliance with the access location standards of this highway overlay zone. 
(2)  When alternatives to a single, two-way driveway are necessary to provide reasonable driveway access to property fronting on US-2/US-141/M-95, and shared access or a service drive are not a viable option, the following progression of alternatives should be used: 
a.  One standard, two-way driveway; 
b.  Additional ingress/egress lanes on one standard, two-way driveway; 
c.  Two, one-way driveways; 
d.  Additional ingress/egress lanes on two, one-way driveways; 
e.  Additional driveway(s) on an abutting street with a lower functional classification; 
f.  Additional driveway on arterial street. 
Note: Restricted turns and roadway modifications will be considered in conjunction with alternative driveway designs. 
(3)  Driveways and new intersecting streets shall provide the following spacing from other access points along the same side of the public street (measured from centerline to centerline of each access point), based on the posted speed limit along the public street segment, unless the appropriate road authority approves less based on the land use characteristics, lot size, and/or restricted turns in the driveway design. 
Posted Speed Limit Along US-2/US-141/M-95* Along Other Intersecting Major Arterials** Along all Other Intersecting Streets (not major arterials) 35 mph or less 245 ft. 245 ft. 150 ft. 40 mph 300 ft. 300 ft. 185 ft. 45 mph 350 ft. 350 ft. 230 ft. 50 mph 455 ft. 455 ft. 275 ft. 55 mph 455 ft. 455 ft. 350 ft.  
* Unless greater spacing is required by MDOT. 
(4)  Where the subject site adjoins land that may be developed or redeveloped in the future, including adjacent lands or potential outlots, the access shall be located to ensure the adjacent site(s) can also meet the access location standards in the future. 
(5)  Driveways or new intersecting streets along sections of US-2/US-141/M-95 with an existing or planned median shall be located in consideration of existing or approved median crossovers. A sufficient length for weaving across travel lanes and storage within the median shall be provided, consistent with MDOT published standards. 
(6)  Driveways and new intersecting streets shall be aligned with driveways on the opposite side of the street or offset a minimum of 250 feet, centerline to centerline wherever feasible. The planning commission may reduce this to not less than 150 feet where each of the opposing access points generates less than 50 trips (inbound and outbound) during the peak hour of the public street or where sight distance limitations exist, or shall rely on the best option identified by MDOT. 
(7)  Minimum spacing of driveways from intersections shall be in accordance with the table below (measured from pavement edge to pavement edge) unless MDOT authorizes a lesser spacing: 
Signalized Locations* Distance in Feet Unsignalized Locations Distance in Feet Along US-2/US-141/M-95 300 Along US-2/US-141/M-95 300 Along other public streets 200 Intersections with US-2/US-141/M-95 300 Other intersections 150  
* Spacing for signalized intersections shall also be applied at intersections where MDOT indicates spacing and approach volumes may warrant a signal in the future. 
(8)  Where direct access consistent with the various standards above cannot be achieved, access should be via a shared driveway or service drive. In particular, the planning commission may require development of frontage roads, or rear service drives where such facilities can provide access to signalized locations, where service drives may minimize the number of driveways, and as a means to ensure that traffic is able to more efficiently and safely ingress and egress. 
(9)  a.  Sharing or joint use of a driveway by two or more property owners shall be encouraged. In cases where access is restricted by the spacing requirements of subsection (3) above a shared driveway may be the only access design allowed. The shared driveway shall be constructed along the midpoint between the two properties unless a written easement is provided which allows traffic to travel across one parcel to access another, and/or access the public street. 
b.  In cases where a shared access facility is recommended, but is not yet available, temporary direct access may be permitted, provided the site plan is designed to accommodate the future service drive, and a written agreement is submitted that the temporary access will be removed by the applicant, when the alternative access system becomes available. This may require posting of a performance guarantee to cover the cost of removing the temporary driveway if the applicant or then owner does not remove the temporary driveway once a permanent driveway is established. 
(10)  Frontage roads or service drives (see Figure 1) shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Location. Frontage roads or service drives shall generally be parallel to the front property line and may be located either in front of, or behind, principal buildings and may be placed in required yards. In considering the most appropriate alignment for a service road, the planning commission shall consider the setbacks of existing and/or proposed buildings and anticipated traffic flow for the site. 
b.  Alignment. The alignment of the service drive can be refined to meet the needs of the site and anticipated traffic conditions, provided the resulting terminus allows the drive to be extended through the adjacent site(s). This determination may require use of aerial photographs, property line maps, topographic information and other supporting documentation. 
c.  Setback. Service drives and frontage roads shall be set back as far as reasonably possible from the intersection of the access driveway with the public street. A minimum of 30 feet shall be maintained between the public street right-of-way and the pavement of the frontage road, with a minimum 60 feet of throat depth provided at the access point. The access point location shall conform with all the applicable standards of this article. 
d.  Access easement. A frontage road or service drive shall be within an access easement permitting traffic circulation between properties. The easement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. This easement shall be at least 40 feet wide. A frontage road or service drive shall have a minimum pavement width of 26 feet, measured face to face of curb with an approach width of 36 feet at intersections. The frontage road or service drive shall be constructed of a paved surface material that is resistant to erosion and shall meet City of Iron Mountain, Dickinson County Road Commission or MDOT (depending on what road the service drive parallels) standards for base and thickness of asphalt or concrete, unless the community has more restrictive standards. 
e.  Snow storage. A minimum of 15 feet of snow storage/landscaping area shall be reserved along both sides of the frontage road or service drive. 
f.  Service drive maintenance. No service drive shall be established on existing public right-of-way. The service drive shall be a public street (if dedicated to and accepted by the public), or a private road maintained by the adjoining property owners it serves who shall enter into a formal agreement for the joint maintenance of the service drive. The agreement shall also specify who is responsible for enforcing speed limits, parking and related vehicular activity on the service drive. This agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and recorded with the deed for each property it serves by the county register of deeds. If the service drive is a private road, the local government shall reserve the right to make repairs or improvements to the service drive and charge back the costs directly or by special assessment to the benefiting landowners if they fail to properly maintain a service drive. 
g.  Landscaping. Landscaping along the service drive shall conform with the requirements of Article VI of this chapter. Installation and maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of the developer or a property owners association. 
h.  Parking areas. All separate parking areas (i.e. those that do not use joint parking cross-access) shall have no more than one access point or driveway to the service drive. 
i.  Parking. The service road is intended to be used exclusively for circulation, not as a parking, loading or unloading aisle. Parking shall be prohibited along two-way frontage roads and service drives that are constructed at the minimum width (see subsection 74-582(4)). One-way roads or two-way roads designed with additional width for parallel parking may be allowed if it can be demonstrated through traffic studies that on-street parking will not significantly affect the capacity, safety or operation of the frontage road or service drive. Perpendicular or angle parking along either side of a designated frontage road or service drive is prohibited. The planning commission may require the posting of "no parking" signs along the service road. As a condition to site plan approval, the planning commission may permit temporary parking in the easement area where a continuous service road is not yet available, provided that the layout allows removal of the parking in the future to allow extension of the service road. Temporary parking spaces permitted within the service drive shall be in excess of the minimum required under Article VI of this chapter, Parking and Loading Standard). 
j.  Directional signs and pavement markings. Pavement markings may be required to help promote safety and efficient circulation. The property owner shall be required to maintain all pavement markings. All directional signs and pavement markings along the service drive shall conform with the current Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
k.  Assumed width of pre-existing service drives. Where a service drive in existence prior to the effective date of this provision has no recorded width, the width will be considered to be 40 feet for the purposes of establishing setbacks and measured an equal distance from the midpoint of the road surface. 
l.  Pedestrian and bicycle access. Separate, safe access for pedestrians and bicycles shall be provided on a sidewalk or paved path that generally parallels the service drive unless alternate and comparable facilities are approved by the planning commission. 
m.  Number of lots or dwellings served. No more than 25 lots or dwelling units may gain access from a service drive to a single public street. 
n.  Service drive signs. All new public and private service drives shall have a designated name on a sign meeting the standards on file in the office of the zoning administrator. 
o.  Pre-existing conditions. In the case of expansion, alteration or redesign of existing development where it can be demonstrated that pre-existing conditions prohibit installation of a frontage road or service drive in accordance with the aforementioned standards, the planning commission shall have the authority to allow and/or require alternative cross access between adjacent parking areas through the interconnection of main circulation aisles. Under these conditions, the aisles serving the parking stalls shall be aligned perpendicularly to the access aisle, as shown in Figure 1c., with islands, curbing and/or signage to further delineate the edges of the route to be used by through traffic. 

(11)  Parking lot connections or parking lot cross-access. Where a proposed parking lot is adjacent to an existing parking lot of a similar use, there shall be a vehicular connection between the two parking lots where physically feasible, as determined by the planning commission. For developments adjacent to vacant properties, the site shall be designed to provide for a future connection. A written access easement signed by both landowners shall be presented as evidence of the parking lot connection prior to the issuance of any final zoning approval. 
(12)  Access easements. Shared driveways, cross access driveways, connected parking lots, and service drives shall be recorded as an access easement and shall constitute a covenant running with the land. Operating and maintenance agreements for these facilities should be recorded with the deed. (Examples of access easements are found in Appendix B of the Michigan Access Management Guidebook.) 
(13)  Access points shall be located to provide safe sight distance, as determined by the applicable road agency. 
(14)  All access points shall maintain clear vision as illustrated in Figures 2 and 3. 


(15)  Throat width and throat length of driveways shall be as required by the road authority and this article. The driveway design shall safely accommodate the needs of pedestrians and bicyclists. 
(16)  Grades and drainage: 
a.  Driveways shall be constructed such that the grade for the 25 feet nearest the pavement edge or shoulder does not exceed 1.5 percent (one and one-half foot vertical rise in 100 feet of horizontal distance) wherever feasible. Where not feasible, grades shall conform with requirements of the applicable road authority. 
b.  Driveways shall be constructed such that drainage from impervious areas located outside of the public right-of-way, which are determined to be in excess of existing drainage from these areas shall not be discharged into the roadway drainage system without the approval of the responsible agency. Storm drains, or culverts, if required shall be of a size adequate to carry the anticipated storm flow and be constructed and installed pursuant to the specifications of the responsible road authority. 
(17)  Directional signs and pavement markings. In order to ensure smooth traffic circulation on the site, direction signs and pavement markings shall be installed at the driveway(s) in a clearly visible location as required by the City of Iron Mountain as part of the site plan review process and approved by the Michigan Department of Transportation and Dickinson County Road Commission (as appropriate), and shall be maintained on a permanent basis by the property owner. Directional signs and pavement markings shall conform to the standards in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(18)  Traffic signals. Access points on US-2/US-141/M-95 may be required to be signalized in order to provide safe and efficient traffic flow. Any signal shall meet the spacing requirements of the applicable road authority. A development may be responsible for all or part of any right-of-way, design, hardware, and construction costs of a traffic signal if it is determined by the road authority that the signal is warranted by the traffic generated from the development. The procedures for signal installation and the percent of financial participation required of the development in the installation of the signal shall be in accordance with criteria of the road authority with jurisdiction. 
(19)  No driveway shall interfere with municipal facilities such as street lights or traffic signal poles, signs, fire hydrants, cross walks, bus loading zones, utility poles, fire alarm supports, drainage structures, or other necessary street structures. The zoning administrator is authorized to order and effect the removal or reconstruction of any driveway which is constructed in conflict with street structures. The cost of reconstructing or relocating any new or proposed such driveways shall be at the expense of the property owner with the problem driveway. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(R)) 
Sec. 74-599. - Nonconforming driveways. 
(a)  Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this section, and were constructed before the effective date of this section, shall be considered legal nonconforming driveways. Existing driveways previously granted a temporary access permit by MDOT or the county road commission are legal nonconforming driveways until such time as the temporary access permit expires. 
(b)  Loss of legal nonconforming status results when a nonconforming driveway ceases to be used for its intended purpose, as shown on the approved site plan, or a plot plan, for a period of 12 months or more. Any reuse of the driveway may only take place after the driveway conforms to all aspects of this article. 
(c)  Legal nonconforming driveways may remain in use until such time as the use of the driveway or property is changed or expanded in number of vehicle trips per day or in the type of vehicles using the driveway (such as many more trucks) in such a way that impact the design of the driveway. At this time, the driveway shall be required to conform to all aspects of the article. 
(d)  Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this article and have been constructed after adoption of this article, shall be considered illegal nonconforming driveways. 
(e)  Illegal nonconforming driveways are a violation of this article. The property owner shall be issued a violation notice which may include closing off the driveway until any nonconforming aspects of the driveway are corrected. Driveways constructed in illegal locations shall be immediately closed upon detection and all evidence of the driveway removed from the right-of-way and site on which it is located. The costs of such removal shall be borne by the property owner. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the repair, improvement, or modernization of lawful nonconforming driveways, provided it is done consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(S)) 
Sec. 74-600. - Waivers and variances of requirements. 
(a)  Any applicant for access approval under the provisions of this section may apply for a waiver of standards in section 74-598 if the applicant cannot meet one or more of the standards according to the procedures provided below: 
(1)  For waivers on properties involving land uses with less than 500 vehicle trips per day based on rates published in the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers: Where the standards in this section cannot be met, suitable alternatives, documented by a registered traffic engineer and substantially achieving the intent of the section may be accepted by the zoning administrator, provided that all of the following apply: 
a.  The use has insufficient size to meet the dimensional standards. 
b.  Adjacent development renders adherence to these standards economically unfeasible. 
c.  There is no other reasonable access due to topographic or other considerations. 
d.  The standards in this section shall be applied to the maximum extent feasible. 
e.  The responsible road authority agrees a waiver is warranted. 
(2)  For waivers on properties involving land uses with more than 500 vehicle trips per day based on rates published in the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers: During site plan review the planning commission shall have the authority to waive or otherwise modify the standards of section 74-598 following an analysis of suitable alternatives documented by a registered traffic engineer and substantially achieving the intent of this section, provided all of the following apply: 
a.  Access via a shared driveway or front or rear service drive is not possible due to the presence of existing buildings or topographic conditions. 
b.  Roadway improvements (such as the addition of a traffic signal, a center turn lane or bypass lane) will be made to improve overall traffic operations prior to project completion, or occupancy of the building. 
c.  The use involves the redesign of an existing development or a new use which will generate less traffic than the previous use. 
d.  The proposed location and design is supported by the county road commission and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation, as applicable, as an acceptable design under the circumstances. 
(b)  Variance standards. The following standards shall apply when the board of appeals considers a request for a variance from the standards of this section. 
(1)  The granting of a variance shall not be considered until a waiver under subsection(1) or (2) above has been considered and rejected. 
(2)  Applicants for a variance must provide proof of practical difficulties unique to the parcel (such as wetlands, steep slopes, an odd parcel shape or narrow frontage, or location relative to other buildings, driveways or an intersection or interchange) that make strict application of the provisions of this section impractical. This shall include proof that: 
a.  Indirect or restricted access cannot be obtained; and, 
b.  No reasonable engineering or construction solution can be applied to mitigate the condition; and, 
c.  No reasonable alternative access is available from a road with a lower functional classification than the primary road; and, 
d.  Without the variance, there is no reasonable access to the site and the responsible road authority agrees. 
(3)  The board of appeals shall make a finding that the applicant for a variance met their burden of proof above, that a variance is consistent with the intent and purpose of this section, and is the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access. 
(4)  Under no circumstances shall a variance be granted unless not granting the variance would deny all reasonable access, endanger public health, welfare or safety, or cause an unnecessary hardship on the applicant. No variance shall be granted where such hardship is self-created. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 2(T)) 
Sec. 74-601. - Traffic impact study. 
(a)  If the proposed land use exceeds the traffic generation thresholds below, then the zoning administrator shall require submittal of a traffic impact study at the expense of the applicant, as described below prior to consideration of the application or site plan by either the zoning administrator or the planning commission. At their discretion, the planning commission may accept a traffic impact study prepared for another public agency. A traffic impact study shall be provided for the following developments unless waived by the planning commission following consultation with the Michigan Department of Transportation or Dickinson County Road Commission, as applicable: 
(1)  For any residential development of more than 20 dwelling units, or any office, commercial, industrial or mixed use development, with a building over 50,000 square feet, or 
(2)  When permitted uses could generate either a 30 percent increase in average daily traffic, or at least 100 directional trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the peak hour on the adjacent streets, or over 750 trips in an average day. 
(3)  Such other development that may pose traffic problems in the opinion of the planning commission. 
(b)  At a minimum the traffic impact study shall be in accordance with accepted principles as described in the handbook Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies, a Recommended Practice for Michigan, developed by the MDOT and other Michigan transportation agencies and contain the following: 
(1)  A narrative summary including the applicant and all project owners, the project name, a location map, size and type of development, project phasing, analysis of existing traffic conditions and/or site restrictions using current data transportation system inventory, peak hour volumes at present and projected, number of lanes, roadway cross section, intersection traffic, signal progression, and related information on present and future conditions. The capacity analysis software should be the same for each project, such as using HCS 2000 or a later version. 
(2)  Projected trip generation at the subject site or along the subject service drive, if any, based on the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation manual. The city may approve use of other trip generation data if based on recent studies of at least three similar uses within similar locations in Michigan. 
(3)  Illustrations of current and projected turning movements at access points. Include identification of the impact of the development and its proposed access on the operation of the abutting streets. Capacity analysis shall be completed based on the most recent version of the Highway Capacity Manual published by the Transportation Research Board, and shall be provided in an appendix to the traffic impact study. 
(4)  Description of the internal vehicular circulation and parking system for passenger vehicles and delivery trucks, as well as the circulation system for pedestrians, bicycles and transit users. 
(5)  Justification of need, including statements describing how any additional access (more than one driveway location) will improve safety on the site and will be consistent with the US-2/US-141/M-95 Access Management Action Plan and the Community or Comprehensive Master Plan, and will not reduce capacity or traffic operations along the roadway. 
(6)  Qualifications and documented experience of the author of the traffic impact study, describing experience in preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan. The preparer shall be either a registered traffic engineer (P.E.) or transportation planner with at least five years of experience preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan. If the traffic impact study involves geometric design, the study shall be prepared or supervised by a registered engineer with a strong background in traffic engineering. 
(c)  The city may utilize its own traffic consultant to review the applicant's traffic impact study, with the cost of the review being borne by the applicant per section 74-12. 
(Ord. of 3-20-06, § 3) 
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES 
Franchisee Ord. No. Date  Term Michigan Consolidated Gas 
Company Ord. of 9-18-95  9-18-95 30 years Northside T.V. Corporation Former Ord. No. 656  9- 8-90 15 years Teleprompter Cable Service, Inc. d/b/a American Cablevision Former Ord. No. 659 Expired 1993 15 years U.P. T-V Systems, Inc. Article IV  6-14-88 Expires 
4-11-2001  
APPENDIX B - LEASES 
Lessee Article Section    Date Cable Constructors, Inc. I 10-1000  8- 3-87 Krist Oil Co. II 10-2000  9- 8-87 (Terminated) Raymond & Donna Schinderle III 10-3000  9- 8-87 (Renewed) Hale Advertising Co. IV 10-4000 11-16-87 (Terminated) Dingeman Advertising Co. V 10-5000  7- 5-88 (Terminated) Schneider Communications Co. VI 10-6000  6- 5-89 (Cancelled) Cable Constructors, Inc. VII 10-7000  8- 7-89 First National Bank VIII 10-8000  4- 2-90 (Expired) Breitung Township Schools IX 10-9000  5-21-90 Range Telecommunications X 10-10000  6- 4-90 Ardis, Inc. (Ron Tomassoni) XI 10-11000 11-19-90 Lake Antoine Lawn and Sport (Krans) XII 10-12000 12- 3-90 First National Bank XIII 10-13000  4-15-91 (Renewal) Range Telecommunications XIV 10-14000 11- 5-91 Danny Hood Evangelical Ass'n. XV 10-15000 12- 2-91 Todd Rose (Toddy's Pasty) XVI 10-16000 10-19-92 Mountain View Ice Arena XVII 10-17000  7-20-92 Cable Constructors, Inc. XVIII 10-18000  3- 1-93 Northside Cable T.V. Corp. XIX 10-19000  9-19-94 Michigan State Police Post XX 10-20000  2-20-95 Dr. Douglas Rybarczyk XXI 10-21000 12-16-96 Family Educational Broadcasting, Inc.  1- 6-97 (Revised) American Microwave & Communications, Inc.  1- 6-97 (Revised) Northside TV  1- 6-97 (Revised) Danny Hood Evangelistic Association  1- 6-97 (Revised) Range Telecommunications Corp.  1- 6-97 (Revised) WMIQ Radio Station (Superior Media Group, Inc.)  1- 6-97 (Revised) WIMK Radio Station (Superior Media Group, Inc.)  1- 6-97 (Revised) Cable Constructors, Inc.  5- 3-99 (Renewal) Breitung Township School District IX  6-20-00 L & B Real Estate Partnership XXIII  2- 6-12 (Renewal) Frank & Alice Smith XXIV  2- 6-12 (Renewal) Mountain View Ice Arena XVII  9-16-02 (Renewal) Summer Rayz Tanning Salon XXV 10-21-02 Northern Star Industries, Inc.  9-21-07 East Lake Antoine Boat Launch  5-21-12  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as updated through September 18, 1995, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1982 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 2-101-2-103 2-126-2-128 2-201-2-204 2-129-2-132 2-401-2-404 2-196-2-199 2-501-2-504 2-216-2-219 2-601-2-613 2-151-2-163 2-701-2-703 2-106-2-108 2-901-2-907 2-251-2-257 2-2000-2-2005 2-61-2-66 3-102-3-104 50-91-50-93 3-201 66-51 3-202-3-207 66-53-66-58 3-208 66-52 3-209-3-213 66-59-66-63 4-101, 4-102 62-28, 62-29 4-103, 4-104 62-26, 62-27 4-201-4-205 62-71-62-75 4-401(B), 4-401(C) 58-61, 58-62 4-401(D), (E) 58-63 4-401(F) 58-64 4-402 58-65 4-403(A)-4-403(D) 62-151-62-154 4-404(A) 62-155 5-803 58-1 5-1301-5-1303 6-26-6-28 6-101-6-105 14-26-14-30 6-201 14-58 6-202 14-56 6-203-6-206 14-59-14-62 6-207 14-57 6-301 14-84 6-302 14-82 6-302(A), (B) 14-81 6-303-6-307 14-85-14-89 6-308 14-83 7-101(A) 42-31 7-101(B) 42-196 7-101(C) 42-3 7-101(E) 42-119 7-101(I) 42-197 7-101(J), 7-101(K) 42-1, 42-2 7-101(L) 42-118 7-102 42-32 7-201(A), 7-201(B) 42-216, 42-217 7-202, 7-203 42-218, 42-219 7-301-7-304 42-256-42-259 7-501-7-504 42-161-42-164 7-601(A), 7-601(B) 42-116, 42-117 ch. 8, art. 2 30-122 8-201 30-121 8-202-8-215 30-123-30-136 8-301-8-303 60-1-60-3 8-401 10-61 8-402 10-71 8-403 10-81 8-404(A), 8-404(B) 10-91, 10-92 8-405 10-101 8-406(A)-(C) 10-111 8-406(D) 10-112 8-406(E), (F) 10-111 8-407(A), (B) 10-52 8-407(C), 8-407(D) 10-51, 10-52 8-408-8-410 10-53-10-55  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated through September 18, 1995, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code. This table contains some ordinances which precede September 18, 1995, but which were never included in the 1982 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since September 18, 1995, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  5-21-84 5-701-5-707 46-27-46-33 5-709-5-713 46-34-46-38 5-714 46-26  9- 2-86 1-3 2-276-2-278  5- 4-87 A-C 2-286-2-288  9- 8-87 5-501-5-504 62-131-62-134  2-15-88 5-301 10-26, 10-27 5-302 10-26 5-304-5-306 10-28-10-30 5-401-5-404 42-96-42-99 5-501-5-506 50-27-50-32 5-507 50-26  2-20-89 5-1401-5-1403 30-28-30-30 5-1404 30-26 5-1405 30-31 5-1406 30-27  4-17-89 5-1501-5-1504 34-91-34-94 5-1505 34-47  9-17-90 5-1605 42-4 11-19-90 3-400-3-426 54-1-54-27  3-18-91 2-1401-2-1404 2-86-2-89  5-20-91 5-500-5-503 50-61-50-64  2-18-92 5-1901, 5-1902 42-76, 42-77 5-1903, 5-1904 42-79, 42-80 5-1905 42-78  6- 1-92 5-601-5-603 22-2-22-4 5-605 22-5 5-607, 5-608 22-6, 22-7 5-610 22-8 5-613 22-9 5-614 22-1  9- 8-92 2-1200 2-42 2-1201, 2-1202 2-41 2-1203, 2-1204 2-43, 2-44 11-23-92 10-39 62-30(10.39)  6- 7-93 5-1201 6-1 5-1202-5-1206 6-3-6-7 5-1207 6-2  8- 2-93(2) 5-101 34-26 5-102 34-28 5-103 34-27 5-104, 5-105 34-30, 34-31 5-106 34-29 5-201 34-46 5-202-5-205 34-48-34-51 5-206, 5-207 34-76, 34-77 5-208-5-210 34-52-34-54 5-211 34-78 5-212-5-218 34-55-34-61 6-500  9- 9-93 1-17 18-186-18-202 19 18-203  7-18-94 2-1501-2-1504 26-1-26-4 10- 3-94 5-2000 58-26 5-2001-5-2003 58-29-58-31 5-2004 58-27 5-2005-5-2009 58-32-58-36 5-2010 58-28  4-17-95(1) 11-101-11-106 38-1-38-6  4-17-95(4) 4-301 62-91 4-302, 4-303 62-96, 62-97 4-304 62-92 4-305, 4-306 62-98, 62-99 4-307-4-309 62-93-62-95  4-17-95(6) 5-1002-5-1004 70-26-70-28 5-1008 70-29  4-17-95(8) 5-1701-5-1709 30-81-30-89  4-17-95(10) 5-1801-5-1803 30-51-30-53  4-17-95(12) 7-401-7-403 6-46-6-48  4-17-95(14) 1-108 1-20 1-111 1-19 1-112 1-15  5- 1-95 8-1-1 74-1 8-2-1 74-2 8-3-1-8-3-3 74-3-74-5 8-4-1, 8-4-2 74-181, 74-182 8-4-6-8-4-9 74-183-74-186 8-5-1, 8-5-2 74-211, 74-212 8-5-4, 8-5-5 74-214, 74-215 8-6-1-8-6-5 74-231-74-235 8-7-1-8-7-5 74-251-74-255 8-10-1-8-10-5 74-271-74-275 8-11-1-8-11-5 74-291-74-295 8-12-1-8-12-5 74-311-74-315 8-13-1-8-13-6 74-331-74-336 8-14-1-8-14-6 74-351-74-356 8-19-1-8-19-19 74-412-74-430 8-20-1-8-20-7 74-451-74-457 8-21-1-8-21-5 74-481-74-485 8-22-1-8-22-15 74-511-74-525 8-23-1-8-23-7 74-551-74-557 8-23-9-8-23-12 74-559-74-562 8-24-1-8-24-7 74-151-74-157 8-25-1-8-25-5 74-41-74-45 8-26-1-8-26-8 74-71-74-78 8-27-1 74-101 8-28-1-8-28-7 74-121-74-127 8-29-1-8-29-6 74-6-74-11 15-17-1, 15-17-2 74-371, 74-372 art. XIX 74-411  5-15-95 8-600-8-610 70-56-70-66  7-17-95 66-56  9-18-95(2) 74-213 74-558 12- 4-95(1) 5-2101 6-72 5-2102 6-71 5-2103, 5-2104 6-73, 6-74  3-18-96 4-601-4-603 62-171-62-173  3-18-96 6-600-6-604 14-106-14-110  7- 1-96       Added Adopting Ord.  7- 1-96       Rpld 50-26-50-32       Added 50-26-50-32 10- 7-96 14-60  1- 6-97 74-520, 74-522  1- 6-97 App. B  3-17-97       Added 66-36-66-40  9-15-97 2-276 10- 6-97 74-73(c) 11- 3-97       Added 66-76-66-85  6- 1-98       Added 34-106-34-113  8- 3-98       Added 30-32 11- 2-98       Added 2-279, 2-280 11-23-98       Added 66-106-66-122  5- 3-99 App. B  9-20-99 01       Added 10-1  9-20-99       Rpld 10-51-10-112 11-22-99 62-30 11-22-99 62-30  4-17-00 01 10-2  9- 5-00 30-32  3-19-01       Rpld 74-558  3-19-01       Added 74-431  6-20-00 App. B  4-18-01(1) App. B  4-18-01(2) App. B  7-16-01(1) 74-215  7-16-01(2) 74-235  7-16-01(3) 74-420  9- 4-01 74-314(2)  3- 4-02 2-216(a)  3-18-02 50-62  7- 1-02 50-27  9- 3-02(1) 46-26-46-38  9- 3-02(2) 46-27  9-16-02 App. B 10-21-02 App. B 11- 4-02(1) 62-153 11- 4-02(2) 62-154 11-18-02 1-21       Added 18-216-18-236  4- 7-03(1) 1 62-26(Hist. note) 2 62-29(Hist. note)  4- 7-03(2) 1 62-26(Hist. note) 2 62-29(Hist. note)  5- 5-03       Rpld 34-92       Added 34-92 11- 3-03(1)       Rpld 30-121-30-136 11- 3-03(2)       Added 30-137, 30-138 12- 1-03       Added 10-51-10-53  8- 2-04 10-3  2-21-05       Rpld 6-71-6-74       Added 6-71-6-74  6-20-05 30-137, 30-138 12-19-05 1-9 6-101-6-109  3- 6-06 I-IV 26-5  3-20-06 1 74-12 2(A)-(T) 74-581-74-600 3 74-601 II 74-4  8-16-06 8-6.50-8-6.63 10-76-10-89 10- 2-06 60-1-60-62  5- 7-07       Added 58-70, 58-71  9-21-07 App. B  3-17-08       Added 74-294(7)  7- 7-08       Added 74-294(8)  7-21-08 8-6.50-       Added 
8-6.64 8-1-8-15  7-16-09       Rpld 66-61  4- 5-10 74-515(2), 74-516(2)(a), 74-518(2)       Added 74-524(a)(1)  4-16-10       Rpld 34-26-34-28 1       Added 34-26 2       Added 34-28  6-17-10       Added 6-49  7- 2-10 60-24 12- 3-10 2-276  6- 6-11 60-3, 60-22, 60-23, 60-41, 60-44, 60-47, 74-4, 74-101, 
74-123-74-125, 
74-127, 74-185, 
74-514, 
74-552-74-555, 
74-557, 74-559  7- 5-11 70-26, 70-27 11- 7-11 66-37  2- 6-12(1) App. B  3-19-12 70-56-70-66  5-21-12(1) App. B  5-21-12(2)       Rpld 30-26-30-32       Added 30-26-30-33  6- 4-12       Added 30-121-30-123 11-29-12 1-3 10-1  7-15-13       Added 14-131-14-295  9- 3-13       Rpld 74-511-74-525 11-18-13(1) 6-106, 6-108  3-17-14       Added 62-161  5- 5-14       Added 2-111-2-114 10- 1-14 74-354       Added 74-563 10-20-14       Added 47-1-47-6  1- 7-15       Added 6-8  7-20-15 42-164 12- 5-16(1) I-XIV       Added 62-181-62-194 12- 5-16(2) 14-251(7)  3- 6-17(1) 74-553(a)  3- 6-17(2) 62-132, 62-151, 62-152  3-29-17 1-9       Added 61-21-61-29  9-18-17 74-419(2)(a)-(d) 11- 6-17       Rpld 74-563 11-20-17 62-132  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 15.231 et seq. Char. § 15.1 15.321 et seq. Char. § 13.10 24.201 et seq. 62-30(5.15a) 62-30(5.15f) 62-30(5.82) 28.601 et seq. 2-106 29.1 et seq. Ch. 34 38.501 et seq. Char. § 7.11 2-114 70.1 et seq. Ch. 34 117.1 et seq. Char. §§ 1.1-16.1 117.3(a) Char. § 4.1 Char. § 4.12 Char. § 9.6 117.3(b) Char. § 3.8 117.3(f) Char. § 9.1 117.3(h) Char. § 8.5 117.3(i) Char. § 9.8 Char. § 9.19 117.3(k) Char. § 5.3 117.4a Char. § 11.1 117.4b Char. § 11.1 117.4c Char. § 12.1 117.4d Char. § 11.1 117.4f Char. § 12.1 117.4i 1-13 117.4j(3) Char. § 2.1 117.5 Char. § 11.1 117.5b 1-1 117.5c 2-197 117.27a 2-126 123.51 et seq. Ch. 46 124.1 et seq. Char. § 2.2 125.286a 74-4 125.581 Ch. 74, Art. VIII 125.581 et seq. Ch. 74 
74-8 74-41 
74-71, 74-72 125.582 74-183 125.583a Ch. 74, Art. V 125.584b 74-557 125.584d 74-153 125.585 74-73 125.651 et seq. 2-216 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 10 125.1651 et seq. 26-1 128.1 et seq. Ch. 22 129.12 Char. § 4.21 141.153 54-15 141.421 et seq. Char. § 8.1 Char. § 8.3 168.1 et seq. Char. § 3.2 168.25 Char. § 3.4 168.323 Char. § 3.11 168.631 Char. § 3.6 168.639 Char. § 3.6 168.654 et seq. Char. § 3.3 168.706 Char. § 3.10 168.851, 168.852 Char. § 3.12 168.861 et seq. Char. § 3.13 205.93 62-30 211.1 et seq. Char. § 9.1 61-28 211.2 Char. § 9.4 211.7 et seq. Char. § 9.3 211.10 et seq. Char. § 9.4 211.30a Char. § 9.10 211.39 Char. § 9.12 211.43b Char. § 4.21 211.44 et seq. Char. § 9.12 211.47 Char. § 9.18 211.55 et seq. Char. § 9.17 211.741 et seq. Char. § 11.1 211.761 et seq. Char. § 11.1 247.61 et seq. Ch. 70 247.241 et seq. Ch. 70 257.1 et seq. Ch. 62 257.204a 62-30(5.15b) 257.252a 62-30(2.5a) 257.252b 62-30(2.5b) 257.252c 62-30(2.5c) 257.252d 62-30(2.5d) 257.252e 62-30(2.5e) 257.252f 62-30(2.5f) 257.252g 62-30(2.5g) 257.319b(1)(c) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 257.319b(1)(d) 62-30(5.15b) 257.319b(1)(d), 257.319b(1)(e) 62-30(5.15m) 257.319d 62-30(5.15a) 257.320a 62-30(5.82), 62-30(5.83) 257.322, 257.323 62-30(5.15f) 257.625 62-30(5.15) 257.625(1) 62-30(5.15b) 257.625(1), (2) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 257.625(1), (3) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 257.625(1), (3), (6) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 257.625(1), (4), (5) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 257.625(3) 62-30(5.15b) 257.625a 62-30(5.15a) 257.625b 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 257.625c 62-30(5.15c) 257.625d 62-30(5.15d) 257.625e 62-30(5.15e) 257.625f 62-30(5.15f) 257.625g 62-30(5.15g) 257.625m 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 257.626 62-30(5.14c) 257.626a 62-30(5.14c) 257.682 62-30(5.97) 257.710c 62-30(5.83) 257.710d 62-30(5.82) 257.732 62-30(5.82) 257.951 et seq. 62-28 282.101 et seq. 30-131 30-136 287.261 et seq. Ch. 6 287.290 Ch. 6 289.1101 58-70, 58-71 333.16215 62-30(5.15a) 336.11- 
336.36 34-110 436.1703 62-30 445.401 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 445.481 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 552.601- 
552.650 62-30 560.101 et seq. 60-1 74-557 600.101 et seq. 1-2 1-15 38-1 600.113 62-194 600.8312 62-30(2.5e) 712A.1 et seq. 42-4 750.49 et seq. Ch. 6 750.161 42-31 750.167(1)(a) 42-31 750.167(1)(c) 42-3 750.167(1)(e) 42-119 750.167(1)(j) 42-1 750.167(1)(l) 42-118 750.170 42-116 750.200 et seq. Ch. 34 750.240 et seq. Ch. 34 750.449 42-197 750.449a 42-197 760.1 et seq. 62-30(5.15) 764.9c(2) 58-70, 58-71  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
Editor's note- The Michigan Statutes Annotated are obsolete and will no longer be updated. References to MSA will be removed from the Code text as pages are supplemented. 
MSA Section  
this Code 2.212 et seq. 1-2 3.560(101) et seq. 62-30(5.15a) 62-30(5.15f) 62-30(5.82) 3.752 Char. § 4.21 4.450(1) et seq. 2-106 4.559(1) et seq. Ch. 34 4.1700(51) et seq. Char. § 13.10 4.1801(1) et seq. Char. § 15.1 5.315 Ch. 22 5.1397 et seq. Ch. 34 5.2071 et seq. Char. §§ 1.1-16.1 5.2073(a) Char. § 4.1 Char. § 4.12 Char. § 9.6 5.2073(b) Char. § 3.8 5.2073(f) Char. § 9.1 5.2073(h) Char. § 8.5 5.2073(i) Char. § 9.8 Char. § 9.19 5.2073(k) Char. § 5.3 5.2074, 5.2075 Char. § 11.1 5.2076 Char. § 12.1 5.2077 Char. § 11.1 5.2079 Char. § 12.1 5.2082 1-13 5.2083(3) Char. § 2.1 5.2084 Char. § 11.1 5.2084(2) 1-1 5.2084(3) 2-197 5.2106(1) 2-126 5.2421 et seq. Ch. 46 5.2572(3) 54-15 5.2931 Ch. 74, Art. VIII 5.2931 et seq. Ch. 74 74-8 74-41 74-71, 74-72 5.2932 74-183 5.2933(1) Ch. 74, Art. V 5.2934(2) 74-557 5.2934(4) 74-153 5.2935 74-73 5.2949(1) et seq. Ch. 10 5.2963(16a) 74-4 5.3010(1) et seq. 26-1 5.3011 et seq. 2-216 5.3228(21) et seq. Char. § 8.1 Char. § 8.3 5.3351 et seq. Char. § 7.11 5.3534(1) et seq. Char. § 11.1 5.3536(1) et seq. Char. § 11.1 5.4081 et seq. Char. § 2.2 6.1001 et seq. Char. § 3.2 6.1025 Char. § 3.4 6.1323 Char. § 3.11 6.1631 Char. § 3.6 6.1639 Char. § 3.6 6.1654 et seq. Char. § 3.3 6.1706 Char. § 3.10 6.1851, 6.1852 Char. § 3.12 6.1861 et seq. Char. § 3.13 7.1 et seq. Char. § 9.1 7.2 Char. § 9.4 7.7 et seq. Char. § 9.3 7.10 et seq. Char. § 9.4 7.30(1) Char. § 9.10 7.80 Char. § 9.12 7.86 Char. § 4.21 7.87 et seq. Char. § 9.12 7.91 Char. § 9.18 7.99 et seq. Char. § 9.17 9.361 et seq. Ch. 70 MSA Section  
this Code 9.631(1) et seq. Ch. 70 9.1801 et seq. Ch. 62 9.1904(1) 62-30(5.15b) 9.1952(1) 62-30(2.5a) 9.1952(2) 62-30(2.5b) 9.1952(3) 62-30(2.5c) 9.1952(4) 62-30(2.5d) 9.1952(5) 62-30(2.5e) 9.1952(6) 62-30(2.5f) 9.1952(7) 62-30(2.5g) 9.2019(2), (1)(c) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 9.2019(2), (1)(d) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 9.2019(2), (1)(e) 62-30(5.15m) 9.2019(4) 62-30(5.15a) 9.2020(1) 62-30(5.82), 62-30(5.83) 9.2022, 9.2023 62-30(5.15f) 9.2325 62-30(5.15) 9.2325(1) 62-30(5.15a) 62-30(5.15b) 9.2325(1), (2) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 9.2325(1), (3) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 9.2325(1), (3), (4), (5) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 9.2325(1), (3), (4), (5), (6) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 9.2325(1), (3), (6) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 9.2325(1), (4), (5) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 9.2325(2) 62-30(5.15) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 9.2325(3) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15c) 9.2325(4) 62-30(5.15d) 9.2325(5) 62-30(5.15e) 9.2325(6) 62-30(5.15f) 9.2325(7) 62-30(5.15g) 9.2325(13) 62-30(5.15b) 62-30(5.15m) 9.2326 62-30(5.14c) 9.2326(1) 62-30(5.14c) 9.2382 62-30(5.97) 9.2410(4), 9.2410(5) 62-30(5.82), 
62-30(5.83) 9.2432 62-30(5.82) 9.2651 et seq. 62-28 13.1820(1) et seq. 30-131 30-136 14.15(16215) 62-30(5.15a) 19.711 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 19.720(1) et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 26.430(1) et seq. 74-557 26.430(101) et seq. 60-1 27.3178(598.1) et seq. 42-4 27A.101 et seq. 1-2 1-15 38-1 27A.8312 62-30(2.5e) tit. 28 Ch. 42 28.358 42-31 28.364(1)(a) 42-31 28.364(1)(c) 42-3 28.364(1)(e) 42-119 28.364(1)(j) 42-1 28.364(1)(l) 42-118 28.367 42-116 28.397 et seq. Ch. 34 28.437 et seq. Ch. 34 28.704 42-197 28.704(1) 42-197 28.841 et seq. 62-30(5.15)  
