Page 1
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections; history notes; references.
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
Sec. 1-5. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
Sec. 1-6. Supplementation of Code.
Sec. 1-7. General penalty; continuing violations.
Sec. 1-8. Severability.
Sec. 1-9. Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances.
Sec. 1-10. Code does not affect prior offenses or rights.
Sec. 1-11. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Keego Harbor, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Keego Harbor City Code."
Charter References: Codification of ordinances, § 6.6.
State Law References: Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise:
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings.
Authorized city official. The term "authorized city official" means a police officer or other personnel as designated by the city manager of the city authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.
Bureau. The term bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau.
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Keego Harbor, Michigan.
City. The term "city" means the City of Keego Harbor, Michigan.
Page 2
City council and council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the city commission of the city.
Civil infraction. The term "civil infraction" means an act or omission prohibited by law which is not a crime and for which civil sanctions may be ordered.
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Keego Harbor, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply.
(2) The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination.
(3) The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination.
County. The term "county" means Oakland County, Michigan.
Crime. The term "crime" means an act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a civil infraction and that is punishable upon conviction by any one or more of the following:
(1) Imprisonment.
(2) Fine not designated a civil fine.
(3) Other penal discipline.
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision or authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates.
Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders.
Health department. The terms "health department" and "department of public health" mean the county health department.
Health officer. The term "health officer" means the director of the county health department.
Page 3
Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" mean terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded.
Joint authority. The term "joint authority" means a grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance.
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory.
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition.
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
Municipal civil infraction. The term "municipal civil infraction” means an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but is which not a crime under this code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses, and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MC 600.101 et seq.), as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense.
Municipal civil infraction action. The term "municipal civil infraction action" means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
Municipal civil infraction citation. The term "municipal civil infraction citation" means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited.
Municipal civil infraction violation notice. The term "municipal civil infraction violation notice" means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of fines adopted by the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the act.
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Number. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation" in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed."
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees.
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
Page 4
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person who appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing.
Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, limited liability company, governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property.
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures.
Property. The term "property" means real and personal property.
Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to the act as amended.
Real property, real estate, land, lands. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write.
State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan.
Street. The term "street" means any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Swear. The term "swear" includes the term "affirm."
Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tense. The future tense includes the present tense.
Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days.
Page 5
Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures.
Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months.
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 12-15-1994; Ord. No. 384, § 1, 2-21-2002)
State Law References: Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections; history notes; references.
(a) The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted.
(b) The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect.
(c) Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code.
State Law References: Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b.
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a) Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving provision in it.
(b) The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any rights, privileges, suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal.
State Law References: Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4.
Sec. 1-5. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
(a) All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from affected reprinted pages.
(b) Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Keego Harbor, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . ."
(c) If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Keego Harbor, Michigan, is hereby created to read as follows: . . . ."
Page 6
(d) All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.
Sec. 1-6. Supplementation of Code.
(a) Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may:
(1) Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units.
(2) Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code.
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code.
(4) Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections.
(5) Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code).
(6) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.
Sec. 1-7. General penalty; continuing violations.
(a) In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
(1) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation by
Page 7
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b) Any provision of this Code that is made or declared to be misdemeanor, civil infraction or municipal civil infraction is a violation of this Code.
(c) In this section the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section.
(d) Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or city ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(e) The commission of any violation of this Code that is declared to be a municipal civil infraction shall subject the violator to a civil penalty as provided by state law for municipal civil infractions or trailway municipal infractions, whichever is applicable, and as determined by this code or city ordinance, as applicable.
(1) The sanction for a violation that is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended and other sanctions, for each infraction.
a. Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction.
b. Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within 12-months of the first or any subsequent offense, unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Repeat offenses are determined on the basis of the date of commission of the offense(s).
c. Unless a different schedule of civil fines is provided by this Code or in specific code
Page 8
sections, or by any ordinance, the following schedule of civil fines for admission of responsibility by persons served with a municipal civil infraction violation shall apply:
1. First offense is $50.00, plus costs, as applicable.
2. First repeat offense is $100.00, plus costs, as applicable.
3. Second repeat offense is $250.00, plus costs, as applicable.
4. Third repeat offense is $500.00, plus costs, applicable.
(2) A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court or a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau. Only the city attorney may dismiss a municipal civil infraction action once commenced.
(3) When issued, municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials containing specific information as follows:
a. The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.
b. The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.
c. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8705).
d. A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief."
e. An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe to, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.
f. An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
1. Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or
Page 9
2. Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approved in writing the issuance of the citation.
g. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows:
1. Except as provided by subsection (e)(3)g.2. of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.
2. If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy of the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address.
h. A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
i. Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following:
1. Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance.
2. Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with explanation by mail by the time specified for appearance, in person, or by representation.
3. Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following:
i. Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city.
ii. Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
j. The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following
1. That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility with explanation in
Page 10
person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance.
2. That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
3. That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city.
4. That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
5. That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or an appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.
(f) Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense.
(g) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions.
(h) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement.
(i) Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau Ordinance
(4) Establishment, Location, and Personnel of Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
a Establishment. The City of Keego Harbor Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau (hereinafter “Bureau”) is hereby established pursuant to Act 12 of the Public Acts of 1994 of the State of Michigan, as amended, for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for ordinance violations designated as municipal infractions, and to collect and retain civil fines/costs for such violations as prescribed herein.
Page 11
b Location. The Bureau shall be located at the City Hall or such other location in the City as may be designated by the City Council.
c Personnel. All Personnel of the Bureau shall be City employees. The City Council may by resolution designate a Bureau Clerk with the duties prescribed herein and as otherwise delegated by the City Council.
(5) Bureau Authority.
The Bureau shall only have authority to accept admission of responsibility (without explanation) for municipal civil infractions for which a municipal ordinance violation notice (as compared to a citation) has been issued and served, and to collect and retain this scheduled civil fines and costs for such violations specified pursuant to this Ordinance or other applicable ordinance. The Bureau shall not accept payment of fine/costs from any person who denies having committed the alleged violation or who admits responsibility only with explanation. The Bureau shall not determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged ordinance violation.
(6) Ordinance Violation Notice Requirements Admission/Denial of Responsibility
a Ordinance Violation Notice Requirements. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized City officials as provided by law. A municipal ordinance violation notice shall include, at a minimum, all of the following:
1 The violation;
2 The time within which the person must contact the Bureau for purposes
3 of admitting or denying responsibility for the violation;
4 The amount of the scheduled fine/costs for the violation;
5 The methods by which the violation may be admitted or denied;
6 The consequences of failing to pay the required fees and costs or
7 contact the Bureau within the required time;
8 The address and telephone number of the Bureau;
9 The days and hours that the Bureau is open
b Denial of Responsibility. Where a person fails to admit responsibility (without explanation) for a violation within the designated time period, the Bureau Clerk or other designated City official or employee shall advise the complainant to issue and file a municipal infraction citation for such violation with the court having jurisdiction of the matter. The citation filed with the court shall consist of a sworn complaint containing, at a minimum, the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. A copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violators last known address. The citation shall thereafter be processed in the manner required by law.
(7) Schedule of Civic Fines and Costs
a Fines. Unless a different schedule of civil fines is provided for by an applicable ordinance, the civil fines payable to the Bureau upon admission of responsibility by persons served
Page 12
with municipal ordinance violation notices shall be determined pursuant to the following schedule:
All Parking: $75.00
All Others*: $100.00
Fines double for second and subsequent offenses*
*determined on the basis of the date of violation or violations.
(8) Records and Accounting
The Bureau Clerk or other designated City official or employee shall retain a copy of all municipal ordinance violation notices, and shall account to the City Council once a month or at such other intervals as the City Council may require concerning the number of admissions and denials of responsibility for ordinance violations within the jurisdiction of the Bureau and the amount of fines and costs collected with respect to such violations. The civil fines and costs collected shall be delivered to the City Treasurer at such intervals as the Treasurer shall require, and shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.
(9) Availability of Other Enforcement Options
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require the City to initiate its municipal civil infraction ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of an ordinance violation notice. As to each ordinance violation designed as a municipal civil infraction, the City may, at its sole discretion, proceed directly with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation or take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law.
(Ord. No. 295, §§ 2--5, 12-15-1994; Ord. No. 384, § 2, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 426, § 7(i), 11-05-2011; Ord. No. 427 § 7(i), 12-15-2011)
Charter References: Penalties, § 6.3.
State Law References: Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.4i(10), 117.4l.
Sec. 1-8. Severability.
If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect other provisions or application of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application; and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable.
State Law References: Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5.
Sec. 1-9. Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.
State Law References: Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u.
Sec. 1-10. Code does not affect prior offenses or rights.
Page 13
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code.
(b) The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code.
Sec. 1-11. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of any ordinance:
(1) Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits.
(2) Deannexing property or excluding property from the city.
(3) Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness.
(4) Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement.
(5) Granting any right or franchise.
(6) Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
(7) Providing for the duties of city officers or employees not codified in this Code.
(8) Providing for salaries or other employee benefits.
(9) Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan.
(10) Levying or imposing any special assessment.
(11) Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley.
(12) Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk.
(13) Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision.
(14) Not codified in this Code that levies, imposes or otherwise relates to taxes, exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes.
(15) Pertaining to zoning, including but not limited to the basic zoning ordinance and ordinances rezoning property.
Page 14
(16) Pertaining administrative rules and procedures regarding rental units.
(17) That is temporary, although general in effect.
(18) That is special, although permanent in effect.
(19) The purpose of which has been accomplished.
(b) The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
__________
* Cross References: Any ordinance adopting or amending a comprehensive plan saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(9); administrative rules and procedures for rental units, § 5-260; precious metals and gems, § 6-246 et seq.; elections, ch. 7; emergency management, ch. 8; emergency response cost recovery, § 9-121 et seq.; zoning administration, § 12-11; offenses against public administration, § 15-41 et seq.; taxation, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 23.
State Law References: Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 2-1--2-30. Reserved.
Article II. City Council
Secs. 2-31--2-60. Reserved.
Article III. Officers and Employees
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2-61--2-80. Reserved.
Division 2. City Manager
Sec. 2-81. Office created.
Sec. 2-82. Appointment.
Sec. 2-83. Salary.
Sec. 2-84. Residence.
Sec. 2-85. Power over administrative officers and departments.
Sec. 2-86. Functions generally.
Sec. 2-87. Reserved.
Sec. 2-88. Removal from office.
Secs. 2-89--2-120. Reserved.
Article IV. Boards and Commissions
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-121. Realignment of staggered terms.
Secs. 2-122--2-140. Reserved.
Division 2. Parks and Recreation Commission
Sec. 2-141. Formation of commission.
Sec. 2-142. Membership.
Sec. 2-143. Term of office; removal; vacancy.
Sec. 2-144. Compensation.
Sec. 2-145. Duties.
Sec. 2-146. Disbursing of donated funds.
Secs. 2-147--2-170. Reserved.
Division 3. Planning Commission
Sec. 2-171. Creation.
Sec. 2-172. Membership; compensation.
Sec. 2-173. Removal of members.
Sec. 2-174. Meetings and records.
Sec. 2-175. Employees, contracts for services, expenditures.
Sec. 2-176. Powers and duties.
Sec. 2-177. Gifts.
Sec. 2-178. Reports and recommendations.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 2-1--2-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
CITY COUNCIL*
__________
* Charter References: City council, § 4.1 et seq.
__________
Secs. 2-31--2-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
__________
* Charter References: Appointive officers and administrative service, § 7.1 et seq.
Cross References: Any ordinance providing for the duties of city officers or employees not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(7); any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(8); mayor, § 8-76 et seq.; emergency management coordinator, § 8-111 et seq.; personnel, § 8-181 et seq.
State Law References: Public officers and employees, conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; nondiscrimination in employment, MCL 37.2102; incompatible offices, prohibition on holding, MCL 15.181 et seq.; political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq.; legal defense of public officers or employees, MCL 691.1408; conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 2-61--2-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
CITY MANAGER*
__________
* Charter References: City manager, § 7.2 et seq.
__________
Sec. 2-81. Office created.
There is created the office of city manager, which officer shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government.
(Ord. No. 73, § 1.01, 6-18-1963)
Sec. 2-82. Appointment.
The city manager shall be appointed by the city council and hold office at its pleasure.
(Ord. No. 73, § 2.01, 6-18-1963)
Sec. 2-83. Salary.
The city manager shall receive such salary or remuneration as shall be set by appropriation of the city council.
(Ord. No. 73, § 3.01, 6-18-1963)
Sec. 2-84. Residence.
At the time of appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city or the state; but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city unless excused by the city council.
(Ord. No. 73, § 4.01, 6-18-1963)
Sec. 2-85. Power over administrative officers and departments.
All administrative officers and departments of the city except the city attorney shall be under the administrative direction of the city manager, who shall have the power to appoint, subject to confirmation of the council, all such administrative officers except the city attorney, and shall have the power to discharge all such administrative officers with the approval of the council, except the city attorney.
(Ord. No. 73, § 5.01, 6-18-1963)
Sec. 2-86. Functions generally.
The functions of the city manager shall be those as set forth in section 7.4 of the Charter as well as those functions expressly or implicitly given to the city manager by other sections of the Charter or ordinances or resolutions of the city council.
(Ord. No. 73, § 6.01, 6-18-1963)
Sec. 2-87. Reserved.
Editors Note: Ord. No. 392, § 1, adopted May 16, 2002, repealed § 2-87, which pertained to the function as clerk, assessor, building inspector and derived from Ord. No. 73, adopted June 18, 1963.
Sec. 2-88. Removal from office.
The city manager may be removed by the city council as provided in section 7.3 of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 73, § 8.01, 6-18-1963)
Secs. 2-89--2-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-121. Realignment of staggered terms.
When any board or comission created by action of the city council whose members' terms of office become unstaggered compared to the provisions of the enabling ordinance, the council may reduce one or more terms of office during any appointment or reappoint to realign staggered terms to comply with the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 383, § 1, 2-21-2002)
Secs. 2-122--2-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION*
__________
* Editors Note: Ord. No. 394, § 1, adopted June 20, 2002, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 2-141-2-149, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 136, adopted Dec. 14, 1972; Ord. No. 151, adopted Dec. 19, 1974; Ord. No. 166, adopted July 21, 1977; Ord. No. 205, adopted Nov. 19, 1981; Ord. No. 287, adopted Jan. 21, 1993; Ord. No. 306, adopted Jan. 18, 1996; Ord. No. 327, adopted Aug. 21, 1997.
__________
Sec. 2-141. Formation of commission.
A parks and recreation commission known as the "Keego Harbor Parks and Recreation Commission" is reformed pursuant to Section 5.7, entitled "Parks and Recreational Facilities" of the Keego Harbor City Charter. Any former commission created is hereby ended.
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 2-142. Membership.
(a) The parks and recreation commission shall consist of nine regular members, three alternate members, and two nonvoting youth members. An alternate member shall serve in the absence of any regular member and when serving in the place of a regular member shall be considered a regular member.
(b) The nonvoting youth member shall be a resident of the city.
(c) A majority of regular members constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 2-143. Term of office; removal; vacancy.
(a) Each member of the parks and recreation commission shall be appointed for a three-year term except the nonvoting youth members who shall be appointed by September 30 annually and serve a one year term.
(b) The terms of all members except the nonvoting youth member expire on March 31 of the third year of such member's term. The terms of each member, except the youth members, shall be three years, except that, to give continuity, the terms of those nine regular and three alternate members appointed under this reformation shall be staggered in such fashion so that the terms of three regular and one alternate members shall expire on March 31, 2003, the term of three regular and one alternate members shall expire on March 31, 2004 and the terms of three regular and one alternate members shall expire on March 31, 2005.
(c) Appointment of successors; removal. All members appointed, except the nonvoting youth members hold office until their successors are appointed. Members may be removed by an affirmative vote of four members of the city council as provided for by the commission's rules and procedures.
(d) The council fills vacancies caused by whatever reason for the unexpired term only.
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 2-144. Compensation.
All members of the parks and recreation commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 2-145. Duties.
The duties of the park commission are as follows:
(a) General.
(1) To establish its own rules and procedures for the conduct of its meetings and operations;
(2) To elect its own officers;
(3) To meet at least six times per year; and
(4) To report to the council periodically, but no less than four times per year.
(b) Parks.
(1) With the approval of council to operate a system of public recreation and playgrounds; acquire, equip and maintain land, buildings or other recreational facilities; employ personnel; and expend funds for the operation of such system within approved appropriations.
(2) With the approval of council may cooperate in the conduct of a system of public recreation and playgrounds with the West Bloomfield School District in any manner in which the Keego Harbor Parks and Recreation and West Bloomfield School District may mutually agree.
(3) To conduct the commission's activities on property under its custody and management; on other public property, under the custody of other municipal corporations or boards, with the consent of such corporations or boards; and on private property, with the consent of the owners.
(4) To solicit, receive and acquire for the city donations of cash, property and services for parks and recreation use in the city.
(5) To recommend to the council rules and regulations for the operation of the parks in the city.
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 2-146. Disbursing of donated funds.
All donated funds shall be deposited in a trust fund established by the city to accept donations for parks and recreation property acquisition and facilities development. Moneys from this fund shall only be disbursed upon a written resolution adopted by the majority of the parks and recreation commission and with the approval of the council.
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 6-20-2002)
Secs. 2-147--2-170. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
PLANNING COMMISSION*
__________
* Charter References: City planning, § 5.8.
State Law References: Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq.
__________
Sec. 2-171. Creation.
A city planning commission is created pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 64, § 1.01, 2-21-1961)
Sec. 2-172. Membership; compensation.
(a) The city planning commission shall consist of nine members who shall represent insofar as possible different professions or occupations. The members shall be appointed by the city council for three-year staggered terms. Each member shall hold office until his successor has been appointed. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council. The city manager shall be a member ex officio of the commission and attend all of its meetings and may participate in all of its discussions, but he shall not have any power to vote.
(b) All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation.
(Ord. No. 64, § 2.01, 2-21-1961)
Sec. 2-173. Removal of members.
Members of the city planning commission may, after public hearing, be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
(Ord. No. 64, § 3.01, 2-21-1961)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.33.
Sec. 2-174. Meetings and records.
The city planning commission shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the mayor shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The chairman shall be elected and hold his position by March 1 of each year. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record and open to inspection in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 64, § 4.01, 2-21-1961)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.34.
Sec. 2-175. Employees, contracts for services, expenditures.
The city planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the city. The commission may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the commission's work.
(Ord. No. 64, § 5.01, 2-21-1961)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.35.
Sec. 2-176. Powers and duties.
The city planning commission shall have such powers concerning:
(1) The preparations and adoption of a master plan or any part of such a plan;
(2) The making of surveys as a basis for such plan;
(3) The approval of public improvements;
(4) The carrying out of educational and publicity programs;
(5) The approval of plats; and
(6) Such other rights, powers, duties and responsibilities as are provided in sections 6--15 of Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.36--125.45).
(Ord. No. 64, § 6.01, 2-21-1961)
Sec. 2-177. Gifts.
The city planning commission may receive gifts for the purpose of carrying out its objectives and may expend any funds received in the form of a gift in such manner as it may deem proper.
(Ord. No. 64, § 7.01, 2-21-1961)
Sec. 2-178. Reports and recommendations.
The city planning commission shall make reports and recommendations to the city council; however, no such recommendation shall be binding upon the city council.
(Ord. No. 64, § 8.01, 2-21-1961)
Chapter 3
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, licenses, § 2.3(g).
Cross References: Businesses, ch. 6; individuals under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, § 9-141 et seq.; furnishing alcohol to minors, § 15-285; alcohol and drugs at house parties, § 15-346 et seq.
State Law References: Liquor control code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq., MSA 18.1175(101) et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 3-1--3-30. Reserved.
Article II. License
Sec. 3-31. Statement of purpose.
Sec. 3-32. New licenses and permits.
Sec. 3-33. Annual license and permit review.
Sec. 3-34. Revocation of license or permit.
Sec. 3-35. Procedure for recommendation of nonrenewal or revocation.
Sec. 3-36. Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation.
Sec. 3-37. Transfers.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 3-1--3-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
LICENSE*
__________
* State Law References: Liquor license, local approval required, MCL 436.1501, MSA 18.1175(501).
__________
Sec. 3-31. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to allow the city to establish and administer a policy for the issuance and enforcement of liquor licenses and permits.
(Ord. No. 310, § 2, 6-20-1996)
Sec. 3-32. New licenses and permits.
(a) Class C and tavern licenses; general statement of policy preferences. The city council will exercise its discretion in the issuance of a class C liquor or tavern license, where permitted by state law and the state liquor control commission, based on the following standards:
(1) a. Preference will be given to applicants proposing to use a license in conjunction with new development of restaurants, hotels or motels, or substantial improvement of existing establishments, which will constitute a distinct benefit to the city and its residents. The investment required for a new building or for rehabilitation of an existing building is not intended to include land or building acquisition costs. The minimum investment level for a new building should exceed $75.00 per square foot exclusive of what is expended for land acquisition.
b. The minimum investment level for a building being rehabilitated should exceed $45.00 per square foot exclusive of the cost of the land and building.
c. In calculating the amount of square footage, all building area used in connection with the restaurant shall be included, i.e., gross square feet. The prices specified in this subsection will be adjusted by the CPI-U, (Consumer Price Index for Urban Consumer's) Detroit-Ann Arbor Region, each year beginning July of 1995.
(2) Preference will be given to applicants proposing use of the license in locations that the city seeks to develop or redevelop.
(3) An applicant will be given consideration only if the applicant proposes to provide and continues to provide for the service of meals to be prepared and consumed on the premises.
(4) The location proposed and methods of operation must not detrimentally and unreasonably impact nearby property owners, businesses and residents.
(5) All applicable health and safety codes and ordinances, including zoning, must be met.
(6) Applicants will be required to submit a detailed plan of their proposed operation as part of their application, which shall include a plot plan of the site, a plan for interior and exterior design, layout of any ancillary facilities, and a general operational statement outlining the proposed manner in which the establishment will be operated, including a schedule of the hours of operation, crowd control, use of the facilities, parking provisions, and estimated cost of the development.
(b) Procedure.
(1) Application. Each applicant seeking a class C license or a tavern license must make an application to the city clerk on forms that will be provided by the city. Such application pertains to city approval only and is in addition to the separate application required by the state liquor control commission.
(2) Fees. Each applicant for a new license or permit, for transfer of an existing license or permit, or for renewal of an existing license or permit shall pay a nonrefundable application fee. Such fee is to be determined by the city council and promulgated by resolution.
(3) Investigation. Upon receipt of such application, the city manager will refer the application to the chief of police and such other persons as he may designate, who shall cause a thorough investigation, including a complete history of past business experience and liquor law violations, if
any, to be made of the persons and/or premises, which must meet or exceed codes. The findings resulting from such investigations shall be reported to the city manager, who then will report the findings to the city council.
(4) Hearing. The applicant will be required to appear before the city council, make a written presentation concerning his plans for the development of his establishment, and answer any questions pertaining to such plans.
(5) License approval. If the city council is satisfied that the establishment for which a class C license or tavern license is sought may constitute an asset to the community, and meets all the criteria set forth in this article, it will adopt a resolution granting approval, subject to satisfaction of conditions stated in the resolution. This will ensure the applicant that the city council will approve his license when his plans for building or remodeling are completed as represented in his presentation to the city council. Once the council approves a license, a copy of the resolution granting approval shall be sent to the state liquor control commission enabling the commission to complete its investigation. When the applicant's building or remodeling is completed, it must meet all state and local regulations, and must comply with the representations made to the city council by the applicant. If a license is approved by the state liquor control commission and it is subsequently determined that the project was not completed as required by plans and specifications presented to the city or is not in compliance with representations made to the city, the city may recommend that the license not be renewed for the following year.
(6) Continued compliance. Applicants for class C licenses or tavern licenses shall continue to comply with all applicable state and city regulations and this general policy, including a comprehensive, written plan of operation which must be approved and will operate premises consistent with any representations made to the city council in obtaining the license. Failure of such compliance or variance from the plan presented may result in the refusal by the city council to renew a license or in revocation of the license.
(7) Changes. Substantial change in operation, including change in space, floor plan, etc., shall be returned for review and approval in compliance with this procedure.
(c) Permits. Permits for dance, entertainment, or dance and entertainment may be issued after an evaluation of the following considerations:
(1) Adequate provisions for anticipated parking needs.
(2) Plan of the nature as required in subsection (a)(6) of this section presented for dealing with and for avoiding nuisances and neighborhood problems created by this permit.
(Ord. No. 310, § 3, 6-20-1996)
State Law References: Consumption of intoxicating liquors in dance halls, MCL 750.464a, MSA 28.719(1); entertainment and dance permits, MCL 436.1916, MSA 18.1175(916).
Sec. 3-33. Annual license and permit review.
The city council may undertake a review of any license or permit for the purpose of making a recommendation to the state liquor control commission regarding renewal of the license or permit. The council
shall consider whether a licensed establishment has been operating during the existing license year in a manner consistent with the provisions of this article and all other applicable laws and regulations of the city and the state.
(Ord. No. 310, § 4, 6-20-1996)
Sec. 3-34. Revocation of license or permit.
Each establishment within the city for which a liquor license or permit is granted shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the city and the state. Upon any violation of this article pursuant to section 3-36, the council may, after notice and hearing, request the liquor control commission to revoke such license and/or permit.
(Ord. No. 310, § 5, 6-20-1996)
Sec. 3-35. Procedure for recommendation of nonrenewal or revocation.
(a) Before filing any objection to renewal or a request for revocation of a license or permit with the state liquor control commission, the city shall serve the licensee by first class mail, mailed at least ten days prior to hearing, with a notice of hearing, which notice shall contain the following:
(1) Date, time and place of hearing;
(2) Notice of the proposed action;
(3) Reasons for the proposed action;
(4) Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify;
(5) A statement that the licensee may present evidence, any testimony, and confront and cross examine adverse witnesses; and
(6) A statement requiring the licensee to notify the city attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if they intend to contest the proposed action, and to provide the names of witnesses known at that time who will testify on their behalf.
(b) Upon completion of the hearing, the city council shall submit to the licensee and the liquor control commission a written statement of its findings and determination.
(Ord. No. 310, § 6, 6-20-1996)
Sec. 3-36. Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation.
(a) The city council may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license or permit to the state liquor control commission upon a determination based upon a preponderance of the evidence at the hearing that any of the following exists:
(1) Failure to comply with all standards, plans or agreements entered into in consideration for the issuance, transfer or continuance of the license or permit, or failure to comply with all agreements or consent judgments entered into subsequent to the issuance of the license or permit.
(2) Violations of the state liquor laws or regulations of the liquor control commission.
(3) Violations of state laws or local ordinances concerning health, safety, moral conduct or public welfare.
(4) Violations of state laws or local ordinances concerning the licensed premises, including but not limited to any of the following:
a. Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes.
b. A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood.
c. Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties.
d. Entertainment on the premises or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder or disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises.
e. Any advertising, promotion or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises.
(5) Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of this article.
(b) In addition to the other provisions of this section, the city council may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license or permit to the liquor control commission based upon the following considerations:
(1) License approval shall be subject to applicable provisions of existing policy for new license applicants.
(2) Compliance with all standards and plans established and approved at the time of issuance is required.
(c) Tax considerations shall be as follows:
(1) All licensees shall be held responsible for paying all real property taxes, personal property taxes and other bills due the city by the due date of each year arising from their use and occupancy.
(2) All licensees renting or leasing the property in which their business is located shall be responsible
for paying all personal property taxes and other bills due to the city arising from their use of that property by the due date of each year.
(Ord. No. 310, § 7, 6-20-1996)
Sec. 3-37. Transfers.
(a) Class C and tavern. Applications for class C and tavern license transfers will be reviewed under the new license policy as any other new licensee; but, in addition:
(1) Consideration will be given to whether or not the operation is expected to change from the existing operation.
(2) If a continuation of existing operation is contemplated, the licensee must present a plan relating to how it will deal with existing problems created by the business by reason of insufficient parking, nuisance created at the site, or civil or criminal violation.
(b) Permits for dance, entertainment, and dance and entertainment.
(1) Transferees holding a dance, entertainment, or dance and entertainment permit must present plans and a written commitment on the type of operation they expect to conduct. This will be termed a plan of operation.
(2) Transferees are responsible for being fully apprised of this policy.
(c) Inspections. In addition to the inspections required to report on the issuance of this license, the licensee is advised that there will be at least one unannounced inspection annually which may inquire into all aspects of compliance spelled out in this article.
(Ord. No. 310, § 8, 6-20-1996)
CD4:1
Chapter 4
ANIMALS*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, licensing and regulation of dogs and animals, § 2.3(oo).
Cross References: Environment, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 13.
State Law References: Wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq.; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; authority to adopt animal control and licensing ordinance, MCL 287.240.
__________
Article I. In General
Sec. 4-1. Dangerous animals.
Secs. 4-2--4-35. Reserved.
Article II. Dogs
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4-36. Number of dogs.
Sec. 4-37. Reserved.
Sec. 4-38. Definitions.
Sec. 4-39. Reasonable control required.
Sec. 4-40. Barking dogs.
Sec. 4-41. Location and housing.
Sec. 4-42. Fecal matter.
Sec. 4-43. Treatment of dogs.
Sec. 4-44. Dead animals.
Sec. 4-45. Responsibility for damages.
Sec. 4-46. Dog bitten by another dog.
Sec. 4-47. Quarantine.
Sec. 4-48. Enforcement.
Sec. 4-49. Authority to inquire.
Sec. 4-50. Alternatives to impounding.
Sec. 4-51. Violations.
Sec. 4-52. Exceptions.
Sec. 4-53. Penalties.
Secs. 4-54--4-75. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 4-76. Required.
Sec. 4-77. Licensing procedure.
Sec. 4-78. Term of license.
Secs. 4-79--4-100. Reserved.
Division 3. Impounding and Disposition
Sec. 4-101. Dog pound.
Sec. 4-102. Impounding of dogs.
Sec. 4-103. Release of dogs.
Sec. 4-104. Confining dog for observation.
Secs. 4-105--4-135. Reserved.
Article III. Cats
Sec. 4-136. License required.
Sec. 4-137. Issuance of license.
Sec. 4-138. Proof of rabies immunization required.
Sec. 4-139. Violation; penalty.
CD4:2
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Dangerous animals.
(a) Regulated. No person shall own, keep or harbor a dangerous animal, or an animal that has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies. Any animal found to be a dangerous animal or afflicted with rabies shall be destroyed unless otherwise disposed of by its owner.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Dangerous animal means a dog or other animal that bites or attacks a person, or a dog that bites or attacks and causes serious injury or death to another dog while the other dog is on the property or under the control of its owner. However, a dangerous animal does not include any of the following:
(1) An animal that bites or attacks a person who is knowingly trespassing on the property of the animal's owner.
(2) An animal that bites or attacks a person who provokes or torments the animal.
(3) An animal that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a person if that person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject of an assault.
(4) Livestock.
Livestock means animals used for human food and fiber or animals used for service to human beings. Livestock includes but is not limited to cattle, swine, sheep, llamas, goats, bison, equine, poultry and rabbits. Livestock does not include animals that are human companions, such as dogs and cats.
Owner includes every person having a right or property in a dog or other animal, and every person who keeps or harbors a dog or other animal or has it in his care, and every person who permits a dog or other animal to remain in or about any premises occupied or owned by such person for a period of five days or more.
Provoke means to perform a willful act or omission that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate the bite or attack by an ordinary dog or animal.
Serious injury means permanent, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function of a person.
Torment means an act or omission that causes unjustifiable pain, suffering and distress to an animal, or causes mental and emotional anguish in the animal as evidenced by its altered behavior, for a purpose such as sadistic pleasure, coercion or punishment that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to
CD4:3
precipitate the bite or attack.
(Ord. No. 161, § 4.01, 3-17-1976)
State Law References: Dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq.
Sec. 4.02. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below:
Animal review board means a board consisting of the city manager, police chief and clerk, or their respective designated deputies or assistants, that shall assemble for purposes of conducting hearings under this article. Although not required, the animal review board may, in the discretion of the city council, also include a licensed veterinarian, American Kennel Club (AKC) certified animal behaviorist and/or AKC certified animal trainer, appointed by city council.
Authorized enforcement officer means a police officer and any officer authorized under section 1-15 of this code to issue appearance tickets in the city.
Dangerous animal means a dog or other animal that bites or attacks a person or causes a serious injury to a person or domestic animal, a dog or other animal that has been designated as a potentially dangerous animal that poses a threat to public safety as described in this article, or a dog or other animal that bites or attacks and causes serious injury or death to another dog or domestic animal while the other dog or domestic animal is on the property or under the control of its owner. However, a dangerous animal does not include any of the following:
(1) An animal that bites or attacks a person who is knowingly trespassing on the property of the animal's owner;
(2) An animal that bites or attacks a person who provokes or torments the animal; or
(3) An animal that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a person if that person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject of an assault.
On a suitable leash means both:
(1) That the animal is attached to a leash that is no more than ten (10) feet in length and of such material that the leash is capable of restraining, and does restrain the type and size of animal to which it is attached; and
(2) That such a leash is continuously held by a person who is reasonably able to and does restrain and prohibit the animal from being out of that person's physical control.
A leashed animal that chases a person or domesticated animal a greater distance than ten (10) feet, or that bites a person or domesticated animal constitutes prima facie evidence that such animal is not kept on a suitable leash.
Exotic animal means, generally, the species of animals which are not native to the state or the United States and/or are introduced from another country.
Hybrid(s) means any animal which is the offspring of two (2) different varieties or species.
CD4:4
Poisonous means a substance which, through its chemical action, usually kills, injures or substantially impairs an organism.
Possess or maintain means the act or ability of having or exerting control and influence over an animal regulated herein, without regard to ownership.
Owner or a landlord that leases to means any person, firm, corporation or organization that owns or harbors a dog or other animal.
Proper enclosure means an enclosure that is constructed and at least six (6’) feet high and at all times maintained in such a manner as to effectively prevent the animal from escaping the confines of enclosure. An invisible fence does not constitute a proper enclosure.
Provoke and provocation mean to perform a willful act or omission that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate the bite or attack by an ordinary dog or other animal.
Potentially dangerous animal means a dog or animal that poses a threat to public safety as demonstrated by any of the following behaviors:
(1) Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal that is less severe than a serious injury;
(2) Without provocation, chasing or menacing a person or domestic animal in an aggressive manner; or
(3) Running at large in violation of Section 4-39 of this code three (3) or more times within any 12-month period.
Serious injury means permanent, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function of a person.
Torment means an act or omission that causes unjustifiable pain, suffering, and distress to an animal, or causes mental and emotional anguish in the animal as evidenced by its altered behavior, for a purpose such as sadistic pleasure, coercion, or punishment that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate the bite or attack.
Sec. 4.03. Determination of a dangerous animal or exotic animal.
(a) An authorized enforcement officer shall have the authority to make a determination that an animal is dangerous, or potentially dangerous, or exotic as defined in this article, upon the complaint of any person that an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous. When the authorized enforcement officer classifies any animal as a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal or an exotic animal under this article, the authorized enforcement officer shall notify the animal's owner of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following:
CD4:5
(1) The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. If an animal has more than one (1) owner, notice to one (1) owner shall be sufficient for purposes of this article.
(2) The notice shall include a summary of the authorized enforcement officer's findings that form the basis for the animal's classification as a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal.
(3) The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing on the classification within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice.
(4) The notice shall state that the animal review board shall conduct the hearing.
(5) The notice shall state that if the owner does not request such a hearing within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice, the classification of the animal as a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall be final and conclusive for all purposes.
(6) The notice shall include the appropriate form to request a review hearing before the animal review board, shall provide notice of the required fee as established by resolution of the City Council, and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such a request.
(b) When the animal review board receives a request for a hearing from an owner, it shall schedule such a hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The city clerk shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing; such notice shall be made to the owner at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence. The animal review board shall also receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as it may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify or overrule the classification of the animal by the authorized enforcement officer. The animal review board shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If the determination is made that the animal is a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal, or an exotic animal the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. Unless the board determines that a later date is appropriate in a particular case, the effective date of the determination shall be the date of the authorized enforcement officer's classification.
(c) If the identity of the owner of an animal that the authorized enforcement officer has classified as a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal cannot be determined, the animal shall be immediately confiscated with notice of same and a description of the animal given to the police department and the local humane society. If the animal's owner claims such animal, the animal shall be released to its owner, together with a copy of the notice specified in subsection (a) of this section. If the animal remains unclaimed for seven (7) days, the animal shall be turned over to the local animal welfare society or examined by a veterinarian and/or the local animal welfare society to determine the viability of the animal or appropriate course of destruction of the animal if necessary.
Sec. 4.04. Requirements for possession of a dangerous animal.
CD4:6
(a) Any owner of a dangerous animal shall be jointly and severally responsible with all other owners of such animal for compliance with the requirements of this section. Except where a different date for compliance with a requirement is specifically identified in this Article, the dangerous animal owner’s or owners’ responsibility for compliance with the requirements of this Article shall commence on the final determinate date.
(b) No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a dangerous animal except in compliance with all of the following requirements:
(1) A dangerous animal shall not be permitted to remain in the city unless it is properly registered as provided in this article, has a microchip inserted, and as otherwise required by law or ordinance within 30 days of the final determination date.
(2) Except under the circumstances otherwise specifically permitted by this article, a dangerous animal shall at all times be maintained inside a proper enclosure.
(3) The premises where a dangerous animal is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is an animal on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. Such sign shall also include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is an animal on the premises that presents a danger to human beings.
(4) Within 30 days of the final determination date, the owner of a dangerous animal shall maintain at all times a policy of insurance in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the animal, which policy shall be issued by an insurer, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in the State of Michigan.
(5) Within 30 days of the final determination date the owner of a dangerous animal shall begin attending, and within 75 days after the final determination date, the owner of a dangerous animal shall successfully complete an animal obedience class with the dangerous animal, as offered through a certified program, and shall produce evidence of such attendance and successful completion by the dangerous animal. In the instance of a dog that has been determined to be a dangerous animal, evidence of successful completion of an animal obedience class shall require the production of a canine good citizenship certificate for the dog by a certified tester pursuant to the standards of the American Kennel Club. In the instance of other animals that have been determined to be dangerous animals under this Article, evidence of successful completion of an animal obedience class shall require a certificate from the trainer who performed the training program certifying that the animal satisfied all requirements of the class and that the animal is obedient.
Sec. 4.05. Requirements for possession of a potentially dangerous animal.
(a) Any owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall be jointly and severally responsible with other owners of such animal for compliance with the requirements of this Article. Except where a different date for compliance with a requirement is specifically identified in this Article, the potentially dangerous animal owner’s or owners’ responsibility for compliance with the requirements of this Article shall commence on the final determination date.
CD4:7
(b) No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody of a potentially dangerous animal except in compliance with all of the following requirements:
(1) A potentially dangerous animal shall not be permitted to remain in the city unless it is properly registered as provided in this Article and as otherwise required by law or ordinance, within 30 days of the final determinate date.
(2) Except under the circumstances otherwise specifically permitted by this article, a potentially dangerous animal shall at all times be maintained inside a proper enclosure.
(3) The premises where a potentially dangerous animal is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is an animal on the premises that is potentially dangerous to human beings. Such sign shall also include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is an animal on the premises that presents a potential danger to human beings.
(4) Within 30 days of the final determination date, the owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall begin attending, and within 75 days after the final determinate date, the owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall successfully complete an animal obedience class with the animal, as offered through a certified program, and shall produce evidence of such attendance and successful completion by the dangerous animal. In the instance of a dog that has been determined to be a potentially dangerous animal, evidence of successful completion of an animal obedience class shall require the production of a canine good citizenship certificate for the dog by a certified tester pursuant to the standards of the American Kennel Club. In the instance of other animals that have been determined to be potentially dangerous animal under this Article, evidence of successful completion of an animal obedience class shall require a certificate from the trainer who performed the training program certifying that the animal satisfied all requirements of the class and that the animal is obedient.
Sec. 4.06. Registration of dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals.
(a) No dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall be permitted to remain in the city unless it is registered in accordance with this article. In addition to the annual registration and/or licensing fees otherwise required by law and ordinance, the owner of a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year and shall register such owner's animal with the police department as a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal according to the classification and determination previously made under this article. No dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall be registered unless the owner can provide sufficient evidence that all of the provisions in Sections 4.04 and 4.05, as applicable, have been and are being met. An animal that has commenced an animal obedience class in a timely manner under either subsection 4.04(b)(5) or subsection 4.05(b)(4) with its owner may be issued a registration, with registration shall be subject to successful completion of the class in accordance with said subsections.
(b) The registration provided by this section shall be nontransferable. The registration shall be renewed annually or upon the earlier of the transfer of ownership or possession of the animal or a change in the location of the animal's primary habitat. The registration year shall be the period from the date of initial registration to the next
CD4:8
December thirty-first, inclusive, unless otherwise provided. All registrations expire on the thirty-first day of December unless suspended or revoked.
Sec. 4.07. Transfer of ownership or possession.
Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, the transferor shall provide the police chief with the name, address and telephone numbers of the new owner of the animal and the effective date of the transfer. Any transferee of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall be presumed to have notice of the animal's classification as such.
Sec. 4.08. Notice to police department.
The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the police department in person or by telephone within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence of any one (1) of the following events:
(1) The animal has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such animal to be physically secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent adult.
(2) Such animal has attacked a human being.
(3) Such animal has been sold, given or otherwise transferred to the ownership or possession of another person.
(4) The animal has died.
(5) The animal is leaving the City of Keego Harbor.
Sec. 4.09. Restraints when outside proper enclosure.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is properly muzzled, if a dangerous animal, and restrained on a suitable leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person at all times.
Sec. 4.10 Prohibited exotic or rare animals.
(a) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to possess or maintain within the city the following animals:
(1) All animals, including snakes and spiders, whose bite or venom is poisonous or deadly to humans.
(2) Apes: Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus).
(3) Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus).
CD4:9
(4) Bears (Ursidae).
(5) Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
(6) Crocodilians (Crocodilus), and alligators.
(7) Constrictor snakes, or other poisonous reptiles.
(8) Coyotes (Canis latrans).
(9) Elephants (Elephas and Loxondonta).
(10) Gamecocks and other fighting birds.
(11) Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
(12) Jaguars (Panthera onca).
(13) Leopards (Panthera pardus).
(14) Lions (Panthera leo).
(15) Lynxes (Lynx).
(16) Ostriches (Sruthio).
(17) Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions, and panthers.
(18) Wolves (Canis lupus).
(19) Wolf hybrids.
(20) Raccoons (Procyon lotor).
(21) Skunks (Genus Mephitis).
(22) Tigers (Felis tigris).
(23) A dangerous animal or animals as defined in section 4-106.
(b) The prohibitions above shall not apply to pet shops licensed by the state department of agriculture, zoological gardens licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and accredited by the American Association for the accreditation of zoological parks and gardens, and circuses licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture if:
CD4:10
(1) Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city.
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
(3) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape, and so as to humanely provide for their biological and social needs.
(4) No person lives or resides within one hundred (100) feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept.
(a) The prohibitions above shall not apply to any person who is in possession of an injured animal listed in this section under a valid caregiver's permit issued by the state department of natural resources.
Sec. 4.11. Confiscation and disposition of animals.
(a) A dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by an authorized enforcement officer or a County animal control officer upon a determination by such an officer that one (1) or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The owner of the animal does not have the proper liability insurance required by section 4.04.
(2) The animal is not validly and currently registered as is required by section 4.04.
(3) The animal is not maintained in a proper enclosure as is required by section 4.02.
(4) The animal is not under the restraints required by section 4.09, whether or not such animal is then in the custody or possession of its owner.
(5) The owner has failed to attend obedience classes with the animal or the animal has failed to successfully complete such obedience classes, as required by section 4.04.
(b) A potentially dangerous animal shall be confiscated by an authorized enforcement officer or a county animal control officer upon a determination by such an officer that one (1) or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The animal is not validly and currently registered as required by section 4.06.
(2) The animal is not maintained in a proper enclosure as is required by section 4.05.
(3) The animal is not under the restraints required by section 4.09, whether or not such animal is then in the custody or possession of its owner.
(4) The owner has failed to take the animal to obedience classes with the animal or the animal has failed to successfully complete such obedience classes, as required by Section 4.05.
CD4:11
(c) Any animal that is confiscated under either subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of the actual costs of boarding the animal, plus a confiscation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) upon the first confiscation of any animal, one hundred dollars ($100.00) upon the second and two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon the third or subsequent confiscation. The foregoing shall be in addition to the penalties otherwise provided for under this article.
(d) If the confiscated animal remains unclaimed for a period of four (4) days after written notice of the confiscation to the owner, or if the identity of the owner cannot be determined and four (4) days have passed after a description of the animal has been given to the police department and the animal remains unclaimed, then the animal shall be examined by a veterinarian and/or an authorized representative of the County animal control division to determine the viability of the animal or appropriate course of destruction of the animal if necessary
Sec. 4.12. District court action.
(a) In lieu of the notice and hearing requirements in this article, the authorized enforcement officer may file a sworn complaint in district court that an animal is a dangerous or exotic animal and that the animal has caused serious injury or death to a person or has caused serious injury or death to a dog or other domestic animal, without provocation. The district court shall issue a summons to the owner ordering him or her to appear to show cause why the animal should not be destroyed.
(b) Upon the filing of a sworn complaint as provided in subsection (a), the district court shall order the owner to immediately turn the animal over to a proper animal control authority, an incorporated humane society, a licensed veterinarian, or a boarding kennel, at the owner's option, to be retained by them until a hearing is held and a decision is made for the disposition of the animal. The owner shall notify the person who retains the animal under this section of the complaint and order. The expense of the boarding and retention of the animal is to be borne by the owner.
(c) After a hearing, the district court shall order the destruction of the animal, at the expense of the owner, if the animal is found to be a dangerous animal or exotic animal that caused serious injury or death to a person, dog or other domestic animal. After a hearing, the court may order the destruction of the animal, at the expense of the owner, if the court finds that the animal is a dangerous animal that did not cause serious injury or death to a person but is instead a potentially dangerous animal that is likely in the future to cause serious injury or death to a person or in the past has been adjudicated as a dangerous animal.
(d) If the court finds that an animal is a dangerous animal or an exotic animal that has not caused serious injury or death to a person, or is a potentially dangerous animal or an exotic animal, the court shall notify the animal control authority for Oakland County of the finding of the court, the name of the owner of the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal or exotic animal, and the address at which the animal is kept. In addition, the court shall order the owner of the animal to do one (1) or more of the following:
(1) Have the animal tattooed or micro chipped in such a manner as to enable the animal to be readily identified as having been determined to be a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal.
(2) Take specific steps, such as escape proof fencing or enclosure, including a top or roof, to ensure that the animal cannot escape and unauthorized individuals cannot enter the premises.
CD4:12
(3) Obtain and maintain liability insurance sufficient to protect the public from any damage or harm caused by the animal.
(4) Take any other action appropriate to protect the public, including order animal obedience classes at a licensed facility.
Sec. 4.13. Removal of potentially dangerous animal classification.
The owner of a dog that has been determined to be a potentially dangerous animal may request that the classification of the dog as a potentially dangerous animal should be reconsidered and removed, which request may be granted by the district court or animal review board, as applicable, if the owner demonstrates that the dog has been incident free for more than eighteen (18) months, the dog and owner have successfully completed obedience training, the dog has been issued and maintained a canine good citizenship certificate by a certified tester pursuant to the standards of the American Kennel Club, and the owner has complied in all respects with the provisions of this chapter of the code and any applicable court orders. A request submitted to the animal review board for removal of a potentially dangerous animal classification under this Section must be made on a form provided by the City Clerk for such purposes and must include a non-refundable administrative and processing fee established by resolution of the City Council and such other information deemed necessary by the City Clerk of purposes of processing this request.
Sec. 4.14. Penalties for violation.
In addition to the penalties set forth elsewhere in this article, and those penalties in MCL 287.321 et seq., the owner of a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal that fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in the manner set forth in section 1-13 of this code.
(Ord. No. 412, 11-18-2010)
Secs. 4-15--4-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
DOGS*
__________
* State Law References: Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 4-36. Number of dogs.
No person or group of persons occupying a single residential unit shall own, harbor or keep at such unit more than three dogs over the age of four months.
CD4:13
(Ord. No. 262, § 1.01, 11-17-1988; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 4-37. Reserved.
Editors Note: Ord. No. 393, § 2, adopted June 20, 2002, repealed § 4-37, which pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No. 262, adopted Nov. 17, 1988.
Sec. 4-38. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Animal control officer means the person employed or designated by the city for the purpose of enforcement and administration of the provisions of this article.
Audibly impaired means audibly impaired as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1981 (MCL 752.61).
Blind person means a blind person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 260 of 1978 (MCL 393.351).
Deaf person means a deaf person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1981 (MCL 752.61).
Dog means any dog, whether male, female or unsexed.
Owner means every person having a right or property in a dog, and every person who keeps or harbors a dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits a dog to remain in or about any premises occupied or owned by such person for a period of five days or more.
Physically limited means physically limited as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 1 of 1966 (MCL 125.1351).
Reasonable control means the state of a dog held securely in leash by a leash of suitable strength and length, by its owner, possessor or harborer or any other responsible person of suitable age and strength, in an enclosed vehicle or container or on the owner's occupied property.
(Ord. No. 161, § 1.01, 3-17-1976)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 4-39. Reasonable control required.
The owner of a dog shall not permit or allow the dog to not be under reasonable control.
(Ord. No. 161, § 2.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-40. Barking dogs.
No person shall keep or harbor a dog which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling shall cause a serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing to and fro upon the streets.
(Ord. No. 161, § 3.01, 3-17-1976)
CD4:14
Sec. 4-41. Location and housing.
All dog houses shall be centered in a strategically located place so as to provide adequate shade in the summer months and be constructed or located so as to provide adequate insulation against cold during the winter months and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents, vermin, debris and excrement, and free from objectionable odors.
(Ord. No. 161, § 5.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-42. Fecal matter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a dog owned, harbored or possessed by him to deposit fecal matter in any place other than the premises where the dog is harbored or kept unless such fecal matter is immediately collected and removed to the premises where the dog is harbored or kept.
(Ord. No. 161, § 5.02, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-43. Treatment of dogs.
No person owning, possessing or harboring any dog, or any other person shall treat a dog in a cruel or inhumane manner, or willfully or negligently cause or permit a dog to suffer unnecessary torture or pain.
(Ord. No. 161, § 6.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-44. Dead animals.
The owner of any dead dog or other animal shall promptly dispose of the remains in such manner as not to cause a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 161, § 7.01, 3-17-1976)
Cross References: Solid waste, ch. 18.
Sec. 4-45. Responsibility for damages.
Every owner, possessor or harborer of a dog shall be liable for damages for any and all injuries to person or property caused by such dog, to be determined and collected in appropriate civil proceedings; and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers, agents or employees, for any damages to persons or property caused by any dog or its owner, possessor or harborer.
(Ord. No. 161, § 16.01, 3-17-1976)
State Law References: Common law liability of owner for damage caused by dog, MCL 287.288.
Sec. 4-46. Dog bitten by another dog.
It shall be the duty of any person owning a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or another animal showing symptoms of rabies to immediately notify the animal control officer that such person has such dog in his possession; and such person shall comply with all lawful orders and requirements of the animal control officer regarding treatment of such dog for rabies.
(Ord. No. 161, § 22.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-47. Quarantine.
CD4:15
The health officer is authorized to require that any dog be quarantined or that a quarantine be established in the city for a defined period, whenever in his opinion such measures are necessary in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city.
(Ord. No. 161, § 23.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-48. Enforcement.
The city may employ animal control officers to enforce and administer the provisions of this article. The animal control officer shall be invested with such powers of a special police officer by the city clerk as are necessary for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. The provisions of this article may be enforced by members of the police department.
(Ord. No. 161, § 24.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-49. Authority to inquire.
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to make diligent inquiry as to the dogs owned, harbored or kept within the city and whether such dogs are licensed, and whether such owner, possessor or harborer is in violation of any other provision of this article. Any dog found unlicensed may be seized and impounded by the animal control officer. If the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog is known, the animal control officer may issue a notice of violation to appear at the city clerk's office within 72 hours, not including Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, to procure a license for such dog. Failure of the owner, possessor or harborer to appear and procure such license may result in the issuance of an ordinance violation by the animal control officer for violation of the licensing section of this article, section 4-76.
(Ord. No. 161, § 25.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-50 Alternatives to impounding.
The animal control officer is authorized, upon the witnessing of a violation of this article where it is impractical or impossible to impound the dog, to issue to the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog a written notice of such violation. The owner, possessor or harborer of such dog may, within 72 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, of such receipt of written notice present such notice to the city clerk and there pay the fees which would have been imposed had such dog been impounded for one day, release fee and boarding fee. If the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog shall fail to appear within such 72-hour period, the officer issuing such notice of violation shall forthwith issue an ordinance violation to the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog, which shall include the applicable section number of this article for which the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog is in violation.
(Ord. No. 161, § 26.01, 3-17-1976; Ord. No. 393, § 3, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 4-51. Violations.
The animal control officer is authorized in addition to seizing and impounding such dog, to issue to the owner, possessor or harborer of such dog a municipal civil infraction action.
(Ord. No. 161, § 27.01, 3-17-1976; Ord. No. 393, § 4, 6-20-2002)
Sec. 4-52. Exceptions.
CD4:16
Sections 4-39 and 4-42 shall not apply where the violation involves a dog which is used as a guide or leader dog for a blind person, a hearing dog for a deaf or audibly impaired person, or a service dog for a physically limited person. As used in this section:
Audibly impaired means audibly impaired as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1981 (MCL 752.61).
Blind person means a blind person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 260 of 1978 (MCL 393.351).
Deaf person means a deaf person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1981 (MCL 752.61).
Physically limited means physically limited as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 1 of 1966 (MCL 125.1351).
Sec. 4-53. Penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article is a municipal civil infraction and subjects the violator to the fines and penalties specified in section 1-7 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 161, § 28.01, 3-17-1976; Ord. No. 393, § 5, 6-20-2002)
Secs. 4-54--4-75. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE*
__________
* State Law References: Dog licensing, MCL 287.266 et seq.
__________
Sec. 4-76. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor any dog four months of age or over in the city unless such dog is licensed as provided in this division, or to own, possess or harbor any dog four months of age or over that does not at all times wear a collar or harness with a current metal license tag attached as provided in this division. Such license tag shall be nontransferable to any dog.
(Ord. No. 161, § 8.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-77. Licensing procedure.
(a) Licenses to own a dog shall be issued by the city clerk or his authorized agent upon application, together with payment of the license fee provided in this division.
(b) It shall be the duty of any person owning a dog, on or before January 1 of any year, or on or after any dog's becoming four months of age, or forthwith upon becoming a resident of the city, or becoming an owner of such dog, to make application to the city clerk or his authorized agent, giving the full name and residence of the applicant and presentation of a valid certificate of vaccination for rabies, with a vaccine licensed by the United
CD4:17
States Department of Agriculture, signed by an accredited veterinarian. The expiration date of the certificate of vaccination shall not be earlier than December 31 of the year for which the dog license is issued. Upon payment of the license fee, the city clerk or his authorized agent shall issue to each applicant a license to own or harbor a dog for the term commencing at the date of such license and terminating December 31 following. Such application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of such dog. For each license the city clerk or his authorized agent shall, at the time and before issuing the license and for each renewal of the license, collect from each applicant a license fee set by the city council by resolution or the city's authorized agent, from time to time, for each dog four months of age or over.
(Ord. No. 161, § 9.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-78. Term of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid and operative for a term beginning January 1 in the calendar year for which such license is issued and terminating on December 31 of that year.
(Ord. No. 161, § 11.01, 3-17-1976)
Secs. 4-79--4-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION
Sec. 4-101. Dog pound.
The city may establish a dog pound, such pound to be located in suitable quarters at such place and location as shall be selected by the city council, or may contract with a person or corporation.
(Ord. No. 161, § 17.01, 3-17-1976)
State Law References: Dog pounds and animal shelters, MCL 287.331 et seq.
Sec. 4-102. Impounding of dogs.
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to take up, seize and place in the dog pound all dogs that may be found running at large or being kept or harbored in any place within the city contrary to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 161, § 18.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-103. Release of dogs.
Dogs shall be released from impoundment or disposed of in accordance with the policies and procedures of the county animal control office.
(Ord. No. 161, §§ 19.01, 20.01, 3-17-1976)
Sec. 4-104. Confining dog for observation.
Any person who shall own a dog which has contracted rabies, or which has been subjected to rabies, or which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person shall upon demand of the animal control officer produce and surrender up such dog to the animal control officer to be held at a licensed veterinarian for
CD4:18
treatment and observation for whatever period is necessary to ascertain the extent of rabies. Such confinement shall be at the sole expense of the owner of the dog and without expense or risk on the part of the city. In lieu of such delivering up of such dog, such person shall have the option of delivering such dog to an approved veterinarian for treatment and observation for rabies and shall furnish to the animal control officer written evidence that such dog has been so delivered, and such confinement shall be at the sole expense of the owner of the dog.
(Ord. No. 161, § 21.01, 3-17-1976)
State Law References: Rules for control of rabies and the disposition of nonhuman agents carrying diseases, MCL 333.5111.
Secs. 4-105--4-135. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
CATS
Sec. 4-136. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor any domestic household cat four months old or over in the city unless such cat is licensed as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 267, § 1.01, 9-21-1989)
Sec. 4-137. Issuance of license.
Upon application filed with the city clerk, giving the full name and residence of the applicant, and upon the payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue to each applicant a license to own or harbor a cat for the term commencing at the date of such license and terminating January 1 following. Such application shall state the sex, age, color and markings of such cat; and such cat shall have been immunized against rabies. For each license, the city clerk shall at the time, and before issuing the license, and for each renewal of a license, collect of each applicant a license fee set from time to time for each male cat or unsexed cat and for each female cat.
(Ord. No. 267, § 2.01, 9-21-1989)
Sec. 4-138. Proof of rabies immunization required.
The owner of every cat within the city shall produce to the city clerk a certificate that such cat has been immunized against rabies.
(Ord. No. 267, § 3.01, 9-21-1989)
Sec. 4-139. Violation; penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 267, § 4.01, 9-21-1989)
CD5:1
Chapter 5
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, enactment of a building code and housing ordinance, regulation of building, § 2.3(y); regulation of construction cellars and basements, § 2.3(cc); building numbering, § 2.3(ee).
Cross References: Environment, ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 11; floods, ch. 12; health and sanitation, ch. 13; land development, ch. 14; solid waste, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 23; vegetation, ch. 24; construction, electricity, house moving, § 24-5; waterways, ch. 25; zoning, ch. 26.
State Law References: State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 5-1--5-30. Reserved.
Article II. Building Code
Sec. 5-31. Adopted.
Sec. 5-32. References in code.
Sec. 5-33. Amendments to code.
Sec. 5-34. Agency designated.
Sec. 5-35. Code referenced.
Sec. 5-36. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
Secs. 5-37--5-65. Reserved.
Article III. Plumbing Code
Sec. 5-66. Adoption.
Sec. 5-67. Additions, insertions and changes.
Sec. 5-68. Agency designated.
Sec. 5-69. Code referenced.
Sec. 5-70. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
Secs. 5-71--5-100. Reserved.
Article IV. Mechanical Code
Sec. 5-101. Adoption.
Sec. 5-102. Additions, insertions and changes.
Sec. 5-103. Agency designated.
Sec. 5-104. Code referenced.
Sec. 5-105. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
Secs. 5-106--5-135. Reserved.
Article V. Electrical Code
Sec. 5-136. Adoption.
Sec. 5-137. Penalty.
Sec. 5-138. Agency designated.
Sec. 5-139. Code referenced.
Sec. 5-140. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
Secs. 5-141--5-147. Reserved.
Article VI. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 5-148. Adoption.
Sec. 5-149. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes.
Secs. 5-150--5-170. Reserved.
Article VII. Dangerous Buildings
Sec. 5-171. Keeping, maintaining prohibited.
CD5:2
Sec. 5-172. Definitions.
Sec. 5-173. Notice of dangerous building; contents; hearing officer; service.
Sec. 5-174. Hearing; testimony; determination to close proceedings or order building or structure demolished, made safe, or properly maintained; failure to appear or noncompliance with order; hearing; enforcement; reimbursement and notice of cost; lien; remedies.
Sec. 5-175. Enforcement of judgment against other assets; lien; effectiveness; priority.
Sec. 5-176. Appeal to circuit court.
Secs. 5-177--5-205. Reserved.
Article VIII. Building, Moving and Demolition
Sec. 5-206. Building permit required.
Sec. 5-207. Taxes paid.
Sec. 5-208. Ownership.
Sec. 5-209. Removing service connections.
Sec. 5-210. Code compliance.
Sec. 5-211. Public protection.
Sec. 5-212. Cash deposits for wrecking a building.
Sec. 5-213. Permit fees.
Sec. 5-214. Penalties.
Secs. 5-215--5-245. Reserved.
Article IX. Rental Units
Sec. 5-246. Purpose.
Sec. 5-247. Applicability.
Sec. 5-248. Definitions.
Sec. 5-249. Requirement of certificate of compliance.
Sec. 5-250. Scope of inspection authority.
Sec. 5-251. Application for rental registration.
Sec. 5-252. Fees.
Sec. 5-253. Issuance of certificate.
Sec. 5-254. Right to examine certificate; registry of certificate holders.
Sec. 5-255. Expiration of certificate.
Sec. 5-256. Transferability of certificate.
Sec. 5-257. Security measures.
Sec. 5-258. Used furnace inspection certificate.
Sec. 5-259. Maintenance of exterior grounds.
Sec. 5-260. Administrative rules and procedures.
Sec. 5-261. Penalties.
Secs. 5-262--5-295. Reserved.
Article X. Swimming Pools
Sec. 5-296. Definitions.
Sec. 5-297. BOCA code.
Sec. 5-298. Permit required.
Sec. 5-299. Application for permit.
Sec. 5-300. Location of outdoor pool.
Sec. 5-301. Protection of the general public.
Sec. 5-302. Water supply and waste disposal.
Sec. 5-303. Construction of nonportable pools.
Sec. 5-304. Electrical.
Sec. 5-305. Recirculation system.
Sec. 5-306. Maintenance and operation.
Sec. 5-307. Use of pool.
Sec. 5-308. Responsibility for control.
Sec. 5-309. Abandonment.
Sec. 5-310. Inspections.
Sec. 5-311. Penalties.
Sec. 5-312. Public nuisance.
ARTICLE I.
CD5:3
IN GENERAL
Secs. 5-1--5-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
BUILDING CODE
Sec. 5-31. Adopted.
Pursuant to the provisions of section 8 of the State Construction Code Act (Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq.) the Basic Building Code, 1996 edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA), is adopted by reference subject to the modifications contained in this article.
(Ord. No. 332, § 1.01, 11-20-1997)
Charter References: Technical codes, adoption by reference, § 6.2.
Sec. 5-32. References in code.
References in the BOCA Code adopted in this article to the terms "state" and "Michigan" shall mean the State of Michigan; references to the term "municipality" shall mean the City of Keego Harbor; references to the term "local ordinances" shall mean ordinances of the City of Keego Harbor; and references to the term "building officials" shall mean the building official or his deputy or deputies of the City of Keego Harbor.
(Ord. No. 332, § 2.01, 11-20-1997)
Sec. 5-33. Amendments to code.
The following section in the BOCA National Building Code, 1996 edition, are revised as follows:
Section 116.4. Violations.
Any person erecting, using, moving, demolishing, occupying or maintaining any building or structure in violation of this building code or causing, permitting or suffering any such violation to be committed shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7 of the city's Code of Ordinances. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day when a violation occurs or continues. Any building or structure erected, used, moved, demolished, occupied or maintained in violation of such ordinance is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Upon application to a court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated or the violation or threatened violation restrained or enjoined.
(Ord. No. 332, § 3.01, 11-20-1997)
Sec. 5-34. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the City of Keego Harbor is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the City of Keego Harbor under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Keego Harbor assumes responsibility for the
CD5:4
administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 371, § 1.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 5-35. Code referenced.
All building materials in all buildings, structures and premises covered by this article shall be designated, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the state code. This code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of building materials.
(Ord. No. 371, § 2.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 5-36. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
(a) Fees for inspection. When an application is made for a permit, license, or registration required under the terms of this article, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by resolution of the City of Keego Harbor City Council.
(b) Right of access to buildings. Subject to the constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the building official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring and building materials contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical supply and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department.
(c) Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair building materials in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause to permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any building materials without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. Nothing in this section shall be considered as applying to any person engaged in repairing and maintaining building materials.
(Ord. No. 371, § 3.01, 6-21-2001)
Secs. 5-37--5-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
PLUMBING CODE*
__________
* Editors Note: By resolution of November 19, 1998, the city council renumbered Ordinance Number 349, pertaining to the adoption of the 1997 edition of the International Plumbing Code, as Ordinance Number 345.
Cross References: Utilities, ch. 23.
State Law References: Licensing of plumbers and regulation of plumbing, MCL 338.901 et seq., MSA 14.451 et seq.
__________
Sec. 5-66. Adoption.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Plumbing Code, 1997 edition, including appendix chapters B, D, E, F and G, as
CD5:5
published International Code Council, is adopted as the plumbing code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees for such permits; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Plumbing Code, 1997 edition, published by the International Code Council on file at the city are referred to, adopted and made part of this article as if fully set out in this section.
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 8-20-1998)
Charter References: Technical codes, adoption by reference, § 6.2.
Sec. 5-67. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the code adopted in this article are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code of the City of Keego Harbor, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section 106.5.2. Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as prescribed by the council of the City of Keego Harbor.
Section 106.5.3. Delete.
Section 108.4. Violation; penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of its requirements or who shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7 of the city's Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 108.5. Stop work orders.
Upon notice from the code official, work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the fines and penalties of the City of Keego Harbor Civil Infraction Ordinance Number 295, section 1-7 of the city's Code of Ordinances.
Section 109.2. Membership of board.
The board of appeals shall consist of three members who shall be appointed by the chief
CD5:6
executive of the jurisdiction.
Section 109.2.1. Qualifications.
A member of the board of appeals shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of members of the board of appeals. A person may serve on the board of appeals of more than one governmental subdivision.
Section 305.6.1. Sewer depth.
Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of eight inches (204mm) to the top of the pipe below finished grade. All other building sewers shall be installed below recorded frost penetration.
Section 904.1. Roof extension.
All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall terminate at least 12 inches (305mm) above the roof; except where that roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least seven feet (2134mm) above the roof.
Chapter 14. CODES.
This model plumbing code is intended to be utilized with other model codes that are adopted by the jurisdiction:
BNBC--96 BOCA National Building Code.
IMC--96 ICC International Mechanical Code.
(Ord. No. 345, § 2, 8-20-1998)
Sec. 5-68. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Plumbing Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the City of Keego Harbor is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the City of Keego Harbor under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Keego Harbor assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 373, § 1.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 5-69. Code referenced.
All plumbing equipment in all buildings, structures and premises covered by this article shall be designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the state code. This code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of plumbing equipment.
(Ord. No. 373, § 2.01, 6-21-2001)
CD5:7
Sec. 5-70. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
(a) Fees for inspection. When an application is made for a permit, license or registration required under the terms of this article, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by resolution of the City of Keego Harbor City Council.
(b) Right of access to buildings. Subject to the constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the building official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring, plumbing devices and/or plumbing materials contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all plumbing supply and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any plumbing where such plumbing is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department.
(c) Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair plumbing equipment in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause or permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any plumbing equipment without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. Nothing in this section shall be considered as applying to any person engaged in repairing and maintaining plumbing equipment.
(Ord. No. 373, § 3.01, 6-21-2001)
Secs. 5-71--5-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
MECHANICAL CODE*
__________
* Editors Note: By resolution of November 19, 1998, the city council renumbered Ordinance Number 350, pertaining to the adoption of the 1996 edition of the International Mechanical Code, as Ordinance Number 346.
Cross References: Utilities, ch. 23.
State Law References: Mechanical contractors, MCL 338.971 et seq., MSA 18.86(1) et seq.
__________
Sec. 5-101. Adoption.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Mechanical Code, 1996 edition, including appendix chapter A, as published by the International Code Council is adopted as the mechanical code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees for such permits; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Mechanical Code, 1996 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file at the city are referred to, adopted and made part of this article as if fully set out in this section.
(Ord. No. 346, § 1, 8-20-1998)
Charter References: Technical codes, adoption by reference, § 6.2.
Sec. 5-102. Additions, insertions and changes.
CD5:8
The following sections of the code adopted in this article are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Keego Harbor, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section 106.5.2. Fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical work shall be as prescribed by the Council of the City of Keego Harbor.
Section 106.5.3. Delete.
Section 108.4. Violation; penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of its requirements or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7 of the city's Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 108.5. Stop work orders.
Upon notice from the code official, work on any mechanical system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the fines and penalties of the City of Keego Harbor Civil Infraction Ordinance Number 295, section 1-7 of the city's Code of Ordinances.
Section 109.2. Membership of board.
The board of appeals shall consist of three members who shall be appointed by the chief executive of the jurisdiction.
Section 109.2.1. Qualifications. A member of the board of appeals shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of members of the board of appeals. A person may serve on the board of appeals of more than one governmental subdivision.
Chapter 14. CODES.
This model mechanical code is intended to be utilized with other model codes that are adopted
CD5:9
by the jurisdiction:
BNBC--96 BOCA National Building Code
BNFPC--96 BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
(Ord. No. 346, § 2, 8-20-1998)
Sec. 5-103. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Mechanical Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the City of Keego Harbor is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the City of Keego Harbor under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Keego Harbor assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 372, § 1.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 5-104. Code referenced.
All mechanical equipment in all buildings, structures, and premises covered by this article shall be designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the state code. This code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of mechanical equipment.
(Ord. No. 372, § 2.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 5-105. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
(a) Fees for inspection. When an application is made for a permit, license, or registration required under the terms of this article, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by resolution of the City of Keego Harbor City Council.
(b) Right of access to buildings. Subject to the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, the building official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring and mechanical equipment and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any mechanical equipment where such is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department.
(c) Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair mechanical equipment in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause or permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any mechanical equipment without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. Nothing in this section shall be considered as applying to any person engaged in repairing and maintaining mechanical equipment.
(Ord. No. 372, § 3.01, 6-21-2001)
Secs. 5-106--5-135. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
CD5:10
ELECTRICAL CODE*
__________
* Cross References: Utilities, ch. 23.
State Law References: Electrical contractor's license, regulation of wire, MCL 338.881 et seq., MSA 18.204(1) et seq.
__________
Sec. 5-136. Adoption.
The 1996 edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA-70), as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, with Technical Amendments & General Rules of the Reciprocal Electrical Council, Inc., are adopted as part of this article, as fully as if set forth in this section, and shall govern and be observed and followed in all installations of electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus and fixtures of any voltage. Notice is given that complete copies of the code, general rules, technical amendments and permit fees, are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 335, § 1.01, 11-20-1997)
Sec. 5-137. Penalty.
Violation of any provisions of the code adopted in this article shall be a civil infraction and shall be subject the violator to the fines and penalties specified in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 335, § 5.01, 11-20-1997)
Sec. 5-138. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the City of Keego Harbor is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge responsibility of the City of Keego Harbor under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Keego Harbor assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 374, § 1.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 5-139. Code referenced.
All electrical equipment in all buildings, structures and premises covered by this article shall be designed, constructed, installed, altered and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the state code. This code provides reasonable safeguards to the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the installation and/or maintenance of electrical equipment.
(Ord. No. 374, § 2.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 5-140. Inspections; rights of access; permits.
(a) Fees for inspection. When an application is made for a permit, license or registration required under the terms of this article, a fee shall be paid in an amount as prescribed by resolution of the City of Keego Harbor City Council.
(b) Right of access to buildings. Subject to the constitution and the laws of the State of Michigan, the
CD5:11
building official and/or his or her deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his or her official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring, electrical devices and/or electrical materials contained therein and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical supply and to disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department.
(c) Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, maintain, service or repair electrical equipment in or on any building, structure or part thereof, or on premises or cause or permit therein or thereon the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of any electrical equipment without a permit having been obtained therefore as provided herein. Nothing in this section shall be considered as applying to any person engaged in repairing and maintaining electrical appliances.
(Ord. No. 374, § 3.01, 6-21-2001)
Secs. 5-141--5-147. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE*
__________
* State Law References: Housing law, MCL 125.401 et seq., MSA 5.2771 et seq.
__________
Sec. 5-148. Adoption.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Keego Harbor, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code as published by the international Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the City of Keego Harbor, in the State of Michigan; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 5-149 of this article.
(Ord. No. 375, § 1, 6-21-2001)
Charter References: Technical codes, adoption by reference, § 6.2.
Sec. 5-149. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes.
Section 101.1. City of Keego Harbor.
Section 103.16. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall be subject to the fines and penalties of the City of Keego Harbor Civil Infraction Ordinance number 295, as amended. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 303.4. Weeds: The city manager of the City of Keego Harbor or his designee shall notify by certified mail and first class mail the owner, as listed in the most recent tax assessment roll, shall destroy or cut all weeds in violation of Section 302.4. The notice shall inform the owner that if such owner fails to destroy or cut said weeds in violation of Section 303.4 within ten (10) days from date of mailing the notice, the City of Keego Harbor or its contractor may enter upon the property to destroy or cut such weeds as many times as is necessary
CD5:12
to protect the public health, safety and welfare, in the current calendar year. In addition to any civil infraction that may be issued for the violation, all such costs borne by the City of Keego Harbor for the destruction or cutting of such weeds shall be paid by the owner, and if necessary, a lien placed against the property.
Section 303.14. January 1 through December 31.
Section 602.3. January 1 through December 31.
Section 602.4. January 1 through December 31.
(Ord. No. 375, § 2, 6-21-2001)
Secs. 5-150--5-170. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS*
__________
* Cross References: Environment, ch. 10.
__________
Sec. 5-171. Keeping, maintaining prohibited.
It is unlawful for any owner or his agent to keep or maintain any dwelling or part of a dwelling which is a dangerous building.
(Ord. No. 149, § 1, 12-19-1974)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.538, MSA 5.2891(18).
Sec. 5-172. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Dangerous building means a building or structure that has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the following conditions:
(1) A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city.
(2) A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirements of any building code of the city for a new building or structure, purpose or location.
(3) A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property.
(4) A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural
CD5:13
portions of the building or structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by the building code of the city.
(5) The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall or give way.
(6) The building, structure, or a part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
(7) The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood; or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger; or becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act.
(8) A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the health officer determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety or general welfare of people living in the dwelling.
(9) A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers.
(10) A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2501--339.2515, MSA 18.425(2501)--18.425(2515)). For purposes of this subsection, the term "building or structure" includes but is not limited to a commercial building or structure. This subsection does not apply to either of the following:
a. A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of the following:
1. Notifies the city police department that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days, which notice shall be given to the city police department by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied; and
2. Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with the building code of the city.
b. A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year if the owner notifies the city police department that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. An owner
CD5:14
who has given the notice prescribed by this subsection shall notify the city police department not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subsection, the term "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling such as a vacation home, hunting cabin or summer home that is occupied by the owner or a member of the owner's family during part of a year.
(Ord. No. 149, § 2, 12-19-1974)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.539, MSA 5.2891(19).
Sec. 5-173. Notice of dangerous building; contents; hearing officer; service.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the building department shall issue a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building.
(b) The notice shall be served on each owner of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records.
(c) The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building. The person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained.
(d) The hearing officer shall be appointed, subject to approval by the city council, by the mayor to serve at his pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters, including but not limited to an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, or member of a community housing organization. An employee of the building department shall not be appointed as hearing officer. The building department shall file a copy of the notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building with the hearing officer.
(e) The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice.
(Ord. No. 149, § 3, 12-19-1974)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.540, MSA 5.2891(20).
Sec. 5-174. Hearing; testimony; determination to close proceedings or order building or structure demolished, made safe, or properly maintained; failure to appear or noncompliance with order; hearing; enforcement; reimbursement and notice of cost; lien; remedies.
(a) At a hearing prescribed by section 5-173, the hearing officer shall take testimony of the building department, the owner of the property, and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained.
CD5:15
(b) If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure should be demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply with the order. If the building is a dangerous building under section 5-172(10), the order may require the owner or agent to maintain the exterior of the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the building, including but not limited to the maintenance of lawns, trees and shrubs.
(c) If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued under subsection (b) of this section, the hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the city council not more than five days after noncompliance by the owner and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 5-173.
(d) The city council shall fix a date not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in section 5-173 for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 5-173 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. The city council shall approve, disapprove or modify the order. If the city council approves or modifies the order, the city council shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. In the case of an order of demolition, if the city council determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood or other natural disaster, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection.
(e) The cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears.
(f) The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this subsection does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq.).
(g) In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to this subsection. The lien provided for in this subsection shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances.
CD5:16
(Ord. No. 149, § 4, 12-19-1974)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.541, MSA 5.2891(21).
Sec. 5-175. Enforcement of judgment against other assets; lien; effectiveness; priority.
(a) A judgment in an action brought pursuant to section 5-174(g) may be enforced against assets of the owner other than the building or structure.
(b) The city shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to section 5-174(g) against the owner's interest in all real property located in this state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this section does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances.
(Ord. No. 149, § 4, 12-19-1974)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.541a, MSA 5.2891(21a).
Sec. 5-176. Appeal to circuit court.
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council under section 5-174 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision.
(Ord. No. 149, § 5, 12-19-1974)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.542, MSA 5.2891(22).
Secs. 5-177--5-205. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
BUILDING, MOVING AND DEMOLITION*
__________
* Cross References: Environment, ch. 10.
State Law References: Moving buildings, MCL 247.188, MSA 9.268.
__________
Sec. 5-206. Building permit required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to wreck or to move any building or structure from one location to another without first obtaining a permit from the building department. This permit may be refused if, in the judgment of the building official, or other authorized person, the building is too large to move without causing damage to property or structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved.
(b) The person requesting a permit under this section shall set forth in his application the streets, alleys and other public places upon and through which the proposed building will be moved and the name of the owner of the building. An application for such permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee set from time to time. All applications to move buildings into the city from another city, village or township shall be accompanied by a fee set from time to time for necessary preliminary inspections.
CD5:17
(c) The applicant shall submit a schedule of the time and routes approved by the chief of police when the proposed building or structure shall be moved. Before a building or structure can be wrecked, the owner, wrecking company or person who secures the permit shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building such as electric, gas or telephone. A permit to wreck shall not be issued unless a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters or regulators, have been removed and/or sealed and plugged in a safe manner; nor shall a wrecking permit be issued until the building official shall be satisfied, after receiving a written report from the utility companies concerned, that the wrecking operations may be accomplished in such a manner as not to create a hazardous condition as a result of the proximity of such public utility installations. All permits issued under this section shall be posted on such building in a conspicuous place.
(d) The person moving the building shall use extraordinary care to prevent any damage to shade trees or public utility installations, curbs, sidewalks, electric signal installations and private properties.
(e) The building official is directed to inspect all applications for moving or wrecking buildings in the city for compliance with the terms and conditions contained in this article and as provided in this section. If a permit to move a building is requested, the applicant shall accompany his application with a cash deposit by the owner in an amount as established by the city manager to protect the city against any delays, negligence in removing the building from its location, city expense incurred or in cleaning up the premises and removing rubbish or debris from its former location, and conditioned further that the building will be completed at its new location within a period of six months, and conditioned further that the applicant will bring the building on its new location in compliance with the building, electrical and plumbing codes within such six-month period. The cash deposit shall also be conditioned to reimburse the city for any expenses incurred by the fire, police, electrical and public works departments, or any other city department, in connection with such moving; and such departments shall keep a record of the time allotted to such project; and the city's cost shall be charged against such deposit and credited to the proper funds. If the applicant or owner fails or neglects to comply with any of the stipulations of this article and conditions, the deposit provided in this section shall be used by the city to bring the building into compliance with city ordinances or to place the premises where the building has been removed in a neat and level condition free from rubbish and debris. The cash deposit shall be held by the city until after the expiration of the six-month period; and after payment of all city expenses have been made and after the premises have been restored to a safe, neat, clean and tidy condition and in accordance with the provisions of this article, the balance shall be returned to the owner making such deposit.
(f) Whenever a building is to be moved through the streets of the city, the applicant shall, in addition to the other requirements of this section, file with the city clerk a policy of insurance insuring all utilities and the city against any damage by reason of the moving of the house within the city limits. This policy of insurance shall be in amounts and types as established by the city manager.
(g) If a permit is requested to wreck a building, the cash deposit shall be as provided in section 5-212 and conditioned that the applicant will clean up the premises where the building has been razed and leave the premises in a neat and tidy condition, level to existing grade, all to be approved by the building official.
(Ord. No. 46, § 1, 4-21-1959; Ord. No. 71, § 1.01, 3-19-1963)
State Law References: Protection of facilities during construction activities, MCL 460.701 et seq., MSA 22.190(1) et seq.
Sec. 5-207. Taxes paid.
Before a permit is issued under this article, the owner of the property shall present to the building
CD5:18
official, for filing, sufficient evidence that the property is free of any entanglements and that all taxes and any city charges against the property are paid in full.
(Ord. No. 46, § 2, 4-21-1959)
Sec. 5-208. Ownership.
The applicant, if other than the owner, shall present a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner that he is entitled to move or wreck the building or structure. The statement or bill of sale will be filed with the permit in the office of the building official.
(Ord. No. 46, § 3, 4-21-1959)
Sec. 5-209. Removing service connections.
Before moving or wrecking any building, it shall be the duty of the mover or wrecker to see that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper and water shut off. The electric and gas services shall be removed by the utility company.
(Ord. No. 46, § 4, 4-21-1959)
Sec. 5-210. Code compliance.
Permission to move a building from one location to another is contingent upon compliance with the building code and the zoning ordinance of the city. No building shall be moved over any street, alley or public place on skids.
(Ord. No. 46, § 5, 4-21-1959)
Sec. 5-211. Public protection.
When wrecking buildings adjacent to the streets, sidewalks or alleys, suitable fences and/or barricades must be erected to protect the public from falling materials, cave-ins and the necessary precautions taken to protect adjacent buildings, public walks, paving, etc.
(Ord. No. 46, § 6, 4-21-1959)
Sec. 5-212. Cash deposits for wrecking a building.
A person desiring to wreck or raze any building shall deposit with the building official sums as established by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 46, § 7, 4-21-1959)
Sec. 5-213. Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be paid to the city for wrecking or razing a building as established by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 46, § 8, 4-21-1959)
Sec. 5-214. Penalties.
Any person wrecking any building or moving any building or structure upon the public streets or
CD5:19
highways in the city or moving any such building or structure from any location to another location without complying with the terms and provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7, provided that each day an offense continues under this article shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 46, § 9, 4-21-1959)
Secs. 5-215--5-245. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
RENTAL UNITS
Section 5-246. Purpose and Intent.
The City of Keego Harbor recognizes the need for an organized inspection and registration program for rental properties located within the City in order to ensure rental units meet all applicable building, existing structures, fire, health, safety, and zoning codes, and to provide an efficient system for compelling both absentee and local landlords to correct violations and maintain, in proper condition, rental property within the City. The City recognizes that the most efficient system is the creation of a program requiring the registration and inspection of rental property within the City as defined in this Ordinance, so that orderly inspection schedules can be made by the City officials.
Section 5-247. Definitions.
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended.
“Commercial not residential purposes” means any premises used for
commercial.
“Department” means the City of Keego Harbor Building Department
or any successor department or division that may be established.
“Dwelling unit” means a building, or portion thereof, designed for
occupancy for living purposes and having cooking facilities and
sanitary facilities, including single family residences.
“Landlord” means any person who owns or controls a dwelling, Dwelling
Unit, or Rental Unit and rents such unit, either personally or through a
designated agent, to any person.
“Owner” means the legal title holder or a Rental Unit or the Premises
within which the Rental Unit is situated.
“Owner-Occupied Rental Unit” means a Rental Unit that is occupied
in whole or in part by an individual whose name specifically appears on
CD5:20
the deed for the property where the Rental Unit is located.
“Person” means any natural individual, firm, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited
liability company, or receiver, executor, personal representative, trust,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any
court.
“Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings
or structures thereon.
“Rental unit” means any Dwelling Unit or a unit containing sleeping
quarters, including but not limited to hotels, motels, bed and breakfast
establishments, boarding houses, sleeping rooms, residential, commercial,
or industrial property, including structures which are leased or rented by
the Owner or other Person in control of such units, to any tenant, whether
by day, week, month, year or any other term.
“Responsible local agent” means a natural Person designated by the
property Owner as the agent responsible for operating such rental
property in compliance with the ordinances adopted by the City.
“Tenant” means any Person who has the temporary use and occupation
of real property owned by another Person in subordination to that other
person’s title and with that other person’s consent; for example, a Person
who rents or leases a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rental unit from a landlord.
Section 5-248. Requirements.
No Person shall lease, rent, occupy, or otherwise allow a Rental Unit within the City to be occupied, unless all of the following requirements have first been met.
The Owner of the Rental Unit shall have registered the Rental Unit with the Department by completing and filing a current registration form with the Department, as provided in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
An inspection shall have been completed to the satisfaction of the Department.
A valid certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the Department.
The current certificate of compliance shall be maintained at the office of the Responsible Agent or on the premises.
All fees charged by the City for the registration and inspection of the Rental Unit shall be paid in full.
Section 5-249. Registration.
CD5:21
It shall be unlawful for any Person to lease, rent, occupy, or otherwise allow a Rental Unit within the City to be occupied without first registering the Rental Unit with the Department and designating a Responsible Local Agent.
Registration Forms.
Registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the Department and shall require all of the following information.
The street address of the Rental Unit(s);
The number and types of Rental Units within the rental property;
The residence address, telephone number, and where applicable an e-mail
address, mobile telephone number, and facsimile number of all property
Owners of the Rental Unit(s);
Name, residence address, telephone number, and where applicable an
e-mail address, mobile telephone number, and facsimile number of the
Responsible Local Agent designated by the Owner;
The maximum number of tenants permitted for each Rental Unit;
The name, address, telephone number, and where applicable an e-mail
address, mobile telephone number, and facsimile number of the Person
authorized to collect rent from the tenants;
The name, address, telephone number, and where applicable an e-mail
address, mobile telephone number, and facsimile number of the Person
authorized to make or order repairs or services for the property, if in
violation of City or State codes, if the Person is other than the Owner or
the Responsible Local Agent;
Accurate and Complete Information.
All information provided on the registration form shall be accurate and complete. No Person shall provide inaccurate information for the registration of a Rental Unit, or fail to provide the information required for such registration. The registration form shall be signed by both the property Owner(s) and the designated Responsible Local Agent. Where the Owner is not a natural person, the Owner information shall be that of the president, general manager or other chief executive of the organization. Where more than one Person has an ownership interest, the required information shall be provided for each such Owner.
Change in Registration Information or Transfer of Property.
Except for a change in the Registered Local Agent, the property Owner of a Rental Unit registered with the City shall re-register within sixty (60) calendar days after any change occurs in the registration information.
CD5:22
If the property is transferred to a new Owner, the new property Owner of a registered Rental Unit shall re-register the Rental Unit within sixty (60) calendar days following the transfer of the property. Property Owners shall notify the Department of any change in the designation of the Registered Local Agent, including a change in name, address, e-mail address, telephone number, mobile telephone number or facsimile number of the designated Registered Local Agent within five (5) business days of the change.
If a transfer of ownership occurs and there is a current certificate of compliance on file, then the new Owner will only have to pay the registration fee upon the expiration of the current registration. It will still be required that the new Owner fill out a new registration form.
Registration Term and Renewals.
Registration of a Rental Unit shall be effective for three (3) years. All registrations shall expire three (3) years from the date of the original issuance of a certificate of compliance. The property Owner shall re-register each Rental Unit with the Department, thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration of the registration of the Rental Unit.
(Ord. No.451, 7-13-2013)
Responsible Local Agent.
The designated Responsible Local Agent shall be responsible for all of the following:
operating the registered Rental Unit in compliance with all applicable City Ordinances;
providing access to the Rental Unit for the purpose of making any and all inspections necessary to ensure compliance with the applicable City Ordinances;
maintaining a list of the names and number of occupants of each Rental Unit for which he or she is responsible; and
accepting all legal notices or services of process with respect to the Rental Unit.
Section 5-250. Inspections.
Rental Units shall be inspected and shall comply with the standards and provisions of the ordinances and codes adopted by the City.
Inspections.
Except as provided in subsection 5-250(a)(3), all Rental Units shall be inspected by the Department at least once every three (3) years. Prior to conducting inspections of those occupied Rental Units, the Department may issue a temporary certificate of compliance as provided in Section 5-251(b). The inspection shall not, however, eliminate an owner’s responsibility to register such Rental Units every three (3) years.
If the first inspection is in compliance with the City’s Property
CD5:23
Maintenance Ordinance and all other City Ordinances, such Rental
Units will have their next inspection waived. If a complaint is filed with
the City and the Rental Unit is found to be in violation of this Ordinance,
therefore making said unit not in compliance, the following inspection
shall not be waived.
Nothing in this section shall preclude the inspection of any Rental Unit
more frequently than once every three (3) years.
Any current property with a valid Rental Registration certificate shall continue
enforced until expiration when the property shall then be re-inspected.
Basis for Inspections.
Inspections may be made to obtain and maintain compliance with the standards of this Ordinance based upon one of the following:
A complaint received by the Department, the City of Keego Harbor Police
Department, any member of the Oakland County Sheriff’s Department or
a State agency, indicating that there is a violation of the standards or the
provisions of any ordinance adopted by the City of Keego Harbor or any
state law;
An observation by the Department, the City of Keego Harbor Police Department,
any member of the Oakland County Sheriff’s Department, a State Agency,
City of Keego Harbor Staff, West Bloomfield Township Fire Chief, of a violation
of the standards of a violation of the standards or the provisions of any Ordinance adopted by the City or any state law;
A report or observation of a Rental Unit that is unoccupied and unsecured
or a dwelling that is damaged by fire;
The registration, re-registration and certification of a Rental Unit as required
by this Ordinance;
The need to determine compliance with a notice or an order issued by the
City;
An emergency observed or reasonably believed to exist;
A request for an inspection by the property Owner; or
Requirements of law where a Rental Unit is to be demolished by the City
or where ownership is to be transferred to the City.
Inspection Procedures.
CD5:24
Once the Department has determined that a Rental Unit is in
compliance with all of the ordinances adopted by the City and
state law, the inspection required for issuance of a certificate of
compliance shall be satisfied. The inspection shall then be valid
for a period of three (3) years from the date the certificate of
compliance is issued.
If, upon completion of an inspection, the premises are found to be
in violation of one or more provisions of applicable City ordinances
and State codes, the Department shall provide the Registered Local
Agent and/or Owner with written notice of such violations. The
Department shall set a re-inspection date before which such violation
shall be corrected. If such violation has been corrected within that
period, the inspection required for issuance of a certificate of
compliance shall be satisfied. If such violations have not been
corrected within that period, the Department shall not issue the
certificate of compliance and may take any action necessary to
enforce compliance with applicable City ordinances and State codes.
If there is a complaint filed on property with the Department, the Owner
and/or Responsible Local Agent will be notified in writing. In the event
that the complaint is of an emergency nature, as determined by the
Department or City of Keego Harbor Police Department, it will require
immediate compliance with adopted Property Maintenance Ordinance.
If the complaint is not of an emergency nature, the Owner will have
fourteen (14) calendar days to correct such violation, unless a longer
period of time is granted by the Department, after which a re-inspection
or written verification from Owner and/or Responsible Local Agent and
complaining party that the violation has been corrected, will be required.
If a violation is not corrected by the property Owner as required by this
Ordinance, the Department may revoke the certificate of compliance.
If an inspection is initiated by a complaint and no violation is found to
exist, no inspection fee will be assessed against the Owner of the
inspected Rental Unit in compliance.
Where a re-inspection must be made to ensure conformity with this
Ordinance or before a certificate of compliance is issued for those
Rental Units that have been issued violation notices, the City will
charge a separate inspection fee for every inspection when the
violation has not been abated or corrected.
If an inspection is scheduled and the Owner or Responsible Local Agent
fails to appear, an inspection fee shall be assessed against the Owner
and/or the Responsible Local Agent, and no inspection shall be completed
CD5:25
until the inspection fee is paid in full.
Transfer of Ownership Inspection.
When there is a transfer of ownership of any Rental Unit, including an
owner-occupied Rental Unit/Tenant Change in Occupancy, and a
current certificate of compliance exists for the unit, the Department
shall require a new inspection. The new Owner shall comply with the
requirements of Section 5-249(c) of this Ordinance by re-registering
the Rental Unit within sixty (60) calendar days following the transfer of
the property or the tenant change in occupancy.
When there is a transfer of ownership of any Rental Unit or a change
in tenant occupancy, including an owner-occupied Rental Unit and
a current certificate of compliance does not exist for the unit, then
the Department shall conduct an inspection within thirty (30) calendar
days following the notification of the transfer of ownership or a change
in tenant occupancy as required by Section 4(c). If violations of this
Ordinance or any other City ordinance, code or State code or laws are
found, a notice of violation shall be issued to the Owner.
If ownership of any Rental Unit is transferred contrary to subsection (d)
(1) or (2) of this Section or a change in tenant occupancy owner, or if
the new Owner fails to re-register a Rental Unit as required by Section
5-249(c) of this Ordinance, the certificate of compliance and Rental Unit
registration shall be deemed to expire within sixty (60) days of the
transfer or change in tenant occupancy unless appropriate steps are
taken to obtain a Rental Unit registration and certificate of compliance.
Within sixty (60) calendar days of the transfer of ownership of a Rental
Unit, the new Owner shall notify all residents of a Rental Unit which
undergoes a transfer of ownership while the individuals are residing in
that unit, including a owner-occupied Rental Unit, of the transfer of ownership.
(Ord. No.449, 06-08-2013)
Section 5-251. Certificate of Compliance.
No Person shall own, operate, lease, rent, occupy, or otherwise allow a Rental Unit within the City to be occupied unless there is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the Department for the Rental Unit. A certificate of compliance shall be issued for each building and Rental Unit.
Requirements.
A certificate of compliance shall be issued only after all of the following requirements have been satisfactorily completed.
CD5:26
Registration of the Rental Unit with the City Building Department.
Designation of the Responsible Local Agent;
Payment in full of any and all required fees for registration, plus any
penalties that may have been imposed on the property; and
Inspection by the Building Department resulting in a determination
that the Rental Unit and the property complies with all City Ordinances
and state law.
Posting of the Certificate of Compliance.
Temporary certificates of compliance may be issued without prior inspection
by the Department for those occupied Rental Units which have not been inspected. Such temporary certificates of compliance may be issued as of the effective date of the initial registration and continue until an inspection date is established, to allow property Owners to operate such Rental Units until such time as an inspection may be made by the Department. At such time as an inspection is made and the Department has determined that provisions of this Ordinance have been complied with, the temporary certificate shall expire, and a certificate of compliance shall be issued according to this Ordinance.
Posting of the Certificate of Compliance.
The certificate of compliance shall be maintained at the office of the Responsible Agent or on the premises.
Section 5-252. Fees.
The City Council shall establish by resolution an appropriate fee for registration and inspections.
If an inspection is initiated by a complaint and no violation is found to exist, no inspection fee will be assessed against the Owner of the inspected Rental Unit in compliance.
Where a re-inspection must be made to ensure conformity with this Ordinance before a certificate of compliance is issued for those Rental Units that have been issued violation notices, the City will charge a separate inspection fee for every inspection when the violation has not been abated or corrected.
Section 5-253. Maintenance of Records.
All records, files and documents pertaining to the Rental Registration and Licensing and Rental Unit Inspection Program shall be maintained by the Department and made available to the public as required by State Law.
Section 5-254. Appeal, Severability and Captions.
CD5:27
Should the Department determine that the property is not in compliance with the City Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the City, from time to time, and/or any other City Ordinance, as amended, and for that reason deny the issuance of a certificate of compliance, or, should a certificate of compliance be suspended or revoked upon a determination by the Department that the Owner has failed to maintain the property in compliance with the aforementioned codes, laws and/or ordinances, the Owner shall have the right to appeal such determination in the following manner:
The Owner shall file the appeal with the City Council, in writing, within 15 days of the date of the determination from which the Owner is appealing. Filing of the appeal with the City Council shall stay the suspension or revocation of the certificate of compliance until such time as the City Council issues its final decision. The appeal shall contain a short and plain statement of the matters asserted by the Owner, including factual and legal bases upon which the Owner relies.
Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Council shall schedule a hearing and provide notice of the hearing to the Owner by sending written notice by first-class mail to the address listed on the Owner’s application form. The Owner may appear at the hearing in person, by agent or by attorney. If the Owner, or his agent or attorney, fails to appear at the hearing after proper notice, the City Council may proceed with the hearing and make its decision. The Owner shall be given an opportunity to present oral and written arguments on the issues of law and policy and an opportunity to present evidence and arguments on issues of fact.
The City Council shall issue a final decision, in writing, setting forth its findings within a reasonable period after the hearing is concluded. A copy of the decision shall be sent by first-class mail to the address listed on the Owner’s application form and to the agent or attorney that appeared at the hearing.
The City Council shall:
Affirm the determination of the Department in refusing to issue, or in
suspending or revoking the certificate of compliance; or
Reverse the determination of the Department and order the issuance
or reinstatement of the certificate of compliance.
If the City Council affirms the determination of the Department or there
is no timely appeal, the Property shall be vacated until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Department.
The City Council shall have no power to vary or modify any rules,
regulations, provisions or ordinances.
Section 5-255. Penalty.
Any Person who violates this Ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction fine of $500.00, subject to the procedures and sanctions contained in City of Keego Harbor Municipal Code, Chapter 1-7. Increased civil fines of $200.00 shall be imposed for repeated violation, which means a second or subsequent municipal civil infraction violation committed by a Person within any twelve (12) month period and for which a Person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. After the third violation of this
CD5:28
Ordinance committed by a Person within any twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00.
(Ord. No.417, 3-17-2011)
Secs. 5-262--5-295. Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 5-296. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Definitions or terms used in this article other than those listed in this section shall be as defined by the National Swimming Pool Institute (NSPI) or other nationally accepted standards:
Enforcing official means the building official of the city or such other official as the city council shall designate.
Private means that a swimming pool is not open to the public and is intended for the use of the resident or his immediate family and guests.
Swimming pool means any permanent outdoor artificially constructed pool, located either above or below grade, intended for swimming, wading or bathing, and having a depth of two feet or more at any point.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.01, 3-24-1966)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 5-297. BOCA code.
The applicable provisions of the Basic Building Code of the Building Officials Conference of America, Inc., shall govern the construction, alteration, installation, maintenance and operation, except as altered, changed or modified by the provisions of this article. Notice is given that a copy of the BOCA code is on file with the city clerk and is available for public inspection during working hours.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.02, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-298. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence construction of a swimming pool until a permit authorizing such work shall have been obtained from the enforcing official. The fee for such permit shall be as set by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.03, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-299. Application for permit.
Application for a permit to construct a swimming pool shall be approved by the enforcing official. Such application shall be accompanied by plans, specifications and calculations in duplicate, drawn to scale and in
CD5:29
sufficient detail to show the following:
(1) Plot plan with elevations and topography at not greater than one-foot contours for 50 feet measured radially from all points of the pool walls and all existing principal and accessory building within that radius.
(2) Pool dimensions, depths and volume in gallons.
(3) Filter system with type and size, filtrations and backwash capacities.
(4) Pool piping layout, with all pipe sizes and valves shown, and types of materials to be used.
(5) The rate capacity and head at filtration and backwash (where applicable) flows of the pool pump in gallons per minute with the size and type of motor.
(6) Disposal system for pool wastes.
(7) Mechanical and structural data and details.
(8) Location of sewer lines, and all water supplies and utilities, electrical, gas, telephone, etc., within 25 feet of the pool, and walls and private sewage disposal systems within 75 feet of the pool.
(9) Location of ditches, drains, culverts and watercourses within the plot area.
(10) Method to be employed to clean the pool (vacuum, etc.).
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.04, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-300. Location of outdoor pool.
(a) There shall be a distance of not less than six feet between the adjoining property line and the outside of any nonportable pool wall.
(b) There shall be a distance of not less than six feet between the outside of any nonportable pool wall and building located on the same lot.
(c) No swimming pool shall be located less than 25 feet from any front lot line.
(d) No swimming pool shall be located less than ten feet from any side street or alley right-of-way; and in the case of a corner lot the rear lot line of which abuts a lot on the side street, the edge of the pool nearest the side street shall be located not less than the front yard setback distance on the side street.
(e) No nonportable swimming pool shall be located in an easement.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.05, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-301. Protection of the general public.
CD5:30
For the protection of the general public, swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height. Such fence shall be of the cyclone or chain link type or their equivalent. The gates shall be of a self-closing and self-latching type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily available for children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is not in use for extended periods; however, if the entire premises of the residence is enclosed, this provision may be waived by the enforcing official upon inspection and approval.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.06, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-302. Water supply and waste disposal.
(a) Swimming pools shall be provided with a portable water supply.
(b) There shall be no cross connection between portable water systems and swimming pool circulation systems. The water supply line to the pool shall be protected against backflow of water by means of a fixed air gap of six inches or more above the highest possible water level, or by an approved vacuum breaker installed in an approved manner. No over-the-rim fill spout will be accepted unless located under a diving board or installed in an approved manner so as to remove any hazard.
(c) There shall be no direct connections with the private or public sewer system.
(d) All pool drainage and wastewater shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the enforcing official.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.07, 3-24-1966)
Cross References: Solid waste, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 23.
Sec. 5-303. Construction of nonportable pools.
(a) All types of equipment and material shall be approved by the enforcing official before installation. All work shall be done in a workmanship manner. The pool structures shall be engineered and designed to withstand the expected forces to which it may be subjected.
(b) A walkway or deck constructed of concrete or other approved material, three feet wide, sloped away from the pool shall be constructed around the perimeter of the pool. Walkway surface shall be reasonably skid-resistant.
(c) Excavations shall be protected in an approved manner for safety purposes.
(d) The design of the pool and surrounding area shall be constructed and arranged in such a manner that all scum, splash and deck water shall not return to the pool except through the filter system.
(e) The pool floor and walls shall have an approved impermeable surface.
(f) Diving boards shall be securely anchored and shall be installed with every consideration for safety in usage.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.08, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-304. Electrical.
CD5:31
All electrical installations or wiring in connection with swimming pools shall conform to the National Electrical Code and the ordinances of the city relative to swimming pools; and no electrical wires shall be permitted over the pool area, excepting public utility wires, including telephone, telegraph and electrical wires.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.09, 3-24-1966)
Cross References: Utilities, ch. 23.
Sec. 5-305. Recirculation system.
(a) Filters required.
(1) Every pool shall be equipped with a recirculation system capable of filtering the entire contents of the pool in 12 hours or less when the flow is calculated at a maximum of three gallons per minute per square foot of filter area.
(2) Filters shall be capable of maintaining reasonable clarity of pool water.
(3) All filters shall be equipped with satisfactory means to determine the necessity and frequency of cleaning (backwashing). Each filter system shall be provided with a visual means of determining when the filter has been restored to original cleanliness.
(4) Pressure filters shall be equipped with an air release at the high point in the system.
(5) Operating instructions shall be posted on every filter system, and all valves shall be properly designated with metal tags indicating their purpose.
(6) The tank containing the filter media or elements shall be constructed of steel, plastic or other suitable material, which will satisfactorily provide resistance to corrosion, with or without coating.
(b) Pressure sand-type filters.
(1) Sand-type filter systems shall be designed and installed to operate at a rate not to exceed three gallons per minute per square foot of filter area and to backwash at a minimum rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of surface area.
(2) Filter tanks shall be built for a minimum of 50 pounds working pressure and tested at 150 psi.
(3) The filter underdrain system shall have a distribution of at least 25 percent of the cross sectional area of the tank evenly distributed over the entire cross sectional area of the tank.
(4) Filter tanks shall be supported in a manner that will prevent tipping or other hazards due to settling.
(5) The influent shall be applied to the filter media surface in a manner which prevents direct discharge against the filter bed surface.
CD5:32
(6) Filter media shall be a hard, uniformly graded, silica material, or approved equivalent, with effective particle sizes between 0.35 and 0.80 millimeter in diameter, with uniformly coefficient between 1.2 and 1.75. There shall be no limestone or clay present.
(7) Filter media shall be no less than 19 inches in depth with a freeboard which shall permit effective backwashing of the filter media.
(8) Graded rock or approved equivalent shall be employed to support the filter media, which shall be clean, noncrushed, rounded, noncalcareous material. Supporting material shall be carefully graded by size and separately leveled in layers to satisfactorily support the filter media and distribute backwash water. Other equivalent methods or materials may be approved by the enforcing official.
(c) Diatomaceous filters. Diatomaceous filters shall be designated and installed to operate at a rate not to exceed three gallons per minute per square foot of filter area and shall meet the performance standards for pressure-type sand filters set forth in this section.
(d) Other filters. Other filters may be approved provided their performance meets the standards for pressure-type sand filters set forth in this section.
(e) Pool piping. Pool piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump will provide such flows. In general, the water velocity in the pool piping should not exceed ten feet per second. When velocity exceeds ten feet per second, calculations should be provided. The recirculating piping and fittings shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Vacuum fittings, if provided, in the pool shall be located in an accessible position below the water line.
(2) An outlet or inlet shall be placed at the deepest point in every pool for recirculating the pool water.
(3) Pool recirculating piping passing through the pool structure shall be type "L" copper tubing, or other type approved by the city engineer.
(4) Filtered water inlets shall be provided in sufficient quantity and shall be properly spaced to provide a maximum circulation of the main body and surface of the pool water. A minimum of two inlets shall be provided.
(f) Valves.
(1) Fullway valves shall be installed throughout to ensure proper functioning of the filtration and piping system.
(2) Valves shall be installed wherever necessary for proper operation and maintenance of the circulation system.
CD5:33
(3) Valves up to and including two inches in size shall be brass. Sizes over two inches may have cast iron or brass bodies. All working parts of valves shall be noncorrosive material.
(4) Combination valves may be installed if the materials and design comply with the intent of this article.
(g) Recirculation pumps.
(1) The recirculating pump shall have sufficient capacity to provide the rated flows of the filter system, without exceeding the head loss at which the pump will deliver such flows. Such pump shall be of a self-priming design if installed above the pool water line.
(2) A recirculating pump shall be equipped on the inlet side with an approved type hair and lint strainer. The basket of the strainer shall be noncorrosive and have an open screen surface of at least four times the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.10, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-306. Maintenance and operation.
(a) Generally. Pools and pool equipment shall be maintained and operated in a manner which will not contribute to health or safety hazards or to public nuisance.
(b) Germicidal treatment. Proper germicidal levels shall be maintained at all times during pool usage to protect health of users. Disinfecting agents shall be as approved by the city council.
(c) pH. pH (alkalinity and acidity) of the pool water shall be maintained as approved by the city council.
(d) Testing devices. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring pH and germicidal levels shall be provided by the owner and utilized to ensure safe pool operation.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.11, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-307. Use of pool.
No outdoor swimming pool shall be used between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. of any day.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.12, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-308. Responsibility for control.
No person shall use any private swimming pool unless the pool shall be under the direct control of the owner or some responsible adult person designated by the owner.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.13, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-309. Abandonment.
Failure to maintain any swimming pool or any part of a pool for a period of one year or more shall be
CD5:34
deemed to be conclusive proof of an intention to abandon the pool by the owner thereof, and such swimming pool or any part of a pool may be abated by the enforcing official in accordance with the provisions of section 5-306; however, any intentional abandonment through which a swimming pool constitutes a public nuisance may be summarily abated in accordance with the provisions of section 5-312.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.14, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-310. Inspections.
(a) Inspections during and after construction shall be made by the enforcing official, for the purpose of determining that all provisions of this article are being fulfilled and complied with.
(b) Final inspection and approval shall be required prior to pool usage. All pool installations must be completed, filled water and the filter system in operation at the time of the final inspection.
(c) The health officer and the enforcing official shall have the right at any reasonable hour to inspect any swimming pool for the purpose of determining compliance with the intent of this article.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.15, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-311. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.16, 3-24-1966)
Sec. 5-312. Public nuisance.
Each violation of this article are declared to be a public nuisance per se and notwithstanding the penal provisions of this article may be abated by injunctive or other appropriate relief.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1.17, 3-24-1966)
Cross References: Nuisances, § 10-31 et seq.
CD6:1
Chapter 6
BUSINESSES*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation of trades and occupations, § 2.3(n); licenses, § 2.3(q).
Cross References: Alcoholic liquor, ch. 3; emergency services, ch. 9; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 17; collection and disposal of commercial and industrial solid waste, § 18-106 et seq.; taxation, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 23.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 6-1--6-30. Reserved.
Article II. License
Sec. 6-31. Definitions.
Sec. 6-32. Purpose.
Sec. 6-33. License requirements.
Sec. 6-34. Procurement procedure for license.
Sec. 6-35. Conditions of license.
Sec. 6-36. Exemption from fee.
Sec. 6-37. Violation; penalty.
Secs. 6-38--6-70. Reserved.
Article III. Pool and Billiards
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6-71. Change of terminology.
Sec. 6-72. Prohibition.
Sec. 6-73. Grounds for forfeiture of license.
Sec. 6-74. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 6-75--6-95. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 6-96. Required information; fee.
Sec. 6-97. Issuance authorized.
Sec. 6-98. Right of cancellation, revocation.
Secs. 6-99--6-120. Reserved.
Division 3. Operation
Sec. 6-121. Location.
Sec. 6-122. Participation by underage persons.
Secs. 6-123--6-155. Reserved.
Article IV. Coin-Operated Machines
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6-156. Definitions.
Sec. 6-157. Gambling devices not permitted.
Sec. 6-158. License renewal; annual report; fee.
Sec. 6-159. Exemption.
Sec. 6-160. Penalties.
Secs. 6-161--6-180. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 6-181. Required.
CD6:2
Sec. 6-182. Application.
Sec. 6-183. Inspections.
Sec. 6-184. Review by city council.
Sec. 6-185. License fees.
Sec. 6-186. Requirements.
Sec. 6-187. Revocation or suspension.
Sec. 6-188. Notice of disciplinary action.
Secs. 6-189--6-210. Reserved.
Division 3. Operation
Sec. 6-211. Prohibitions and restrictions.
Sec. 6-212. Exempt organizations.
Sec. 6-213. Seizure and destruction of machine.
Secs. 6-214--6-245. Reserved.
Article V. Precious Metals and Gems
Sec. 6-246. Definitions.
Sec. 6-247. Administration of article.
Sec. 6-248. Application by a dealer.
Sec. 6-249. Allocation of fees.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 6-1--6-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
LICENSE
Sec. 6-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Business means any trade, occupation, profession, work, commerce or other activity owned or operated for profit by any person within the city, excluding, however, political, charitable or religious establishments or agencies of the United States, the state, or any political subdivisions thereof.
Licensing agent means the city clerk or such other city official or employee as may be designated by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 153, § II, 8-21-1975)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assist the city with information to provide more adequate police and fire protection; more equal and equitable real and personal property taxation; better efficiency and economy in furnishing public utility services within the city; more comprehensive and informed planning and zoning for uses of land and structures within the city; and to establish a registry of businesses operating within the city for the
CD6:3
general information of the public and for the promotion of the city.
(Ord. No. 153, § III, 8-21-1975)
Sec. 6-33. License requirements.
No person may commence or continue a business within the city without having first obtained a city license as hereinafter provided and without maintaining such license in current effect during any business operation or activity.
(Ord. No. 153, § IV, 8-21-1975)
Sec. 6-34. Procurement procedure for license.
No license to commence or continue a business shall be issued until the owner or operator shall have first submitted an application to the licensing agent of the city on a form provided by the licensing agent for such purposes. A fee set from time to time shall accompany the application. Upon the filing of a properly completed application and upon payment of the fee, the licensing agent shall issue a license to the person to commence or continue the business designated in the application if the business complies with the terms of this article. All moneys collected under this article shall be remitted to the city treasurer.
(Ord. No. 153, § V, 8-21-1975)
Sec. 6-35. Conditions of license.
The license issued under this article shall be effective until December 31 of the year issued, with renewals of the license to be issued upon application and payment of a fee set from time to time in the same manner as set forth in this article for the original issuance of the license. No license shall be issued by the licensing agent where the existing or proposed business would be illegal under any law or ordinance of the United States, the state, the county, or the city. No license may be transferred by the holder to any other person except upon prior approval of the city council. The licensing agent shall have the right of inspection of business premises to ensure compliance with this article. In the event of any noncompliance with the provisions of this article after a license has been issued, the same may be revoked by order of the licensing agent until the noncompliance has been corrected as determined by the agent. Appeal from revocation shall be made to the city council.
(Ord. No. 153, § VI, 8-21-1975)
Sec. 6-36. Exemption from fee.
No license fee shall be required to be paid of any establishment recognized by the laws of this state, any other state or the federal government or a bona fide political, charitable or religious establishment and which is situated within the city, nor any business licensed by the state or the county; however, proof of a current license from the state or the county must be submitted to the licensing agent of the city to obtain such exemption from payment of fee, whereupon the license will be issued without payment of the fee to the city.
(Ord. No. 153, § VII, 8-21-1975)
Sec. 6-37. Violation; penalty.
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction fine of a maximum fine of $500.00, subject to the procedures and sanction contained in the City of Keego Harbor Municipal Code,
CD6:4
Chapter 1-7 (Ord. No. 448, 04-18-2013)
Secs. 6-38--6-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
POOL AND BILLIARDS*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation and licensing of amusements, § 2.3(mm).
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-71. Change of terminology.
The use of the term "pool room" is prohibited and abolished, and the terms "billiard room" and "billiard parlor" are substituted.
(Ord. No. 29, § 1, 12-17-1957)
Sec. 6-72. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for hire any billiard table or pocket billiard table within the city limits except as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 29, § 2, 12-17-1957)
Sec. 6-73. Grounds for forfeiture of license.
Any person who shall twice be convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to all other penalties provided, forfeit any license granted in the provisions of this article and shall thereupon be disqualified from thereafter holding a license under this article.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8, 12-17-1957)
Sec. 6-74. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction, in addition to all other penalties provided in this article, be subject to the provisions of section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 29, § 9, 12-17-1957)
Secs. 6-75--6-95. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
CD6:5
Sec. 6-96. Required information; fee.
(a) Before any license under this article shall be granted, the application shall state the name of the applicant, the location of the premises, the number of billiard tables or pocket billiard tables, and the citizenship of the applicant.
(b) Before a license is issued, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a sum as set from time to time for each billiard table or pocket billiard table so to be kept, operated and maintained.
(Ord. No. 29, § 3, 12-17-1957)
Sec. 6-97. Issuance authorized.
Upon the filing of an application for a license under this division, the application shall be referred to the city clerk and if, after investigation by the city clerk, he shall report favorably upon the application, and if the city council shall determine that the applicant is a fit and proper person to conduct such tables, the city council shall authorize the city clerk to issue the applicant a license, which shall expire on the first Monday in June subsequent thereto; and if the application of the applicant is denied, the city clerk shall return to the applicant all license fees which have been paid by the applicant as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 29, § 4, 12-17-1957)
Sec. 6-98. Right of cancellation, revocation.
The city council reserves the right under this article to cancel or revoke any license granted under this division, at any time, when in its judgment, such act is deemed advisable; and in case of the revocation of the license, the licensee shall forfeit any and all license fees under the terms of this article.
(Ord. No. 29, § 5, 12-17-1957)
Secs. 6-99--6-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
OPERATION
Sec. 6-121. Location.
All business carried on under the terms of this article shall be in a single room; and the use of stalls, partitions, anterooms, and rooms adjoining the place where the tables are kept and which are operated in connection with the place of business is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 29, § 6, 12-17-1957)
Sec. 6-122. Participation by underage persons.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor child under 17 years of age to be or remain in any room or place where any billiard table or pocket billiard table is kept or operated or any room or hall adjoining or used in connection with any such place or room unless such person is accompanied by his parent or guardian.
CD6:6
(b) No minor child under 17 years of age shall be permitted to be or remain in any room or place where any billiard table or pocket billiard table is kept or operated or any room or hall adjoining or used in connection with any such place or rooms unless such person is accompanied by his parent or guardian.
(Ord. No. 29, § 7, 12-17-1957)
Secs. 6-123--6-155. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation and licensing of amusements, § 2.3(mm).
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-156. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accessory to a principal use means the commercial use of a coin-operated amusement device which is not an arcade.
Arcade means any place, premises, establishment or room open to the public set aside in a commercial establishment in which there is offered the use by the general public a total of five or more coin-operated amusement devices.
Cigarette vending machine means any automatic vending machine used for the sale of cigarettes and matches, and controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins. It shall not include machines or devices used solely for the vending of service items, food or confections.
Coin-operated amusement device means any machine, instrument or contrivance, whether video, electronic or mechanical, which may be operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin, token, trade token, slug, plate, disc, key, card or similar object, whether the device is activated by insertion of such object or is activated after paying a fee, membership fee or admission price, or their equivalent, which may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score or whether operated by hand, electrically, or by any other form of power.
Jukebox means any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
Owner means any person who owns, operates or conducts any place, premises, establishment or room set
CD6:7
aside in commercial establishments in which any coin-operated amusement device or coin-operated music device may be operated.
(Ord. No. 208, § 1.01, 5-20-1982)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-157. Gambling devices not permitted.
Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any laws of the state.
(Ord. No. 208, § 2.01, 5-20-1982)
State Law References: Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq., MSA 28.533 et seq.
Sec. 6-158. License renewal; annual report; fee.
(a) Prior to January 1 of each year, the council may renew a license under this article for another year upon application.
(b) The licensee shall file an annual report detailing any change in ownership or management, and providing a current list of the number, type and location of all coin-operated amusement devices, including billiard tables, on the premises.
(c) The renewal of a license shall otherwise be subject to the same terms and requirements as required for an original license and payment of the annual license fee.
(Ord. No. 208, §§ 13.01, 13.02, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-159. Exemption.
Any coin-operated amusement device licensed by the city under article III of this chapter shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 208, § 15.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-160. Penalties.
The owner, manager or employee of any establishment who shall violate any of the terms of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 208, § 16.01, 5-20-1982)
Secs. 6-161--6-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
Sec. 6-181. Required.
CD6:8
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee or manager, to establish, operate, conduct or maintain any cigarette vending machine, arcade or coin-operated amusement device without first obtaining a license for the machine, the device, and the arcade from the city clerk pursuant to this division.
(Ord. No. 208, § 3.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-182. Application.
(a) The application for cigarette vending machines, arcades or any coin-operated amusement device shall contain the following information:
(1) The names in full, dates of birth, fingerprints, current addresses, motor vehicle operators license number and type of legal interest of all owners and/or managers.
(2) Prior felony and moral turpitude corrections of the applicant, owner and/or manager, if any.
(3) Place where machines or devices are to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that place.
(4) Description of the machine to be covered by the license, mechanical features, name of manufacturer and serial number and owner of the machine if different from the applicant.
(5) A scale diagram of the premises on which the business will be conducted, showing the location of each coin-operated amusement device on the premises, and each exit from the premises.
(6) If the applicant is a corporation authorized to do business in this state, the application shall be made by the agent of the corporation who will have principal charge of the premises established; and the application shall contain all the facts and recommendations required in the case of an individual. The license issued to a corporation is revocable upon a change in the agent managing the premises, and a new license may be required by the city council before a new agent may take charge of the premises.
(7) If the applicant is a partnership, each active partner shall join in the application for the license and shall furnish the information and recommendations required of an individual applicant.
(b) No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over 18 years of age and a citizen of the United States. The failure to provide any required information for a license shall constitute sufficient reason to refuse issuance of a license.
(c) Each application shall be accompanied by the specified fee, payable to the city treasurer, for the use of the city upon issuance of the license.
(Ord. No. 208, § 5.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-183. Inspections.
(a) An application for an arcade license shall be made out in triplicate, one copy being referred to the chief of police, to the city building official and to the fire chief.
CD6:9
(b) The chief of police shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate the arcade, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character, and either approve or disapprove the application in writing.
(c) The building official shall inspect all wiring and connections to determine if the arcade complies with the building code of the city and that all zoning and building regulations have been satisfied and shall either approve or disapprove the application in writing.
(d) The fire chief shall inspect the proposed location to ascertain that all fire prevention regulations are satisfied and shall either approve or disapprove the application in writing.
(e) No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the chief of police, the building official and the fire chief.
(Ord. No. 208, § 6.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-184. Review by city council.
If an application under this division and subsequent reports are satisfactory and if the city council is satisfied that the issuance of such license would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare and morals of citizens of the city, the city council shall grant a license for a period of one year.
(Ord. No. 208, § 7.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-185. License fees.
(a) Every applicant under this division, before being granted a license shall pay the annual license fee set from time to time for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each cigarette vending machine, jukebox, or coin-operated amusement device.
(b) In addition to the required license fees, an applicant whose retail service establishment offers to the public, for profit, the uses of coin-operated amusement devices as his primary and principal business operation shall pay an additional annual license fee set from time to time. These business operations are commonly known as arcades.
(c) Any license issued under this division shall expire on December 31 following its issuance, and successive renewals of the license shall require a new application and license fee for each device and arcade.
(Ord. No. 208, § 8.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-186. Requirements.
(a) Display of license.
(1) The license provided for in this division shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
CD6:10
(2) Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the city clerk to such effect and the giving of the description and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him.
(3) If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the city clerk, giving the street and number of the new location. The new location shall be approved in the same manner as provided in section 6-183.
(b) Inspection. Each licensee shall at all times open each portion of a licensed premises for the inspection by law enforcement agencies and any city department for the purpose of enforcing any provisions of this Code.
(c) Operator. Each arcade shall have at least one adult operator on the premises at all times the premises are open to the public and who has been certified by and registered with the city clerk following application. The operator's application shall include the following information:
(1) The operator's date of birth, correct name, post office address and residence, the length of time the operator has resided within the state, and the operator's places of residence for the five years preceding application.
(2) Whether the operator has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude.
(d) Space. Only one license for each coin-operated amusement device shall be issued for each ten square feet of usable floor space.
(e) Accessory uses. If the coin-operated amusement devices are accessory to a principal use, only one device may be licensed for each 750 square feet of usable floor area of the premises. Usable floor area does not include accessory unoccupied areas, restroom areas, storage areas, thickness of walls, bowling lane areas, rink areas, court areas and the like.
(f) Aisle space. Six feet of aisle space is required for coin-operated amusement devices or groups of devices in all instances.
(g) Limitation on devices. No arcade shall contain more than 35 coin-operated amusement devices.
(Ord. No. 208, § 9.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-187. Revocation or suspension.
(a) The city council is vested with the authority to revoke, suspend or place on probationary status any license granted under this division for any length of time. A licensee shall be given not less than three days' notice of the date of hearing in any manner providing actual notice of the date, time and place, and the alleged infractions or violations by the licensee. At such hearing, the licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, have the assistance of counsel, produce witnesses and evidence, and cross examine witnesses. The council shall base any
CD6:11
action upon competent and trustworthy evidence introduced at the hearing.
(b) If the council shall find that any of the following situations exist at the premises of the licensee, the council shall take the disciplinary action it deems in the best public interest:
(1) Intoxicating liquors are either sold or drunk on premises not licensed to sell liquor, or persons under the influence of intoxicating liquors are permitted to frequent, be in, or remain on the premises.
(2) Drugs or narcotics are sold, used or found on the premises or on the person of anyone on the premises, or that persons under the influence of drugs or narcotics are permitted to frequent, be in, or remain on the premises.
(3) The licensee has an employee, or permits on the premises a promoter, defined as one who regularly or frequently engages in competition on coin-operated amusement devices for value or prizes with patrons of coin-operated amusement devices and shares the value of prizes received with the owner or manager of the premises.
(4) Gambling in any form is permitted in or about the premises.
(5) The licensee and/or agent of the licensee advertises or awards prizes to customers based upon competition between persons using the coin-operated amusement devices; however, nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to make lawful tournament prizes, or prizes or awards based upon one person's competition or scoring results with a coin-operated amusement device.
(6) A consistent pattern of negligence in the manner of management and control of the premises which results in the premises' becoming a nuisance to the surrounding environs.
(c) Any license issued in accordance with the requirements of this division may be suspended or revoked by the council for any violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 208, §§ 10.01--10.05, 10.07--10.09, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-188. Notice of disciplinary action.
If disciplinary action is taken on a licensee under this division, the city clerk shall notify the licensee, his agent, or employers in charge of the premises in writing; and such disciplinary action shall become effective from and after 12:00 midnight of the day.
(Ord. No. 208, § 10.10, 5-20-1982)
Secs. 6-189--6-210. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
OPERATION
Sec. 6-211. Prohibitions and restrictions.
CD6:12
(a) It shall be considered a violation of this article for any licensee to permit or suffer:
(1) Any person under 14 years of age to be present in the premises unless the parent or guardian of such child shall be present, or the child is accompanied by a brother or sister, either of whom is 18 years of age or older.
State Law References: Amusements and exhibitions, attendance of minors unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, MCL 750.141, MSA 28.336.
(2) Any person to operate a coin-operated amusement device, or use or occupy the premises where coin-operated amusement devices of all kinds, including billiard tables, are located between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any weekday, and 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday or the eve of any nationally recognized holiday; however, this time limitation shall not apply to those premises lawfully licensed to sell liquor, beer or wine by the glass.
(3) Any person under the age of 17 years to occupy the licensed premises during the hours when school is in session.
(4) A coin-operated amusement device to display, expose, produce or emit any motion picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing, song, recitation, speech, music or other matter which depicts or describes nudity, which means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, and human female breasts below a point above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a visibly turgid state. A female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and areola only are covered; nor shall a device depict or describe:
a. Sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation, or any other act by a person involving the touching or contacting of the genitals or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
b. The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic region or genitals or their stimulation by any device, tool, implement or object.
c. The actual or simulated displaying or exposure or simulations of the pubic hair, pubic region, anus, vulva, or genitals of humans, brutes, beasts or animals.
d. The exposure of the postpubertal female breast. A female breast is considered exposed if any portion of the breast below a line above the top of the areola is exposed.
e. Artificial devices or inanimate objects employed to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this subsection.
(5) The operation and/or use of devices for which the annual device fee required in section 6-185 has not been paid.
(Ord. No. 208, §§ 11.01--11.06, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-212. Exempt organizations.
CD6:13
Nothing in this article regarding the making of application for a license and the payment of a license fee shall be construed to apply to any fraternal lodge, school or church organization incorporated under the laws of the state or chartered by a superior governing body incorporated under the laws of this state and organized exclusively for fraternal, religious or charitable purposes, and conducting its affairs in a room or auditorium occupied by and under the control of such lodge, school or church organization; however, the exemptions contained in this section shall not extend so as to exempt such lodge, school or church organization from prosecution for violation of any of the other provisions of this article whether licensed under this article or not.
(Ord. No. 208, § 12.01, 5-20-1982)
Sec. 6-213. Seizure and destruction of machine.
If the chief of police shall have reason to believe any coin-operated amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded; and if upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as a gambling device the exhibitor shall be found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police.
(Ord. No. 208, § 14.01, 5-20-1982)
State Law References: Seizure and destruction of gambling apparatus, MCL 750.308 et seq., MSA 28.540 et seq.
Secs. 6-214--6-245. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS*
__________
* Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
State Law References: Precious metal and gem dealer act, MCL 445.481 et seq., MSA 19.720(1) et seq.
__________
Sec. 6-246. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Agent or employee means a person who, for compensation or valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer.
Dealer means any person who engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this state.
Gold means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal.
Jewelry means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious gem.
Local police agency means the police agency of the city.
Platinum means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and the chemical element symbol
CD6:14
of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal.
Precious gem means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline, or pearl.
Precious item means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver or platinum. Precious item does not include the following:
(1) Coins, commemorative medals and tokens struck by or in behalf of a government or private mint.
(2) Bullion bars and disc of the type traded by banks and commodity exchanges.
(3) Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered under this article, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from a manufacturer.
(4) Industrial machinery or equipment.
(5) An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item was purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales receipt.
(6) An item which is received for alteration, redesign or repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer.
(7) An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.00.
(8) Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver or platinum which are recoverable as a byproduct.
(9) Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer.
Silver means elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal.
(Ord. No. 203, § 1.01, 12-17-1981)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-247. Administration of article.
The chief of police shall be responsible for reviewing all applications for a certificate of registration and upon approval shall transmit a copy of the application and the certificate of registration to the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 203, § 2.01, 12-17-1981)
Sec. 6-248. Application by a dealer.
(a) A dealer who applies for a certificate of registration shall submit the following information on the form provided:
CD6:15
(1) His name, home address, phone number, driver's license number, date of birth, and right thumb print (print to be affixed to the application by the police department). Applications for more than one establishment shall be made on separate application forms.
(2) The name, address, telephone number and hours of the dealer's business. If the dealer's business is a corporation, an updated copy of the articles of incorporation or a valid certified copy of the assumed name certificate from the county clerk must be provided.
(3) The name, address, date of birth and right thumb print of each employee or agent of the dealer.
(b) The dealer shall also submit a signed statement indicating that he has read and understands the provisions of Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq., MSA 19.720(1) et seq.), as provided to him by the police department, and further that the dealer has informed his agents or employees, and will immediately inform all new agents or employees, as to the provisions of such act.
(c) The dealer shall submit a signed statement that neither he nor any of his agents or employees has been convicted of a felony under Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq., MSA 19.720(1) et seq.) or under section 535 Public Act No. 328 of 1931 (MCL 750.535, MSA 28.803), within the five-year period preceding the date of the application, or convicted of a misdemeanor under such laws within a one-year period preceding the date of the application.
(d) The dealer shall submit proof of proper zoning or other special exception permits as required by the zoning board of appeals or planning commission of the city.
(e) The dealer shall pay a fee set from time to time for each licensed establishment in the city.
(Ord. No. 203, § 3.01, 12-17-1981)
Sec. 6-249. Allocation of fees.
The funds collected pursuant to this article shall be credited to the general funds of the police department for the administration of this article and shall be in addition to the police department's budget.
(Ord. No. 203, § 4.01, 12-17-1981)
Chapter 7
ELECTIONS*
__________
* Charter References: Elections, § 10.1 et seq.
Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
State Law References: Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq.
__________
Sec. 7-1. Precinct.
Sec. 7-1. Precinct.
Pursuant to section 10.2 of the Charter, there is established a single precinct within the city, numbered Precinct No. 1.
(Ord. No. 265, § 1.01, 6-28-1989)
State Law References: Election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq., MSA 6.1654 et seq.
Chapter 8
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
__________
* Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
State Law References: Continuity of government during an emergency, Mich. Const. art. IV, § 39; emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.; governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq., MSA 3.4(1) et seq.; emergency interim local succession act, MCL 31.101 et seq., MSA 5.5000(1) et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
Sec. 8-2. Political activity.
Sec. 8-3. Oath.
Sec. 8-4. Continuity of government.
Sec. 8-5. Penalty.
Sec. 8-6. Scope.
Secs. 8-7--8-40. Reserved.
Article II. Office of Emergency Management
Sec. 8-41. Creation of.
Secs. 8-42--8-75. Reserved.
Article III. Mayor
Sec. 8-76. Powers and duties.
Sec. 8-77. Emergency powers.
Sec. 8-78. Effective date.
Sec. 8-79. Penalty.
Secs. 8-80--8-110. Reserved.
Article IV. Emergency Management Coordinator
Sec. 8-111. Powers and duties.
Secs. 8-112--8-145. Reserved.
Article V. Plan
Sec. 8-146. Adoption.
Secs. 8-147--8-180. Reserved.
Article VI. Disaster Relief Forces
Sec. 8-181. Powers and duties.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property
resulting from a natural or manmade cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders.
Disaster relief forces means all agencies of state, county and municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees, and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this chapter or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this chapter.
Emergency means a condition resulting from disaster which cannot be handled by normal operating personnel and facilities.
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, for protection against and to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by natural disaster.
(Ord. No. 68, § 1.01, 11-21-1961)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 8-2. Political activity.
No organization for emergency management established under the authority of this chapter shall participate in any form of political activity nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes.
(Ord. No. 68, § 6.01, 11-21-1961)
Sec. 8-3. Oath.
Each person appointed to serve in the office of emergency management shall take an oath in writing as prescribed by law pertaining to emergency management before entering upon his duties.
(Ord. No. 68, § 7.01, 11-21-1961)
Sec. 8-4. Continuity of government.
(a) The city council, that is, those surviving, will convene at the city hall if possible, and if not possible, at the nearest safe place in the city. If the mayor is unable to perform the duties of his office, the mayor pro tem shall serve as mayor. If both the mayor and the mayor pro tem are unable to perform the duties of the office of the mayor, the member of the council who has served on the council for the longest current continuous length of time shall serve as mayor. The mayor pro tem or a member of the council shall serve as mayor until a mayor is elected and takes office.
(b) The members present shall elect a mayor and a mayor pro tem.
(c) The members present shall have power to make temporary appointments to fill vacancies, to take such temporary measures and to make such rules and regulations as they deem necessary to temporarily meet the emergency pending replacement of those persons made absent by the emergency. As soon as duly elected persons are seated on the council, all actions temporarily taken shall be reviewed, rescinded, repealed, modified or affirmed as the council shall determine.
(d) It shall be the duty of the office of emergency management to forthwith ascertain and notify the person who shall be responsible for convening the council of the nearest safe place to convene.
(Ord. No. 68, § 8.01, 11-21-1961)
Sec. 8-5. Penalty.
Any person willfully violating any provisions of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order lawfully issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 68, § 11.01, 11-21-1961)
Sec. 8-6. Scope.
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes.
(Ord. No. 68, § 10.01, 11-21-1961)
Secs. 8-7--8-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 8-41. Creation of.
(a) There is created within the executive branch of the city government a department to be known as the office of emergency management with a coordinator of emergency management, who shall be the head of the department. The coordinator shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. He shall receive such salary for his services as the city council may prescribe by resolution or ordinance. Within the appropriations for the office, the coordinator may employ such technical, clerical, stenographic or other personnel and may make necessary expenditures as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
(b) No person shall be ineligible for appointment as a member of the office of emergency management because he holds any other public office or trust; nor shall any person forfeit his right to any public office or trust by reason of his appointment under this article, notwithstanding any contrary provisions of law.
(c) The coordinator may also be appointed coordinator of any other city, village or township emergency management agency.
(Ord. No. 68, § 2.01, 11-21-1961)
Secs. 8-42--8-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
MAYOR*
__________
* Cross References: Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.
__________
Sec. 8-76. Powers and duties.
In the event of an emergency, the mayor, or in his absence or inability to serve the mayor pro tem, as conservator of the peace, shall:
(1) Declare a state of emergency within the city, thereby placing in effect the emergency management control plan required by this chapter and designate the area or areas within the city involved. The state of emergency shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except with consent of the city council.
(2) As soon as may be thereafter, convene the city council to perform its legislative and administrative functions as the situation may demand. The council shall have the power to terminate the state of emergency.
(3) Request the state, its agencies or political subdivisions, to send aid if the situation is beyond the control of the regular and disaster relief forces.
(4) Have the power to command services and the use of equipment and facilities for such work and duties as the city may require to aid the regular and disaster relief forces in time of emergency.
(Ord. No. 68, § 3.01, 11-21-1961)
Charter References: Duties of mayor, § 4.2.
Sec. 8-77. Emergency powers.
(a) The mayor may promulgate such reasonable orders, rules and regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation within the affected area or areas under control. These orders, rules and regulations may provide for:
(1) The control of traffic;
(2) Designation of specific zones within the area or areas in which occupancy and use of buildings and ingress and egress of persons and vehicles may be prohibited or regulated;
(3) Control of places of amusement and assembly and of persons on public streets and thoroughfares;
(4) Establishment of a curfew;
(5) Control of the sale, transportation and use of alcoholic beverages and liquors; and
(6) Control of the sale, carrying and use of firearms or other dangerous weapons, ammunition, explosives and flammable materials or liquids deemed to be dangerous to the public safety.
The mayor may also issue such other orders, rules and regulations, without being limited by this section.
(b) The mayor, or in his absence or inability to serve the mayor pro tem, shall have the power to direct disaster relief forces to the aid of the state or its political subdivisions subject to council review as soon as practicable.
(Ord. No. 68, § 3.01, 11-21-1961; Ord. No. 103, § 1.01, 3-26-1968)
Sec. 8-78. Effective date.
Orders, rules and regulations promulgated under this article shall be effective from the date and in the manner prescribed and shall be made public as provided in such orders, rules and regulations. Such orders, rules and regulations may be amended, modified or rescinded in like manner from time to time by the mayor during the pendency of the emergency but shall cease to be in effect upon declaration by the mayor that the emergency no longer exists.
(Ord. No. 103, § 3.01, 3-26-1968)
Sec. 8-79. Penalty.
The violation of any orders, rules and regulations made in conformity with this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor where such order, rule or regulation states that the violation shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 103, § 4.01, 3-26-1968)
Secs. 8-80--8-110. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR*
__________
* Cross References: Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.
__________
Sec. 8-111. Powers and duties.
(a) The coordinator of emergency management shall be executive head of the office of emergency management and shall have the responsibility for the organization, administration, and operation of the emergency management plan subject to the direction and control of the city council.
(b) The coordinator shall be responsible for public relations, information and education regarding all phases of emergency management.
(c) The coordinator shall be responsible for the development of an emergency management plan and upon adoption shall be responsible for such implementation and revision of the plan as to maintain it on a current state of readiness at all times.
(d) The coordinator shall coordinate all activities for emergency management and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with all other interested and affected agencies, public and private.
(e) The coordinator shall coordinate the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency management purposes.
(f) The coordinator may issue proper insignit and papers to disaster relief forces and other people directly concerned with emergency management.
(Ord. No. 68, § 4.01, 11-21-1961)
Secs. 8-112--8-145. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
PLAN
Sec. 8-146. Adoption.
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be adopted by resolution of the council upon the recommendations of the coordinator of emergency management. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
(Ord. No. 68, § 5.01, 11-21-1961)
Secs. 8-147--8-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
DISASTER RELIEF FORCES*
__________
* Cross References: Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.
__________
Sec. 8-181. Powers and duties.
All disaster relief forces while on duty shall have the duties, rights, privileges and immunity accorded them by Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.), as well as any other statute, resolution or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 68, § 9.01, 11-21-1961)
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY SERVICES*
__________
* Cross References: Businesses, ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, ch. 11.
State Law References: Authority of local government to operate ambulance or life support services, MCL 333.20948, MSA 14.15(20948).
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 9-1--9-30. Reserved.
Article II. Alarm Systems
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9-31. Purpose.
Sec. 9-32. Definitions.
Sec. 9-33. Permits required; fees.
Sec. 9-34. Sale or installation of system; license required.
Sec. 9-35. Automatic telephone alarm systems prohibited.
Secs. 9-36--9-55. Reserved.
Division 2. Installation and Operation
Sec. 9-56. Audible alarms; locating information required.
Sec. 9-57. Duration of audible alarms limited.
Sec. 9-58. Multiple units of occupancy within building; separate alarm system required.
Secs. 9-59--9-80. Reserved.
Division 3. False Alarms
Sec. 9-81. False alarms; fees; revocation procedure.
Sec. 9-82. Alarm use terminated upon revocation; reinstatement upon payment of fees.
Sec. 9-83. Exceptions to false alarms.
Sec. 9-84. False alarm warning notice.
Sec. 9-85. Penalties.
Secs. 9-86--9-120. Reserved.
Article III. Emergency Response Cost Recovery
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9-121--9-140. Reserved.
Division 2. Individuals Under the Influence of Alcoholic Beverages or Controlled Substances
Sec. 9-141. Purpose.
Sec. 9-142. Definitions.
Sec. 9-143. Liability for expense of an emergency response.
Secs. 9-144--9-165. Reserved.
Division 3. Hazardous Materials
Sec. 9-166. Definitions.
Sec. 9-167. Charge against person liable; collection of debt.
Sec. 9-168. Tri-City Fire Department to submit bill.
Sec. 9-169. Failure to pay; Tri-City Fire Department to sue to recover cost.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 9-1--9-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
ALARM SYSTEMS*
__________
* State Law References: Private security guards and alarm systems, MCL 338.1051 et seq., MSA 18.185(1) et seq.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 9-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is declared as follows:
(1) To license and regulate alarm systems;
(2) To establish fees payable to the city for responding to certain false alarms;
(3) To require certain permit holders to furnish the police department locating information;
(4) To establish a time limit on external alarm signals;
(5) To regulate the use of automatic dialers;
(6) To require separate alarm systems in certain multiple-occupancy housing units; and
(7) To provide for fines and penalties for the violations of this article.
(Ord. No. 238, § 2.01, 9-19-1985)
Sec. 9-32. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device arranged to signal the presence of a hazard, or situation requiring urgent attention and to which the police or fire department is expected to respond.
Alarm user means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm
system at a premises, the person using such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this section are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located for an attempted unauthorized intrusion or other illegal act. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitted outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject to this section.
Automatic telephone alarm system means a device that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other means initiate the automatic calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public phone company for the purpose of delivering a recorded message.
False alarm means an alarm condition which is registered at the police department, fire department or elsewhere which results in an audible signal or through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or user of an alarm system or of his employee or agent. Also included is any alarm condition registered at the police department, fire department or elsewhere not resulting from criminal activity for which the alarm was intended, or in case of a fire alarm any alarm condition which is registered at the fire department or elsewhere not resulting from a fire or potential fire condition.
Subscriber includes but is not limited to any public service utility, fire department or police agency.
(Ord. No. 238, § 3.01, 9-19-1985)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 9-33. Permits required; fees.
Notwithstanding the provisions in this article, all persons owning and/or leasing or occupying premises upon which a burglar system has been installed and maintained, shall, from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived obtain a permit from the city. Permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 238, § 4.01, 9-19-1985)
Sec. 9-34. Sale or installation of system; license required.
No person shall engage in the business of providing for the sale, installation, operation and/or maintenance of a burglar or fire alarm system unless properly licensed by the state.
(Ord. No. 238, § 5.01, 9-19-1985)
Sec. 9-35. Automatic telephone alarm systems prohibited.
It is prohibited and a violation of this article for any person to sell, install, operate, adjust, arrange for or contract to furnish an automatic telephone alarm system in violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 238, § 6.01, 9-19-1985)
Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation of trades and occupations, § 2.3(n).
Secs. 9-36--9-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
INSTALLATION AND OPERATION
Sec. 9-56. Audible alarms; locating information required.
No person shall maintain an alarm system which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visible signal, which signal can be heard or seen outside the premises protected by the alarm system, and which signal is disturbing to the peace and quiet of the surrounding area, unless that person has first furnished to the chief of police the following: the name, telephone number and address of the premises where the alarm system is located and also the names and telephone numbers of at least two other persons who may be reached at any time day or night and who, within a 30-minute response time, can open the premises in which the alarm system is installed and deactivate the audible and/or visual signal.
(Ord. No. 238, § 7.01, 9-19-1985)
Sec. 9-57. Duration of audible alarms limited.
No person shall use, install or direct to be installed any audio alarm system which emits a sound and/or visual signal for a period longer than 15 minutes from the time of the initial signaling of the device.
(Ord. No. 238, § 7.02, 9-19-1985)
Sec. 9-58. Multiple units of occupancy within building; separate alarm system required.
Separate systems are required whenever a single building contains more than one unit of occupancy and each unit has a separate entrance. If such occupant elects to install an alarm system, such person shall be required to have a separate alarm system for each such business located in such building. Whenever a multiple housing residential structure shall have separate entrances for each occupancy unit and such occupant elects to have an alarm system, each separate entrance to the occupancy unit shall contain separate alarm systems.
(Ord. No. 238, § 8.01, 9-19-1985)
Secs. 9-59--9-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
FALSE ALARMS
Sec. 9-81. False alarms; fees; revocation procedure.
Any person operating an alarm system experiencing more than one false alarm as described above within one calendar year shall pay to the City of Keego Harbor false alarm fees, or in the event of false fire alarms, the fees shall be paid to the tri-city fire authority, as herein described:
Second false alarm . . . . . $25.00
Third false alarm . . . . . $50.00
Fourth false alarm . . . . $75.00
Fifth and subsequent false alarms . . . . . $100.00 and alarm permit subject to revocation.
Whenever there are more than five false alarms within a calendar year emanating from a specific occupancy unit, such alarm system shall be determined defective. Upon written notice by the City of Keego Harbor Police or tri-city fire department to the owner or lessee, such owner or lessee shall within ten days from the date of said notice, cause the alarm system to be inspected by a licensed, competent alarm system contractor who shall within ten days from the date of such inspection file a written report with the City of Keego Harbor Police Department and tri-city fire department of the results of his inspection of the system, together with the finding or probable cause of the false alarms and the measures implemented to eliminate the same. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or failure to eliminate the occurrence of any additional false alarm(s) may result in the revocation of a permit. A written notice of revocation, stating the cause or causes therefor, shall be delivered to the permittee personally or sent by registered mail. Unless a written request for a meeting is filed with the City of Keego Harbor Chief of Police, tri-city fire department fire chief, or his designated representative within ten days from the receipt of the notice of revocation, a permit shall be revoked and permittee shall immediately discontinue operation of a burglar or fire alarm system. If a meeting is requested hereunder it shall take place within ten days of that request. The permittee at that time shall have the opportunity to present written and oral evidence as to why the revocation of said permit would not be justified. If it is determined at that meeting that the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article and that the revocation is justified, the City of Keego Harbor Chief of Police or tri-city fire department fire chief shall issue a written finding of his recommendation to that effect with the City of Keego Harbor Clerk.
(Ord. No. 238, § 9.01, 9-19-1985; Ord. No. 354, § 1.01, 12-16-1999; Ord. No. 453, § 9.81, 04-16-2015)
Sec. 9-82. Alarm use terminated upon revocation; reinstatement upon payment of fees.
A permittee shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system upon being notified by the City of Keego Harbor Clerk by certified mail of the revocation of the permit. A permittee whose permit has been revoked may reapply as provided for herein if any and all false alarm fees have been paid.
(Ord. No. 238, § 9.01, 9-19-1985; Ord. No. 354, § 1.01, 12-16-1999)
Sec. 9-83. Exceptions to false alarms.
Alarm conditions caused by the following extenuating circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and the City of Keego Harbor or tri-city fire authority shall charge no false alarm fee:
(a) Alarm system malfunctions, if corrective measures have been instituted within a 72-hour period with notification to the City of Keego Harbor Police provided that the alarm user presents documentation of repair service having been performed by the alarm company to remedy a malfunction.
(b) Alarm conditions being activated by persons working on the alarm system with prior notification to the City of Keego Harbor Police Department and/or tri-city fire department.
(c) Alarms which can be substantiated as being activated by disruption or disturbance of Michigan Bell Telephone Company facilities or motor vehicle-utility pole accidents or by extreme storm conditions.
(Ord. No. 238, § 10.01, 9-19-1985; Ord. No. 354, § 1.01, 12-16-1999)
Sec. 9-84. False alarm warning notice.
The City of Keego Harbor Police Department or tri-city fire department shall mail a false alarm notice to the alarm user following each false alarm occurrence indicating therein the appropriate warning of fee as prescribed by this article.
(Ord. No. 238, § 11.01, 9-19-1985; Ord. No. 354, § 1.01, 12-16-1999)
Sec. 9-85. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the terms of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to the provisions of section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 238, § 14.01, 9-19-1985)
Secs. 9-86--9-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY*
__________
* Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 9-121--9-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES*
__________
* Cross References: Alcoholic liquor, ch. 3.
__________
Sec. 9-141. Purpose.
The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances. In addition, the city finds that in traffic, accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. In addition, the city finds that persons that are under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances are more likely to cause personal injury and/or property damage due to physical altercations. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police, firefighting and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle or
otherwise behaving while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances.
(Ord. No. 292, § 1, 6-16-1994)
Sec. 9-142. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Emergency response means:
(1) The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, emergency medical and rescue services by the city, or by a private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, to an incident resulting in an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance;
(2) An incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when a driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance; or
(3) An incident resulting in the dispatch of a police officer or firefighting, emergency medical and rescue services by the city whereby an individual is involved in a physical altercation while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance.
Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city or to a private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, when making an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue services at the scene of the incident. These costs further include all identifiable salaries and wages of the city personnel responding to the incident; all salaries and wages of the city personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation; all costs connected with the administration and provision of all chemical tests of his blood, breath or urine; and all costs related to any prosecution of the person causing the incident.
(Ord. No. 292, § 2, 6-16-1994)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 9-143. Liability for expense of an emergency response.
(a) Person responsible. Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response if, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance, such person's behavior or operation of a motor vehicle proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency response.
(b) Presumptions. For the purpose of this division, a person is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, when his physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree where a chemical analysis of his blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his blood was 0.07 gram or more per 100 milliliters of blood. This condition presumes that a person no longer has the ability to behave or to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence.
(c) Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this division. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city and/or the Tri-Cities Fire Department for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract expressed or implied.
(d) Cost recovery schedule. The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of costs to be charged and applied as defined recoverable expenses of an emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the police department.
(e) Billing. The chief of police or the chief of the Tri-Cities Fire Department may, within ten days of receiving itemized costs incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this division. The bill shall require full payment in 30 days from the date of service.
(f) Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any failure by the person described in this division as liable for the expense of an emergency response to pay the bill within 30 days of service shall be considered in default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by law.
(Ord. No. 292, § 3, 6-16-1994)
Secs. 9-144--9-165. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS*
__________
* Cross References: Environment, ch. 10.
__________
Sec. 9-166. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Costs and expenses of response means reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city, or the Tri-City Fire Department, making a response to a hazardous material fire, explosion, spill, leak, accident or related occurrence, including the costs and expenses of the hourly wage of firefighting, police and emergency medical service personnel, including overtime wages, costs and expenses for special equipment used during the response; and the costs and expenses of any special costs and expenses shall only include those costs and expenses directly arising because of the response to the particular incident.
Hazardous material incident means a fire, explosion, spill, leak, accident or related occurrence involving the transportation, storage, handling, sale, use, or processing of hazardous material by a firm, person or vehicle.
Hazardous materials means explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, combustible liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, irritating material, etiologic material, radioactive material, corrosive material, liquefied
petroleum gas, or any other hazardous material as defined under the Fire Prevention Code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.) and Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.1101 et seq., MSA 13A.1101 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 305, § I, 10-19-1995)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 9-167. Charge against person liable; collection of debt.
Costs and expenses under this division shall constitute a debt of that person and is collectible by the Tri-City Fire Department in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. If, in fact, costs and expenses as designated by this division are recoverable under an insurance policy, it shall be the duty of the person in possession of the hazardous material at the time of the incident to notify the fire chief within 30 days of the incident of the name and address of the insurance company issuing the policy and the policy number.
(Ord. No. 305, § II, 10-19-1995)
Sec. 9-168. Tri-City Fire Department to submit bill.
The Tri-City Fire Department shall, after receiving itemized costs and expenses incurred for hazardous materials response, submit a bill for those services by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as set forth in this division.
(Ord. No. 305, § III, 10-19-1995)
Sec. 9-169. Failure to pay; Tri-City Fire Department to sue to recover cost.
A person liable for the costs and expenses of a hazardous material response shall pay the bill submitted by the Tri-City Fire Department as set out in this division within 30 days of receipt of the bill. The Tri-City Fire Department or their designate may commence civil suit on behalf of the Tri-City Fire Department to recover the expenses, court costs and attorney's fees for the collecting of that debt if payment is not received by the Tri-City Fire Department within 30 days.
(Ord. No. 305, § IV, 10-19-1995)
Chapter 10
ENVIRONMENT*
* Charter References: General municipal powers, local police, sanitary and other regulations, § 2.3(ii).
Cross References: Animals, ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; dangerous buildings, § 5-171 et seq.; building, moving and demolition, § 5-206 et seq.; hazardous materials, § 9-166 et seq.; floods, ch. 12; health and sanitation, ch. 13; land development, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 16; solid waste, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; utilities, ch.
23; vegetation, ch. 24; waterways, ch. 25; zoning, ch. 26.
State Law References: Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq., MSA 13A.101 et seq.; Michigan Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.1701 et seq., MSA 13A.1701 et seq.
Secs. 10-1--10-30. Reserved.
Article I. In General
Article II. Nuisances
Sec. 10-31. Penalties. Sec. 10-32. Definitions.
Secs. 10-33--10-55. Reserved.
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10-56. Smoke control.
Sec. 10-57. Fumes, toxic and nontoxic. Sec. 10-58. Accelerators.
Division 2. Air Pollution
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 10-1--10-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
NUISANCES*
* Charter References: General municipal powers, prevention and abatement of nuisances, §§ 2.3(p), 2.3(u).
Cross References: Swimming pools as a public nuisance, § 5-312.
State Law References: Public nuisances and abatement, MCL 600.3801 et seq., MSA 27A.3801 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 10-31. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 212, § 9.01, 1-20-1983; Ord. No. 301, § 9.01, 7-20-1995)
Sec. 10-32. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Nuisance means anything which is injurious to health, offensive to the senses, obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use of property, or causes inconvenience or discomfort to the community or neighborhood. The following activities constitute a nuisance: noise, pollution, smoke control, fumes, toxic and nontoxic, accelerators, and noxious weeds.
(Ord. No. 212, §§ 1.01, 2.01, 1-20-1983)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 10-33--10-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. AIR POLLUTION*
* State Law References: Air pollution control standards, MCL 324.101 et seq., MSA 13A.101 et seq.
Sec. 10-56. Smoke control.
No person or owner of property and no person having possession or control of property shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the open air substances in quantities which will result in air pollution. No person shall cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any source whatever except as specifically permitted.
(Ord. No. 212, § 4.01(1), 1-20-1983)
Sec. 10-57. Fumes, toxic and nontoxic.
(a) No person or owner of property and no person having possession or control of property shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the open air substances in quantities which will result in air pollution. No person shall cause or permit the emission of toxic fumes or dense nontoxic fumes from any source whatever except as specifically permitted.
(b) Nontoxic fumes are materials that produce toxic effects on humans only under the most unusual condition or by overwhelming dosage.
(c) Toxic fumes are those that are hazardous or irritating to the human body, skin membranes, or senses as referenced by the Federal Toxic Substance Control Act 1976, OSHA, and HIOSH standards.
(Ord. No. 212, § 4.01(2), 1-20-1983)
Sec. 10-58. Accelerators.
No accelerators will be used in order to increase burning; that is, the uses of anything containing mineral spirits or petroleum bases.
(Ord. No. 212, § 4.01(3), 1-20-1983)
Sec. 10.59 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Authorized enforcement agency means the city engineer and his/her authorized representatives, which shall specifically include all inspectors and code enforcement, and any other individual designated by the City Manager of Keego Harbor to enforce this Ordinance. Where applicable the terms may also mean the director of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or his/her designated official, and/or the United States EPA Administrator or his/her designated official.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
City means the City of Keego Harbor.
Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
County means the County of Oakland.
Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres or more requiring an issued permit and small construction activities impacting one to five acres of land deemed to operate under a national permit. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except an s exempted in section 10.64(b) of this Ordinance.
Illicit connections mean either of the following:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b) (14).
MS4 means a municipal separate storm sewer system.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), or by the State of Michigan under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) and codified in the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act Protection at MCL 324.101. et seq that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States or State of Michigan, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Storm sewer system or storm drainage system means a publicly-owned facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
Sec. 10.60 Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This Ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Ordinance are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user.
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm sewer system.
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
Sec. 10.61 Applicability.
This Ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless expressly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
Sec. 10.62 Enforcement, responsibility for administration.
This Ordinance shall be enforceable by the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency.
Sec. 10.63 Minimum standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this Ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
Sec. 10.64 Discharge prohibitions.
(a) Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) Discharges from footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), Discharges or flows from firefighting activities are excluded from prohibiting if they are identified as not being significant sources of pollutants to waters of the state.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the city engineer as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the city engineer prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements
of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
(b) Non-stormwater discharges. The following discharges of flows are excluded from prohibiting if they are identified as not being a significant contributor to violations of Water Quality Standards:
1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources
2. Landscape irrigation runoff, lawn watering runoff, and irrigation waters
3. Diverted stream flows and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands
4. Rising ground waters and springs
5. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration and seepage
6. Foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, and basement sump pumps
7. Air conditioning condensation
8. Waters from noncommercial car washing
9. Street wash water
10. Dechlorinated swimming pool water from single, two or three family residences. (A swimming pool operated by the permittee shall not be discharged to a separate storm sewer or to surface waters of the state without NPDES permit authorization from MDEQ.)
(c) Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this Ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to a storm drain system or MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
Sec. 10-65 Suspension of storm sewer system access.
(a) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm sewer system or the waters of the United States or State of Michigan. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system or waters of the United States or State of Michigan, or to minimize danger to persons.
(b) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the storm sewer system in violation of this Ordinance may have their storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city engineer will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its storm sewer system access. The violator may petition the city engineer for reconsideration and hearing.
(c) Violation. A person violates this Ordinance if the person reinstates storm sewer system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency.
Sec. 10.66 Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm sewer system.
Sec. 10.67 Monitoring of discharges.
(a) Applicability. This Ordinance applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial
activity, including construction activity.
(b) Access to facilities.
(1) The city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the city engineer or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(3) The city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The city engineer has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city engineer and/or designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person operating the facility.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city engineer and/or a representative of the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this Ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity violated this Ordinance if the person denies the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this Ordinance.
(7) If the city engineer and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city engineer and/or authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 10.68 Requirement to prevent, controls, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices.
The city engineer shall adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States or State of Michigan. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
Sec. 10.69 Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee(s), shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. This responsibility does not apply to publicly or privately owned drains that are not owned by the property owner and are otherwise the responsibility of the drain owner. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
Sec. 10.70 Notification of release or discharge.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the United States or State of Michigan said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city engineer within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
Sec. 10.71 Notice of violation.
(a) Whenever the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the city engineer or his/her designee or other authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(b) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the city or the authorized enforcement agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Sec. 10.72 Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city engineer to the City Council. The notice of appeal must be received by the city engineer's office within seven days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the City Council shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
Sec. 10.73 Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the denial of an the appeal, then representatives of the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
Sec. 10.74 Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within 60 days or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall become liable to the city for the cost of the abatement by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the legal rate then applicable shall be assessed on a per annum basis on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.
Sec. 10.75 Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Ordinance, the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
Sec. 10.76 Compensatory action.
In lieu of bringing enforcement proceedings to seek the penalties and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the city engineer or authorized enforcement agency may impose alternative compensatory actions upon a violator, such as
storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. The decision to seek alternative compensatory actions does not waive the city or authorized enforcement agency’s right to seek legal enforcement from a court of law.
Sec. 10.77 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
Sec. 10.78 Criminal prosecution.
All violations of this Ordinance shall be misdemeanor and upon a plea or finding of guilt therefor shall be punishable by up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine of not more than $500.00.
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
Sec. 10.79 Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this Ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. No. 438, 08-23-2012)
(Ord. No. 438, amendment 3-16-2017)
CD11:1
Chapter 11
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, fire prevention and protection, §§ 2.3(z), 2.3(aa), 2.3(bb).
Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; emergency services, ch. 9; chemicals, fire, gas, smoke, § 24-4.
State Law References: State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; explosives act of 1970, MCL 29.41 et seq.; crimes relating to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes relating to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Sec. 11-1. Open burning prohibited.
Sec. 11-2. Violations and penalties.
Sec. 11-3. 1 – Opening burning
Sec. 11-4 – Amendments
Secs. 11-5--11-35. Reserved.
Article II. Fire Prevention Code
Sec. 11-36. Adopted.
Sec. 11-37. Additions, insertions and changes.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 11-1. Open burning prohibited.
(a) No person shall kindle or cause and burn an open fire in any public or private place outside any building or structure located within the City of Keego Harbor per Code of Ordinances.
(b) Open fires may be used for cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created and the fire is done within an appropriate container.
(Ord. No. 370, § 4, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 4-18-2002)
(c) Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor under the terms of this section shall upon conviction be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7. (Ord. No. 260 Section 1.01,2.01,4.01, 12-15-1988)
(d) State law reference: Open burning of leaves and grass clippings. MCL 324.11522, MSA 13 A. 11522.
(Ord. No.405, 12/18/2003)
Sec. 11-2. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article is a municipal civil infraction and subjects the violator to the fines and penalties specified in section 1-7 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 391, § 1, 4-18-2002)
Sec. 11-3. International Fire Code 2003 or Current Adopted Code.
(a) The International Fire Code, 2003 edition, including appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F and G as
CD11:2
published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as an ordinance of the City of Keego Harbor, subject to the insertions and amendments contained in this Ordinance. The adoption of the Fire Code does not include any provisions that are inconsistent with the State of Michigan Fire Prevention Code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as amended, or rules promulgated under and as defined in that Act, and any such provision shall not be enforced,
(b) When used in the Code adopted by this Ordinance, “Fire Code Official” means the Chief of the Charter Township of West Bloomfield Fire Department.
(c) Basis and intent. The City of Keego Harbor has found that open burning on residential property has and contributes to creating or furthering a detrimental environmental effect, a health hazard, and serious and significant effects on the values of properties within the City of Keego Harbor. It is the intent of this article to prohibit open burning on residential property and thus promote the public health, safety and welfare of the city.
(d) Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Keego Harbor Fire Prevention Code”
Sec. 11-3.1. Open Burning.
(a) Basis and intent; short title.
Basis and intent. The City Council of the City of Keego Harbor has found that open burning on residential property has and contributes to creating or furthering a detrimental environmental effect, a health hazard, and serious and significant effects on the values of properties within the City of Keego Harbor. It is the intent of this article to prohibit open burning on residential property and thus promote the public health, safety and welfare of the City.
Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as “the City of Keego Harbor Open Burning Ordinance.”
(b) Definitions.
The term “open burning” means the setting on fire, igniting or combustion of any natural or man-made material, item or thing out-of-doors. Open burning, as defined for the purpose of this article, shall not include the burning and/or use of:
candles, lanterns, lamps, bug repellent torches, fireplaces, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, charcoal cookers. Brazier, hibachis, grills or any flammable liquid or liquefied petroleum gas-fired stoves or similar devices maintained and used solely for the preparation of food on the premises of the owner or occupant. Controlled fires caused and maintained for the training of authorized firefighters and fires confined to matches used for the purpose of maintaining authorized fires shall be excluded from this article’s provisions.
(c) Open-flame cooking devices. Amended to read:
Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible
CD11:3
balconies or within ten (10) feet of combustible construction.
Exception: Single family dwellings.
(d) Liquefied-petroleum-gas-containers. Added to read:
LP-gas containers with a water capacity greater than 2.5 pounds (nominal 1 lb. LP-gas capacity) shall not be located on combustible balconies or within ten (10) feet of combustible construction.
Exception: Single family dwellings.
Exception: Where such balconies are served by outside stairways and where only such stairways are used to transport the cylinder.
(e) Provisions supplemental to chapter 8. Added to read:
The terms of the ordinance shall supplement chapter 8, City of Keego Harbor Ordinances, as amended, and shall and does hereby repeal and supersede any conflicting provisions as amended, to the extent of the conflict.
The term “fire chief’ means the chief of the West Bloomfield Township Fire Department or his designate.
The term “zoning ordinance” means the City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance No, 14.01, as amended.
Words not expressly defined above shall have the definitions customarily ascribed to them.
(f) Prohibitions.
Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or maintain any open burning of any substance on property situated in a residential zoning classification pursuant to the zoning ordinance.
(g) Prohibition on burning of leaves, brush and twigs
On all lots and parcels in the City, the City shall not specifically except or authorize the burning of leaves, brush and twigs and, accordingly, the open burning of such materials shall be completely prohibited as provided and as ultimately contemplated under section 18b of Act 641 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended.
(h) Outdoor cooking devices on attached residential premises.
For reasons for proximity and the potential for fire extension from one residential unit to another, the use of cooking devices exempted from the definition of “open burning” in section Sec. 3.01 (b) on the premises of a residence physically attached to one or more other residences creates a relatively higher risk of fire damage or injury to property and persons in adjoining residential units
CD11:4
than where such devices are used on the premises of a detached residence. Accordingly, where a cooking device is used outdoors on the premises of a residential unit which is physically attached to one or more other residential units, such device shall not be exempt from the definition of open burning and shall be included within the open burning prohibition contained in sec 3.01 (1) above, unless all of the following conditions are met:
(1) A functioning fire extinguisher shall be readily accessible during all times the heat source of the cooking device remains in a heated condition.
(2) When the heat sources of the cooking device is in a heated condition, the cooking device shall be located a horizontal distance of at least eight (8) feet from all structures constituting a part of a building; provided, if there is a limitation based upon available space which would render it unfeasible or dangerous to establish such eight-foot clearance, the cooking device shall he located as far from building structures as safety and feasibility permit.
(3) The user of the cooking device shall take steps necessary to extinguish the heat source immediately following use, e.g. discontinue gas transmission to the device, restrict oxygen source to burning charcoal and the like.
Sec. 11-4. Amendments.
The following Sections of the International Fire Code, 2003 edition, are amended, completed, supplemented, or added as follows:
(a) Title. Completed by inserting the City of Keego Harbor (City) as the name of the jurisdiction.
(b) Permits Required. Amended to add the following sentence:
Permit fees are established, and from time-to-time amended, by resolution of the City of Keego Harbor City Council as the Board of Appeals for purposes of this Code.
(c) Board of Appeals. Amended to read:
The Construction Board of Appeals, established and maintained pursuant to the Building Code, adopted, administered and enforced under Ordinance no. 5.01 of the City of Keego Harbor Code, shall serve as the Board of Appeals for purposes of this Code.
(d) Court Review. Added to read:
Any persona having the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals shall have a limited right to appeal a decision of the Board of Appeals to the Oakland County Circuit Court, in the manner required by law, no later than twenty-one (21) days after the date of the meeting at which the decision of the Board of Appeals is made. The scope of review on appeal is limited to correction of errors of law by the Board of Appeals.
(e) Violations Penalties. Completed to specify offenses as misdemeanors, a maximum fine of $500.00 and maximum imprisonment of 90 days and amended to add the following sentence:
CD11:5
The imposition of one or more penalties for a violation does not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, with all persons responsible for the condition under this Code required to correct or remedy the violation or defect within a reasonable time.
(f) Failure to Comply. Completed to specify a minimum fine of $250.00 and a maximum fine of $500.00.
(g) Premises Identification. Amended to read:
Premises Identification is regulated by City of Keego Harbor
Property Identification Ordinance, No. 5.12 of the City of Keego Harbor Ordinance.
(h) Definitions. Amended to add definitions for Emergency response, Expense of an emergency response and Responsible Party to read:
Emergency Response. The dispatch, provision and/or utilization of police, fire, emergency medical, rescue services and/or other services by the City at an incident involving the release, leakage, spillage, exposure, use, handling storage, transportation, processing, disposal and/or unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials.
Expense of an emergency response. The direct and reasonable costs incurred by the City when making an emergency response, including, without limitation, the costs of providing police, fire department, emergency medical, rescue, clean-up, restoration or other services at the scene of the emergency response. These costs further include, without limitation, all of the salaries and wages of the City personnel responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of City personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, and all costs for materials and equipment utilized, and any other expenses incurred by the City in cleaning up, inspecting, testing and restoring the site of an emergency response.
Responsible Party. An individual, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity, or any combination thereof, who owns, possesses or controls a hazardous material involved in an unauthorized discharge, or whose transportation, storage, handling, sale, use or processing of a hazardous material causes or results in an unauthorized discharge.
(i) Responsibility for cleanup. Amended to read:
The responsible party for an unauthorized discharge shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual at no cost to the jurisdiction. When deemed necessary by the Fire Code Official, or in the event of an emergency response, clean up may be initiated by the fire department or by an authorized individual or firm. The responsible party for the unauthorized discharge is liable for the expense of an emergency response. If more than one person or entity is deemed to be a responsible party under this section, each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable to the jurisdiction for the total amount of the expense of an emergency response. The expense of an emergency response shall become a debt of the responsible party and is collectible by the jurisdiction incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. The jurisdiction may within thirty (30) days of receiving all of the itemized costs, or any part thereof,
CD11:6
for an emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the responsible part. The bill shall require frill payment within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing or personal service. Any failure by the responsible party to pay the bill within thirty (30) days shall be considered to be a civil default and the jurisdiction may commence a civil suit against the responsible party to recover the billed expenses of an emergency response, plus the jurisdiction’s attorney fees, court costs, litigation expenses and all other costs allowed by law. Additionally, in the event that the responsible party has an ownership interest in the property upon which the emergency response incident occurred or property in the jurisdiction, the unpaid cost shall be a lien upon such property and all amounts may be placed on delinquent tax roll of the jurisdiction as to such property and such amounts shall accrue interest and penalties and shall be deemed delinquent real property taxes and collectable according to law. The recovery of expenses of an emergency response under this section is a separate civil liability of any responsible party for the emergency response incident, and is separate from and in addition to, any criminal proceedings that may be brought against the responsible party.
(j) Class A circuits required. Added to read:
Fire alarm systems, including the initiating devices, notification appliances and signaling line circuits shall be wired in a “Class A”, four (4) wire method in accordance with NFPA 72, and subject to the additional requirement that the outgoing and return conductors for the control unit be separated at all points by at least four (4) feet where installed horizontally and at least one (1) foot where installed vertically.
(k) Location. Supplemented to provide:
In addition to not exceeding the limits established by current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) code requirements, the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited except:
(1) as disclosed and permitted by an approved site plan in connection with a permitted use of property under the City Zoning Ordinance or (2) if determined by the Fire Code Official to be allowed by the State of Michigan Fire Prevention Code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as amended, or rules promulgated under that Act, and in compliance with all other applicable governmental regulations.
(l) Fireworks. Amended to add Exception 5. to read as follows:
5. Activities pursuant to and in compliance with a permit obtained as provided in of the City of Keego Harbor and the State law referenced in the Section.
(m) Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Supplemented to provide:
The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited except: (1) as disclosed and permitted by an approved site plan in connection with a permitted use of property under the City Zoning Ordinance or (2) if determined by the Fire Code Official to be allowed by the State of Michigan Fire Prevention Code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as amended, or rules promulgated under that Act, and in compliance with all other applicable governmental regulations.
CD11:7
(n) Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Supplemented to provide:
The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited except: (1) as disclosed and permitted by an approved site plan in connection with a permitted use of property under the City Zoning Ordinance, (2) if determined by the Fire Code Official to be allowed by the State of Michigan Fire Prevention Code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as amended, or rules promulgated under that Act, and in compliance with all other applicable governmental regulations or (3) in connection with a temporary activity necessary to the use or development of property in conformity with all City and other governmental ordinances, laws, permits and approvals.
(o) Maximum capacity within established limits. Supplemented to provide:
For the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the capacity limitations in this Section for storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall apply within any protection area established by current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) code requirements and to all properties except as disclosed and permitted by an approved site plan for a permitted use under the City Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 451, 07-03-2013)
Secs. 11-5--11-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 11-36. Adopted.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of Keego Harbor, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, including appendix chapters Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F, Appendix G as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the City of Keego Harbor for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Keego Harbor and providing for issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the City of Keego Harbor are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
(Ord. No. 370, § 1, 6-21-2001)
Charter References: Technical codes, adoption by reference, § 6.2.
Sec. 11-37. Additions, insertions and changes.
Section 101.1. City of Keego Harbor.
Section 109.3. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall be subject to the fines and penalties of the City of Keego Harbor Infraction Ordinance Number 295, as amended. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
CD11:8
Section 111.4. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall be subject to the fines and penalties of the City of Keego Harbor Infraction Ordinance 295, as amended.
Section 3204.3.1.1. Zero (0) limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited in the City of Keego Harbor.
Section 3404.2.9.5.2. Zero (0) limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in the City of Keego Harbor.
Section 3406.2.4.4. Zero (0) limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited in the City of Keego Harbor.
Section 3804.2. 20 Gallons limit in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas in the City of Keego Harbor.
(Ord. No. 370, §§ 2, 3, 6-21-2001)
Chapter 12
FLOODS*
__________
* Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, ch. 10; land development, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 23; waterways, ch. 25; zoning, ch. 26.
__________
Sec. 12-1. Definitions.
Sec. 12-2. Intent.
Sec. 12-3. Delineation of the flood hazard area zone.
Sec. 12-4. Mapping disputes.
Sec. 12-5. Development permits.
Sec. 12-6. Flood hazard area application information.
Sec. 12-7. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
Sec. 12-8. Specific base flood elevation standards.
Sec. 12-9. Mobile home standards.
Sec. 12-10. Floodway protection standards.
Sec. 12-11. Zoning administration.
Sec. 12-12. Authority and responsibilities.
Sec. 12-13. Hearings.
Sec. 12-14. Flood hazard area zone variances.
Sec. 12-15. Disclaimer of liability.
Sec. 12-16. Violations; penalties.
Sec. 12-17. Nonconforming uses.
Sec. 12-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of the city, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards have been designated as zone A.
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of Flood).
Harmful increase means an unnaturally high stage on a river, stream or lake which causes or may cause damage to property, threat to life, personal injury, or damage to land or water resources.
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(Ord. No. 211, § 1.01, 11-29-1982)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 12-2. Intent.
(a) It is the purpose of this chapter to significantly reduce hazards to persons and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in the city and to comply with the provisions and requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accord with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and the rules and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the National Flood Insurance Program as published in the Federal Register, Vol. 41, No. 207, Tuesday, October 26, 1976, and redesignated at 44 FR 31177, May 31, 1979, all as subsequently amended.
(b) Further, the objectives of this chapter include:
(1) The protection of human life, health and property from the dangerous and damaging effects of flood conditions;
(2) The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects, rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding, repair of flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and the redevelopment of flood-damaged homes, neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas;
(3) The prevention of private and public economic loss and social disruption as a result of flood conditions;
(4) The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the blighting influence of flood damage;
(5) To ensure that the public has access to information indicating the location of land areas subject to periodic flooding; and
(6) To preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a base flood.
(Ord. No. 211, § 2.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-3. Delineation of the flood hazard area zone.
(a) The flood hazard area zone shall overlay existing zoning districts delineated on the official zoning map. The boundaries of the flood hazard area zone shall coincide with the boundaries of the areas indicated as within the limits of the 100-year flood in the report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study Keego Harbor," dated June, 1982 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps. Within the flood hazard area zone, a regulatory floodway shall coincide with the floodway boundaries indicated on the flood boundary and floodway map. The study and accompanying maps are adopted by reference, appended to, and declared to be a part of this chapter. The term "flood hazard area" as used in this chapter means the designated regulatory floodway.
(b) Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard area zone boundary, the zoning board of appeals shall resolve the dispute in accord with section 12-4.
(c) In addition to other requirements of this chapter applicable to development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be necessary for all development occurring within the flood hazard area zone.
(Ord. No. 211, § 3.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-4. Mapping disputes.
(a) Where disputes arise as to the location of the flood hazard area boundary, the zoning board of appeals shall resolve the dispute and establish the boundary location. In all cases, the decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be based upon the most current floodplain studies issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Where Federal Emergency Management Agency information is not available, the best available floodplain information shall be utilized.
(b) Where a dispute involves an allegation that the boundary is incorrect as mapped and Federal Emergency Management Agency floodplain maps are being questioned, the zoning board of appeals shall modify the boundary of the flood hazard area only upon receipt of an official letter of map amendment issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(c) All parties to a map dispute may submit technical evidence to the zoning board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 211, § 4.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-5. Development permits.
Development, including the erection of structures and placement of mobile homes, within a flood hazard area shall not occur except upon issuance of a zoning compliance permit, and the following standards:
(1) The requirements of this chapter shall be met.
(2) All necessary development permits shall have been issued by appropriate local, state and federal authorities, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of no authority from the state department of natural resources under authority of Part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq., MSA 13A.3101 et seq.). Where a development permit cannot be issued prior to
the issuance of a zoning compliance permit, a letter from the issuing agency indicating intent to issue contingent only upon proof of zoning compliance shall be acceptable.
(Ord. No. 211, § 5.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-6. Flood hazard area application information.
In addition to the information required with an application for a zoning compliance permit or any other type of development permission required under this chapter, the following information shall be submitted as a part of an application for permission to commence any type of development within a flood hazard area zone:
(1) The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the floor, including basement, of all structures;
(2) Where floodproofing will be employed, the elevation in relation to mean sea level to which a structure will be floodproofed;
(3) Where floodproofing will be employed, a certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing criteria of this chapter will be met;
(4) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Proof of development permission from appropriate local, state, and federal agencies as required by section 12-5(a)(1), including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of no authority from the state department of natural resources under authority of Part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1995 (MCL 324.3101 et seq., MSA 13A.3101 et seq.);
(6) Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.) or greater than five acres in size; and
(7) Additional information which may be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 211, § 6.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-7. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements within a flood hazard area, including the placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes, shall be:
(1) Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
(2) Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and
(3) Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(b) All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
(c) All new and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding.
(d) All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed and located to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(e) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(f) The building official or his representative shall review development proposals to determine compliance with the standards in this section, and shall transmit his determination to the zoning administrator.
(g) Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
(h) The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse not subject to state or federal regulations designed to ensure flood-carrying capacity shall be maintained.
(i) Available flood hazard data from federal, state or other sources shall be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this section. Data furnished by the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources.
(Ord. No. 211, § 7.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-8. Specific base flood elevation standards.
(a) On the basis of the most recent available base flood elevation data, the following standards shall apply in the flood hazard area zone:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood level.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have either:
a. The lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood level; or
b. Be constructed such that below base flood level, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this section are satisfied, and that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood in the location of the structure. Such certification shall be submitted as provided in section 12-11 and shall indicate the elevation to which the structure is floodproofed.
(b) The most recent base flood elevation data received from the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources.
(Ord. No. 211, § 8.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-9. Mobile home standards.
(a) All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties in accord with the following specifications:
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, except that on mobile homes less than 50 feet in length one tie per side shall be required.
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, except that on mobile homes less than 50 feet in length four ties per side shall be required.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(4) All additions to a mobile home shall be similarly anchored.
(b) An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with the city manager for mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions.
(c) Mobile homes within zones A1--30 on the flood insurance rate map shall be located in accord with the following standards:
(1) All mobile homes shall be placed on stands or lots which are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level.
(2) Adequate surface drainage away from all structures and access for a mobile home hauler shall be provided.
(3) In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots shall be large enough to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement shall be provided for piers more than six feet above ground level.
(4) In mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions which exist at the time the ordinance from which this section derives was adopted, where repair, reconstruction or improvement of streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, the standards in subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3) of this section shall be complied with.
(Ord. No. 211, § 9.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-10. Floodway protection standards.
(a) New construction, substantial improvements and all other development, including fill, shall be
prohibited within zones numbered A1--30 on the FIRM, except where it is demonstrated to the zoning administrator that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not harmfully increase the water surface elevation of a base flood. In determining whether a harmful increase will occur, compliance with Part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1995 (MCL 324.3101 et seq., MSA 13A.3101 et seq.), shall be required, provided that the allowable increase shall not exceed one foot. The provisions of this section shall not apply within the regulatory floodway. The provisions of subsection (b) shall be applied to land situated within the regulatory floodway.
(b) All development occurring within the regulatory floodway shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, shall be prohibited. Exception to this prohibition shall only be made upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the state department of natural resources that the development proposed will not result in any increases in flood levels during a base flood discharge, and compliance with Part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1995 (MCL 324.3101 et seq., MSA 13A.3101 et seq.).
(2) The placement of mobile homes shall be prohibited except in mobile home parks and subdivisions which exist at the time the ordinance from which this chapter was derived was adopted.
(3) Development which is permitted in the regulatory floodway shall meet the requirements of sections 12-7(c) through 12-7(f).
(c) The uses of land permitted in an underlying zoning district shall not be construed as being permitted within the regulatory floodway except upon compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 211, § 10.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-11. Zoning administration.
An enforcement officer shall be duly appointed by the city council to enforce this chapter and in addition shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources of the proposed alteration or relocation of any watercourse, and the submission of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures constructed within the flood hazard area, and in the case of floodproofed structures, the elevation to which the structure was floodproofed.
(3) Record all certificates of floodproofing, and notify in writing all applicants to whom variances are granted in a flood hazard area zone indicating the terms of the variance, the increased danger to life and property, and that the cost of flood insurance will increase commensurate with the increased flood risk, and may reach amounts in excess of $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage per year. A record of all variance notifications and variance actions shall be maintained, together with the
justification for each variance.
(4) Maintain all records and maps pertaining to the National Flood Insurance Program in his office, and open for public inspection.
(5) Obtain and utilize the best available flood hazard data for purposes of administering this chapter in the absence of data from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(6) Issue a zoning permit when after inspection it is determined that the placement of a principal structure complies with the requirements of this chapter.
(7) Issue violation notices requiring compliance within 30 days and initiate any other activities to abate violations as authorized by this chapter.
(8) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including all permits applied for, issued and denied, maintain the zoning maps and property descriptions, delineate affected areas, maintain records of application for variances, appeals and the decisions on these appeals by the zoning board of appeals.
(9) In the case of denying a zoning permit, inform the property owner of the right to appeal the conditions under which an appeal will be granted, and he shall further inform the zoning board of appeals, the time an appeal action is initiated.
(Ord. No. 211, § 11.01, 11-29-1982)
Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 12-12. Authority and responsibilities.
(a) The zoning board of appeals shall have those powers and duties prescribed by law and by this chapter, including:
(1) Interpretation of the boundaries of the zoning map.
(2) Interpretation of the text of the zoning ordinance.
(3) Granting variances or modifications from the terms of this chapter.
(b) Any conditions imposed by the board of appeals shall be to further the purposes of this chapter, shall be reasonably related to promoting and maintaining the public health, safety and general welfare, and shall be consistent with the provisions of City-Village Zoning Act, Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 211, § 12.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-13. Hearings.
The zoning board of appeals shall not make decisions within its authority without first holding a public hearing. Notice of this hearing and the substance of the appeal or application shall be given to all the parties affected. Each appeal or application shall be in written form and shall include the circumstances of the case,
reference to the specific provisions of this chapter from which the appeal is taken, and the grounds on which it is claimed that the appeal should be granted. Every decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be recorded and shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case and the findings and reasoning on which the decision is based.
(Ord. No. 211, § 13.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-14. Flood hazard area zone variances.
(a) Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall only be granted by the zoning board of appeals upon a determination of compliance with the following specific standards:
(1) A variance shall be granted only upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in a harmful increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
(2) The variance granted shall be in the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief to the applicant.
(b) The city zoning board of appeals may attach conditions to the granting of a variance to ensure compliance with the standards contained in this chapter.
(c) Variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state historic markers listing of historic sites, or any other state register of historic places without regard to the requirements of this section governing variances in flood hazard areas.
(Ord. No. 211, § 14.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-15. Disclaimer of liability.
(a) The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. Approval of the use of land under this chapter shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage.
(b) This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard area will be free from flood damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee of the city for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 211, § 15.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-16. Violations; penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to develop a flood hazard area in violation of the terms of this chapter, and any violation shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-7. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Violation of this chapter is declared a nuisance per se, and conviction under the penal provisions of this chapter shall not preclude proceedings to abate such nuisance.
(Ord. No. 211, § 17.01, 11-29-1982)
Sec. 12-17. Nonconforming uses.
The lawful use of any land or structure existing at the time of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may continue in the same location and in the same manner and to the same extent without change as it existed on day of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. However, any substantial improvement or any relocation of the land use or structure shall be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 211, § 18.01, 11-29-1982)
CD13:1
Chapter 13
HEALTH AND SANITATION*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, prevention of injury or annoyance from anything dangerous, offensive or harmful, § 2.3(p); local police and sanitary regulations, § 2.3(ii).
Cross References: Animals, ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, ch. 10; solid waste, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 23.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 13-1--13-30. Reserved.
Article II. Outdoor Gatherings
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13-31. Findings.
Sec. 13-32. Definitions.
Secs. 13-33--13-65. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 13-66. Required.
Sec. 13-67. Application for license.
Sec. 13-68. Required facilities.
Sec. 13-69. Officials' findings and recommendations.
Sec. 13-70. Prerequisites to issuance.
Sec. 13-71. Reasons for denial.
Sec. 13-72. Required information.
Sec. 13-73. Minimum facilities required.
Sec. 13-74. Revocation.
Secs. 13-75--13-95. Reserved.
Division 3. Conduct
Sec. 13-96. Violations.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 13-1--13-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
OUTDOOR GATHERINGS
DIVISION 1.
CD13:2
GENERALLY
Sec. 13-31. Findings.
The city council finds and declares that the interests of public health, Safety and welfare of the citizens of the city require the regulation, Prohibition, licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, and utility and other public services regularly provided in this city or upon the waterways of this city. (Ord. No. 118, § 1, 12-15-1970) and (Ord. No. 411, 10-21-2010)
Sec. 13-32. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Assembly or outdoor assembly means any event, attended by more than 1,000 attendants, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar gatherings; but does not mean:
(1) An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property;
(2) An event which is conducted or sponsored by any entity qualifying for tax-exempt status under section 501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, being 26 USC 501(c)(3), as incorporated by reference in section 201 of the Michigan Income Tax Act of 1967, Public Act No. 281 of 1967 (MCL 206.201, MSA 7.557(1201)) or any applicable law; or
(3) An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure.
Attendant means any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly by the payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the payment of money for admission.
Licensee means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this article.
Sponsor means any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly.
(Ord. No. 118, § 2, 12-15-1970)
Waterways within the city means waters of Dollar Bay, Cass Lake and Sylvan Lake within the City of Keego Harbor.
(Ord. No. 411, 10-21-2010)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
CD13:3
Secs. 13-33--13-65. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
Sec. 13-66. Required.
No person shall sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor assembly in the city unless he shall have first made application for and obtained a license for each such assembly.
(Ord. No. 118, § 3, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-67. Application for license.
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the city clerk and shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of the proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set from time to time and shall include at least the following:
(1) The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. (Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed.
(2) A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed assembly.
(3) The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed assembly.
(4) The dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted.
(5) An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or other method which will be used for accounting purposes.
(Ord. No. 118, § 4, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-68. Required facilities.
Each application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following:
(1) Police and fire protection.
(2) Food and water supply and facilities.
CD13:4
(3) Health and sanitation facilities.
(4) Medical facilities and services, including emergency vehicles and equipment.
(5) Vehicle access and parking facilities.
(6) Camping and trailer facilities.
(7) Illumination facilities.
(8) Communications facilities.
(9) Noise control and abatement.
(10) Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal.
(11) Insurance and bonding arrangements.
In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map of the overall site of the proposed assembly.
(Ord. No. 118, § 5, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-69. Officials' findings and recommendations.
On receipt by the clerk, copies of the application for a license under this division shall be forwarded to the chief law enforcement officer and the city manager for the city, the state fire marshal, and to such other appropriate public officials as the clerk deems necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within 20 days of receipt shall report their findings and recommendations to the city council.
(Ord. No. 118, § 6, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-70. Prerequisites to issuance.
Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the city council shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny, a license under this division. The city council may require that adequate security or insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, within five days of such action, notice must be mailed to the applicant by certified mail; and, in the case of denial, the reasons shall be stated in the notice.
(Ord. No. 118, § 7, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-71. Reasons for denial.
A license under this division may be denied if:
(1) The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this article, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant to this article, or with any other applicable provision of state or local
CD13:5
law; or
(2) The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document.
(Ord. No. 118, § 8, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-72. Required information.
A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license, and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this division. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly and shall not be transferred to any other person or location.
(Ord. No. 118, § 9, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-73. Minimum facilities required.
In processing an application for a license under this division, the city council shall, at a minimum, require the following:
(1) Security personnel. The licensee shall employ at his own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the chief law enforcement officer for the city in cooperation with the director of state police is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly.
(2) Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in quantity and pressure to ensure proper operation of all water-using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then from a source constructed, located and approved in accordance with Part 127 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12701 et seq., MSA 14.15(12701) et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the city manager.
(3) Restroom facilities.
a. The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water closets as defined in Public Act No. 266 of 1929 (MCL 338.901 et seq., MSA 14.451 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. If such flush-type facilities are not available, the city manager may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with Part 127 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12701 et seq., MSA 14.15(12701) et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law.
b. The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities constructed, installed, and
CD13:6
maintained in accordance with Public Act No. 266 of 1929 (MCL 338.901 et seq., MSA 14.451 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water and soap and paper towels.
c. The number and type of facilities required shall be determined, on the basis of the number of attendees, in the following manner:
Facilities
Male
Female
Toilets
1:300
1:200
Urinals
1:100
Lavatories
1:200
1:200
Drinking fountains
1:500
Taps or faucets
1:500
d. Where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, the licensee shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number of attendees, in the following manner:
Facilities
Male
Female
Shower heads
1:100
1:100
e. All facilities shall be installed, connected and maintained free from obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable condition as determined by the city manager.
(4) Food service.
a. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of part 129 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12901 et seq., MSA 14.15(12901) et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law.
b. If the assembly is distant from food service establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services available on the premises as will adequately feed the attendants.
(5) Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind, location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such facilities shall be as prescribed by the city manager.
(6) Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all pertinent rules and regulations established by the city manager. If such rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the
CD13:7
United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled, "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with part 117 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11701 et seq., MSA 13A.11701 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law; and, prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the city manager with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to public health.
(7) Solid waste disposal.
a. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from, the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, fly tight and rodent proof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the city manager with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.
b. The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food or equipment or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin.
(8) Public bathing beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with part 125 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12501 et seq., MSA 14.15(12501) et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law.
(9) Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools only in accordance with part 125 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12501 et seq., MSA 14.15(12501) et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law.
(10) Access and traffic control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulances, fire equipment, helicopters and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the director of the department of state police and the director of the department of state highways must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control.
(11) Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles,
CD13:8
but in no case shall he provide less than one automobile space for every four attendants.
(12) Camping and trailer parking. A licensee who permits attendees to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in accordance with part 125 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12501 et seq., MSA 14.15(12501) et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such act, and in accordance with any other applicable provision by state or local law.
(13) Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all attendees. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the city building official.
(14) Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance and property damage insurance limits as established by the city council from a company or companies approved by the commissioner of insurance of the state, which insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident to the assembly and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the city clerk in writing at least ten days before the expiration or cancellation of the insurance.
(15) Bonding. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state, a corporate surety bond in an amount as established by the city council in a form to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this article and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers and employees, and the council against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash or other waste resultant from the assembly.
(16) Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps as determined by the state fire marshal, to ensure fire protection.
(17) Sound equipment. Sound-producing equipment, including but not limited to public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens of the city.
(18) Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendees from gaining access and which will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and safe ingress and egress.
(19) Communications. The licensee shall provide at least one unit of public telephone equipment for general use.
CD13:9
(20) Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a license, the city council may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendees or of citizens of the city.
(Ord. No. 118, § 10, 12-15-1970)
Sec. 13-74. Revocation.
The city council may revoke a license under this division whenever the licensee, his employee or agent, fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this article or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated in this article by reference.
(Ord. No. 118, § 11, 12-15-1970)
Secs. 13-75--13-95. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
CONDUCT
Sec. 13-96. Violations.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this article, his employee or agent, to knowingly:
(1) Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct or operate an assembly without first obtaining a license as provided in this article.
(2) Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance.
(3) Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display, exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement.
(4) Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in, around or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct.
(5) Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess, intoxicating liquor while on the premises.
(6) Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined in article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq., MSA 14.15(7101) et seq.).
(7) That the sale of any food or beverage will be prohibited upon any waterway within the City of Keego Harbor.
(Ord. No. 411, 10-21-2010)
CD13:10
(b) Any of the violations enumerated in subsection (a) of this section is a separate offense, is a nuisance per se immediately enjoyable in the circuit courts, and is a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section 1-7.
(c) Any violation of this article is a sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the immediate enjoining in the circuit court of the assembly.
(Ord. No. 118, § 12, 12-15-1970)
Chapter 14
LAND DEVELOPMENT*
__________
* Charter References: Approval of plats, § 2.3(w).
Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 23; vegetation, ch. 24; waterways, ch. 25; zoning, ch. 26.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 14-1--14-30. Reserved.
Article II. Land Division
Sec. 14-31. Purpose and scope of application.
Sec. 14-32. Definitions.
Sec. 14-33. Application requirements.
Sec. 14-34. Approval procedures.
Sec. 14-35. Standards for granting approval.
Sec. 14-36. Private road requirements.
Sec. 14-37. Fees.
Sec. 14-38. Penalties.
Secs. 14-39--14-70. Reserved.
Article III. Land Parcel Improvements
Sec. 14-71. Generally.
Sec. 14-72. Definitions.
Sec. 14-73. Procedures, requirements, fees and standards.
Sec. 14-74. Penalties.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1--14-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
LAND DIVISION*
__________
* State Law References: Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.
__________
Sec. 14-31. Purpose and scope of application.
In interest of protecting the public health, safety and welfare, the city council finds that this article is necessary to regulate the division and partitioning of parcels of land which are otherwise not subject to platting procedures and requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to divide or partition any lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat, or to divide or partition any unplatted parcel or tract of land, except in accordance with the provisions of this article, unless the division or partition is approved and a part of a recorded plat,
pursuant to the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.).
(Ord. No. 261, § 1.01, 10-20-1988)
Sec. 14-32. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Acreage tract or acreage land means land or real estate which is not located in or a part of a recorded plat.
Applicant means an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, in any combination, who holds ownership interest in land and is seeking approval for a division or partition of land in accordance with this article.
Divide or partition means to split or separate a parcel of land into parts by changing the boundaries and/or legal description, where such splitting or separating of land is not accomplished pursuant to platting procedures under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.).
Land means the surface area known as real estate.
Lot means a piece of land the dimensions and configuration of which are shown on a subdivision plat recorded in the offices of the county register of deeds.
Parcel means a measured portion of land which is described by virtue of a request to divide or partition the parcel in accordance with the provisions of this article. A parcel may be a subdivision lot or an acreage tract or acreage land.
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land which has been approved in accordance with the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.).
Private road means a strip of land used for ingress and egress to and from land which does not abut onto a public road, where such land or road is not dedicated for use by the public.
Public road means a road which is dedicated for use of the public for travel and which is maintained by a public agency, such as the city or the county.
(Ord. No. 261, § 2.01, 10-20-1988)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-33. Application requirements.
(a) Application forms and documentation. The application for division of land shall be made on the forms and according to the guidelines provided by the city. The application shall be accompanied by the necessary fees and information as specified in this article.
(b) Information required. Applications shall be accompanied by the following information:
(1) Three copies of a drawing, prepared by a land surveyor at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, showing the parcels that would result from the requested division of land. The drawing
shall provide the dimensions of all parcels and shall show all structures on and within 50 feet of the proposed parcels.
(2) A legal description of all parcels that would result from the requested division of land. The legal description shall be in a form sufficient for recording with the county register of deeds and shall indicate the acreage of all parcels.
(3) Copies of existing or proposed deed restrictions related to the proposed parcels.
(4) If any portion of the land has been part of a previous application for division of land, the date of such application and action taken.
(5) Additional information deemed necessary by the city manager or the city council to make the determination required by this article.
(Ord. No. 261, § 3.01, 10-20-1988)
Sec. 14-34. Approval procedures.
(a) Submission to city manager. All applications for division of land shall be submitted, together with the required information, to the city manager.
(b) Review by staff. The city manager shall review the application for completeness of data and to determine whether it is in compliance with this article. If deemed necessary during the course of his review, the city manager may submit the application to various departments and consultants of the city for review and recommendation, including but not limited to departments or consultants having jurisdiction over assessing, planning, engineering or building code enforcement functions.
(c) Recommendation to the city council. Upon review of the proposed division of land, and after consideration of the comments submitted by departments or consultants, the city manager shall submit a recommendation to the city council.
(d) Decision by city council. After reviewing the findings submitted to the city manager, the city council shall make the final decision concerning any application for division of land, based on the standards set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 261, § 4.01, 10-20-1988)
Sec. 14-35. Standards for granting approval.
The following standards shall be used as the basis upon which applications for division of land are reviewed and approved:
(1) Compliance with state law. An application for division of land shall not be approved unless it is in compliance with the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). Accordingly, a parcel of land may be divided pursuant to the requirements of this article if such division creates less than five parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area, or if such division creates less than five parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in
area as a result of successive divisions over a period of ten years.
(2) Lot dimensional requirements. All parcels created as a result of division of land shall comply with the minimum lot dimensional requirements of the current zoning ordinance, including minimum lot size and lot width, except in the following circumstances:
a. Where the proposed division of land would reduce the degree of existing nonconformity with zoning ordinance standards; or
b. Where the nonconforming parcel created as a result of the division of land is intended to be combined with additional land for the purposes of creating a building site that conforms with the zoning ordinance requirements.
(3) Taxes or assessment liens. Any due or unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property shall be paid before the division of land is given final approval.
(4) Division of existing nonconforming parcels. No parcel that is smaller than currently required by the zoning ordinance shall be further divided.
(5) Depth-to-width ratio. Wherever possible, the depth to width ratio of a parcel created through land division shall not exceed 3 to 1.
(6) Disruption to flow of water. No division of land shall be approved if subsequent development would result in disruption to the existing or natural flow of water within drainage ditches, natural watercourses, or government-maintained drains unless evidence of a feasible alternate method of drainage is presented.
(7) Consideration of deed restrictions. The effect of proposed division of land on deed restrictions shall be considered by the city manager and the city council in their review of the application. However, such deed restrictions shall not be binding upon the city under this article.
(8) Consent of the title holder. No division of land shall be approved without the consent of the title or deed holder of the subject parcel.
(9) Character of surrounding development. In reviewing an application for division of land, the city manager and the city council shall consider the impact of subsequent construction on the character of surrounding development. In evaluating character of surrounding development, the city manager and the city council shall consider the size, dimensions and proportions of existing surrounding parcels.
(10) Parking requirements. An application for division of land shall not be approved if it would result in a loss of parking such that development on any of the resulting parcels would be unable to comply with the minimum parking requirements in the zoning ordinance.
(11) Access. An application for division of land shall not be approved unless all parcels created as a result of such division front onto a public road, or onto a private road that complies with the
requirements in section 14-36.
(Ord. No. 261, § 5.01, 10-20-1988)
Sec. 14-36. Private road requirements.
Private roads created pursuant to this article shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Easement. A legal description of the private road easement shall be submitted for review by the city attorney. Following city attorney review and approval, the private road easement shall be recorded with the city clerk and the county register of deeds. At a minimum, the easement shall contain the following provisions:
a. Minimum easement width. Private roads shall have a minimum easement width of 60 feet.
b. Emergency and public vehicle access. The easement shall provide unrestricted access for emergency and public vehicles used in the performance of necessary public services.
c. Noninterference. The terms of the easement shall prohibit any property owner served by the road from restricting or interfering with the normal ingress and egress of other property owners, their families, guests, invitees, tradesmen, and others traveling to or leaving any of the properties served by the road.
(2) Specifications. Private roads shall be paved and drained in accordance with the requirements specified by the city engineer for typical subdivision streets in the city.
(3) Timing of construction. Private roads shall be constructed prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure on any parcel where the private road provides the only means of access.
(4) Road name. Private roads shall be named and appropriate signage shall be erected to identify the road name. No road names shall be permitted which might cause confusion with existing roads in or near the city. Road names shall be approved by the city council.
(5) Maintenance. Continued maintenance of private roads shall be the responsibility of the property owners served by the roads. Prior to issuance of construction permits, property owners shall enter into a legally binding easement maintenance agreement, which shall be subject to review and approval by the city attorney. Upon execution, the easement maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the city clerk and the county register of deeds. At a minimum, the easement maintenance agreement shall contain the following:
a. Maintenance costs. The easement maintenance agreement shall acknowledge that the road surface and easement area are privately owned, and therefore all construction and improvements within the easement will be contracted and paid for by the signatories to the agreement. The agreement shall set forth a workable method of apportioning maintenance costs.
b. City not responsible. The provisions in the easement maintenance agreement shall in no
way be construed to obligate the city to perform regular inspections of the easement area or to provide necessary repairs or maintenance. The city shall intercede in maintenance of a private road only if a potential health or safety hazard is brought to the attention of city officials.
c. Maintenance needs. The easement maintenance agreement shall acknowledge the responsibility of the signatories to the agreement to maintain the following:
1. Surface grading and resurfacing at regular intervals;
2. Snow and ice removal;
3. Repair of potholes;
4. Maintenance of road drainage systems; and
5. Regular cutting of weeds and grass within the easement.
d. Continuing obligation. The easement maintenance agreement shall specify that the obligation to maintain the easement shall be an obligation running with the land to be served by the private road, and shall be binding upon the owner of such land and their heirs, successors and assigns.
(6) Review and approval. Proposals for construction of private roads shall follow the review procedures set forth in section 14-34, except that review and approval of the city engineer shall be mandatory. The request for approval of a private road shall be submitted in writing to the city manager and shall be accompanied by a plan, copies of the proposed easement and copies of the proposed easement maintenance agreement. The private road plan shall be drawn to scale by a registered professional engineer and shall indicate the following:
a. The exact location of the proposed private road and road easement in relation to intersecting streets and adjacent properties.
b. The location of existing structures on adjacent properties.
c. Topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at two-foot contour intervals, referenced to a U.S.G.S. benchmark.
d. Road cross section, showing type and depth of base and surface materials.
e. Proposed method of drainage.
f. Other information deemed necessary by the city engineer to make the determination required by this article.
(Ord. No. 261, § 6.01, 10-20-1988)
Sec. 14-37. Fees.
Each application filed for division of land and each request for approval of a private road shall be accompanied by required fees. The amount of such fees shall be established by the city council and shall cover the cost of the review required by this article.
(Ord. No. 261, § 7.01, 10-20-1988)
Sec. 14-38. Penalties.
Any violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 261, § 8.01, 10-20-1988)
Secs. 14-39--14-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
LAND PARCEL IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 14-71. Generally.
(a) Purposes. This article has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and of ensuring the orderly growth and harmonious development of the city by requiring:
(1) Adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting equipment, recreation, light, air, privacy and safety from fire hazards.
(2) Establishment of standards for the construction of any and all improvements as required in this article.
(b) Interpretation. The provisions of this article shall be construed to be the minimum requirements necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare within the city. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or supersede any existing regulations of the city, or to conflict with any statutes, laws or regulations of the state or the county; except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a lawful restriction or requirement more severe than existing statutes, laws or regulations. If any section or provision of this article shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdictions, this shall not affect the validity of other sections or provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 252, 3-19-1987)
Sec. 14-72. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Grading means any change or alteration of existing ground surface elevations of any parcel of land by
excavating or filling.
Improvements means any additions to or change of the natural state of the land which increase its value, utility or habitability.
Parcel means a unit of land described by survey or metes and bounds, or identified by lot number in a plat.
Surface drainage means any stormwater collecting on and flowing over the surface of the ground.
(Ord. No. 252, 3-19-1987)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-73. Procedures, requirements, fees and standards.
(a) Deposit of plans and specifications. Any land developer or owner of a parcel of land, prior to construction of any sanitary sewer, any storm sewer, any water main or any stormwater retention pond, or prior to any grading or changing of surface drainage or paving, shall deposit with the city building department the required number of copies, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, of drawings and specifications, together with estimated costs of the improvements.
(b) Plans and specifications.
(1) The plans and specifications shall be prepared by, and each sheet of the plans signed and sealed by, a professional engineer. Plans detailing parcel surveys must be signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor.
(2) Plans shall be prepared on 24-inch by 36-inch size sheets and shall generally be drawn to scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch. The drawings shall contain sufficient detail to properly show the proposed locations and methods of construction or grading. The city consulting engineer may require the plans to be drawn to a scale of 30 feet to the inch when it is deemed necessary to properly show existing conditions. Site plan and profile drawings may also be required when deemed necessary by the engineer.
(3) As-built plans on a polyester film base and acceptable to the city must be submitted, showing the exact location of all water mains, sewers and appurtenances, after completion of the project and before it is accepted by the city. These plans must be prepared and certified by the developer's engineer.
(4) The number of copies of plans required to be submitted to the city building department shall be as follows:
Type of Improvement
Initial Submission
Final Submission
Grading and surface drainage....
3
4
Water mains....
3
4
Sanitary sewers....
3
4
Storm sewer and paving....
3
4
Retention basins....
3
4
(5) Before any construction takes place, all appropriate governmental permits covering noncity jurisdiction must be on file at city hall.
(c) Grading and surface drainage plans.
(1) All fill brought on to the site shall be clean, inert granular or cohesive soil. Building debris, broken concrete, organic material or other objectionable materials will not be allowed to be dumped on a site being filled.
(2) In order to provide effective erosion and sediment control without impeding surface water flow, practical combinations of the following technical principles shall be applied to the erosion control aspects of the grading plan:
a. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one time during development.
b. When land is exposed during development, the exposure should be kept to the shortest practical period of time.
c. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching should be used to protect critical areas exposed during development.
d. Sediment basins (debris basins or silt traps) should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development.
e. Provision should be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions after development.
f. The permanent final vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as practical in the development.
g. The development plan should be fitted to the topography and soil so as to create the least erosion potential.
h. Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and protected.
i. Asphalt paved or grass covered areas shall have a minimum general slope of one percent with specific water-carrying swales having a minimum slope of 0.4 percent.
j. Concrete paved surfaces shall have a minimum slope of 0.4 percent.
k. All project areas shall drain stormwaters to suitable inlet structures which will prevent such stormwater from flowing across adjacent private property and prevent damage to both private and public properties.
l. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the flow of surface water
over easements for public utilities or to impede the flow of surface water across private property in a manner different from the approved grading plan and drainage pattern.
m. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, it will be necessary that a grading survey, prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor, be submitted to the city building department attesting to the fact that the site is graded in accordance with the drainage pattern approved at the time of issuance of the building or land use permit. This may be submitted as part of the as-built construction drawings.
n. In lieu of this land survey, a surety bond, letter of credit or cash deposit in the amount set by the city building department may be required to ensure grading and submission of each survey at a later date when a building, land or structure is otherwise suitable for occupancy during that season of the year when weather conditions make finish grading unfeasible. In such case a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued, and the date for completion of grading shall be indicated on the temporary certificate of occupancy or its related documents.
(d) Storm sewer system and retention basin design criteria and construction requirements.
(1) The developer's engineer must submit copies of all design data, together with plans for any storm drainage system.
(2) Determination of surface water runoff and sizing of sewer system pipes, culverts, open channels shall be as follows:
a. All storm drain systems shall be designed to carry the maximum anticipated stormwater runoff flowing full from the entire contributing acreage. The hydraulic gradient shall generally be kept at the top of pipe, and in no case shall it be higher than two feet below any manhole or catchbasin cover.
b. The "rational method" of design shall be used to determine flow (Q). (Q=CIA)
c. The ten-year storm frequency of I-175/(T+25) shall be used.
d. A realistic coefficient of runoff shall be used based upon the imperviousness of the contributing acreage.
e. An initial time of coefficient of 15 minutes shall be used on residential developments. A shorter time of concentration shall be used in industrial developments.
f. To select pipe sizes the manning's formula with an "N" factor of 0.013 for concrete pipe and an "N" factor of 0.025 for C.M.P. shall be used.
g. The minimum velocity of flow through pipes shall be 2.5 feet per second when flowing full.
h. Pipe joints shall be such as to prevent excessive infiltration.
i. Minimum pipe size shall be 12 inches in diameter unless a restricted outlet is required. Design data must support restriction.
j. Inlet headwater control or outlet tailwater control nomographs with proper "K" factors shall be used to determine culvert size.
k. The Manning's formula shall be used to size an open channel and/or ditch. A minimum "N" factor of 0.035 shall be used unless special treatment is given to the bottom and side slopes, such as riprap or paving.
(3) Stormwater retention is required as follows:
a. On-site retention will be required if the storm drainage outlet is incapable of handling the developed runoff.
b. The allowable outflow from a retention basin shall be restricted to agricultural runoff, which is defined as 0.2 cfs per acre.
c. The volume of retention provided must be equal to or in excess of that required by the county drain commissioner's "simplified retention basin design procedure" for a ten-year frequency storm.
d. All retention basins should have a positive method in which to be dewatered such as by gravity flow or pump outlet.
e. Retention volume on a gravity outflow retention basin is defined as the volume of retention provided above the invert of the outflow pipe. Any volume provided below the invert of the outflow pipe will not be considered as retention.
f. Retention volume must be provided for all acreage contributing to the retention basin, including that acreage off the site.
g. Retention may be provided by either an in-line or off-line retention basin.
h. All in-line basins must have a control structure capable of passing the upstream ten-year storm flow.
i. Provision for maintenance of the retention basin shall be made by the developer with the property owners. The city will not accept the responsibility for the maintenance of any retention basin.
j. All retention basins must have provision for an overflow.
k. The bottom of all retention basins shall be graded in such a manner as to provide positive
flow to the pump or pipe outlet.
l. One foot of freeboard shall be provided above the ten-year storm water elevation.
m. Fencing will be required as needed, depending upon basin depth, steepness of side slopes, etc.
n. All retention basins must be permanently stabilized to prevent erosion.
o. It is not acceptable to retain water on parking lots in excess of one foot of depth. This depth shall not include curbs.
(4) Drainage structures, open channels and/or ditches are regulated as follows:
a. All drainage structures shall be constructed according to latest issue of standard details and specifications of the state department of transportation.
b. Minimum size of all manholes and catchbasins shall be four feet in diameter, and all inlets shall be two feet in diameter.
c. Inlets shall be used only in paved areas and shall not be connected to a sumpless drainage structure, e.g. an inlet can precede a catchbasin.
d. Drainage inlets and catchbasins shall be located as follows:
1. To ensure complete positive drainage of all areas of the development.
2. At all low points of streets and rear yards.
3. Such that there is no flow across a street intersection.
4. Such that there is a maximum of 500 feet of drainage from any particular point in the development to an inlet or catchbasin.
e. The flows to specific catchbasin or inlet castings shall conform to the following:
1. Combination curb and gutter casting (M.D.O.T. Cover K) and gutter casting (M.D.O.T. Cover D-4) a maximum of 3.1 cfs at zero percent grade (sump condition) and decreasing as grade increases.
2. Rear yard or ditch (beehive) casting (M.D.O.T. Cover E) a maximum of 2.5 cfs at zero percent grade (sump condition) and decreasing as grade increases.
f. All drainage systems discharging into lakes, creeks, open drains or natural drainage courses shall terminate with A.M.D.O.T. standard headwall; and the first manhole upstream of a headwall shall have a two-foot-deep sump.
g. Leach basins will not be recognized as acceptable methods of providing adequate storm drainage.
h. Side slopes of all open channels and/or ditches shall be no steeper than 1 vertical to 4 horizontal.
i. Special erosion protection shall be placed at bends, drain inlets or outlets or other location as required in all open channels and/or ditches.
(e) Water mains and sanitary sewers are regulated as follows:
(1) All water mains and appurtenances shall be designed and constructed according to and in conformity with the requirements and specifications of the appropriate county and state agencies.
(2) All sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be designed and constructed in accordance and conformity with the requirements and specifications of the appropriate county and state agencies.
(3) Copies of all required permits must be on file with the city before construction commences.
(f) Pavement design criteria and construction requirements are as follows:
(1) Grades.
a. Minimum grades on roadways with curb and gutter section shall be 0.4 percent and maximum grade shall be 6.0 percent.
b. Minimum grades in parking lots shall be 1.0 percent and maximum 6.0 percent.
c. Vertical curves will be required at all intersection grades where the grade change exceeds 1.0 percent.
(2) Subbase and aggregate base material and construction.
a. Subbase materials shall meet the requirements for granular material class II of M.D.O.T. specifications.
b. Base material shall consist of either 21AA crushed stone, 21A slag or 22A aggregate meeting the gradation requirements of M.D.O.T. specifications.
c. The base shall be constructed in two equal courses. In no instance shall the depth of any one layer be more than six inches compacted thickness nor less than three inches compacted thickness. Each layer shall be spread uniformly and located with an approved motor grader until the surface is smooth and evenly distributed. The floating and leveling shall be done in combination with rolling by a tamping type, vibrating type or pneumatic tired roller until each layer is compacted to 95 percent of its maximum density, measured
according to ASTM Designation D-1557, also known as AASHO No. T-180, for a minimum depth of nine inches. Compaction tests of the base shall be conducted by an independent testing laboratory and results furnished to the city's engineer upon request.
(3) Bituminous aggregate pavement and construction.
a. All materials and construction shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of M.D.O.T. specifications.
(4) Full-depth asphalt pavement and construction. Bituminous aggregate base course shall conform to the latest edition of M.D.O.T. specifications.
(5) Concrete pavement and construction.
a. All concrete shall have a compressive strength at 28 days of not less than 3,500 psi.
b. All concrete shall be produced by use of air entraining Portland cement. Air entrained concrete shall contain 6.5 percent entrained air with a tolerance of plus or minus 1.5 percent.
c. All concrete pavement shall be minimum six-inch uniform thickness and shall have six-inch integral roll curb or four-inch mountable curbs, except industrial development pavements shall have eight-inch minimum uniform thickness, with six-inch roll curbs.
d. All longitudinal and transverse contraction joints shall be sawed one-fourth inch wide and to a depth of one-fourth of the pavement thickness plus one-half inch.
e. On pavements with widths of 31 feet or less, longitudinal joints will be required at the third points of the pavement; and on pavements with widths greater than 31 feet, longitudinal joints will be required at the quarter points of the pavement.
f. Prior to sealing, all joints shall receive a cleaning with a jet of compressed air supplied at a working pressure of not less than 90 psi. in addition to any other cleaning which may be required to ensure a thoroughly clean joint.
g. All joints, either contraction or expansion, shall be filled and sealed with a hot-poured rubber-asphalt type compound which shall be placed in two applications.
h. Maximum single pour width for concrete pavement shall not exceed 31 feet back of curb to back of curb. Pavements with widths greater than 31 feet back of curb to back of curb shall be placed by part width construction.
i. The subgrade shall be constructed for the entire development (special consideration may be given to large developments) prior to the installation of any subbase or concrete pavement and shall be compacted to 95 percent of its maximum density measured according to AASHO T-180 test, accurately trimmed to within one-fourth inch plus or
minus of the established grade and shaped to provide adequate drainage.
j. When required, subbase material, in addition to conforming to requirements of subsection (f)(2)a. of this section, shall be placed not less than four feet wider than the proposed width of the concrete pavement, and compacted for its entire width to not less than 95 percent of its maximum density as measured according to AASHO No. T-180 test.
k. All forms shall be set on a true line and on grade with a minimum of 1,000 lineal feet set prior to and maintained during all paving operations. The proprietor's engineer is to verify the setting of the forms, in writing, prior to placing of the concrete pavement.
l. Concrete pavement placed in intersections and approaches shall be constructed with independent grades to provide smooth riding transitions and a variable joint layout. In addition, concrete pavement placed within all intersections and approaches shall be poured as a single unit from radius point to radius point and shall be constructed two inches greater in thickness than the uniform widths portions of the streets, but shall not exceed nine inches in thickness.
m. All compaction tests of subgrade and subbase shall be conducted by an independent testing laboratory and results furnished to the city's engineer upon request.
(6) Pavement thickness.
a. In residential developments:
1. Pavement on existing natural granular subgrades shall consist of 2 1/2-inch asphalt surface on eight-inch 22 aggregate base or on six-inch 21AA stone, or 21A slag base, or six-inch full-depth asphalt, or six-inch uniform concrete pavement.
2. Pavement on cohesive (clay) soil subgrades shall consist of:
i. Nine-inch full-depth asphalt or eight-inch uniform concrete pavement.
ii. Seven-inch full depth asphalt or six-inch uniform concrete with six-inch subbase, and full-length edge drain.
iii. Seven-inch full-depth asphalt or six-inch uniform concrete with six-inch lime stabilized subgrade and edge drains as needed.
iv. Eight-inch full-depth asphalt or seven-inch uniform concrete on 12-inch excavated, replaced and compacted subgrade.
b. For industrial developments, pavement shall meet county road commission specifications as to type, construction procedures, materials and thickness requirements.
c. All concrete curb and gutter sections shall meet requirements of section 6:09 of current
M.D.O.T. specification and shall be constructed according to M.D.O.T. standard details.
(g) At the time of initial submittal of the required number of copies to the city building department, the land developer or owner shall also deposit the sum of 1.5 percent of the total estimated cost of improvements or $100.00, whichever sum is greater, which amount will be used by the city to defray their expenses incurred for consulting engineering review work.
(h) Upon receipt of the required number of copies of plans, specifications, cost estimates and fees, the building department shall transmit all except one copy to the city's consulting engineers for their review.
(i) Upon completion of his review, the city's consulting engineer shall approve the plans, specifications, cost estimates and fees if they comply with the city's design and construction standards and shall forward such items to the cognizant governmental agencies. If any item does not comply with such design and construction standards, the plans shall be returned to the land developer or owner or their agents with the engineer's notations as to any deficiency. Upon correction of the necessary deficiency, the land developer or owner shall again submit the required number of copies directly to the city's consulting engineer.
(j) Before commencement of construction of any improvements, the owner or the owner's agent shall submit copies of approvals and/or permits of all cognizant governmental agencies to the city's building department.
(k) No grading work or construction of improvements shall be undertaken without city inspection. Any facilities installed without inspection may be required to be removed and reinstalled at the owner's or land developer's expense with proper city inspection.
(l) Prior to commencement of construction, the developer or owner shall deposit with the city the sum as shown below to cover the inspection costs:
(1) On projects less than $100,000.00, the deposit shall be five percent of the total estimated cost.
(2) On projects of $100,000.00 or more, the deposit shall be 3.5 percent of the total estimated cost.
The inspection fees will be drawn from the moneys deposited with the city. The actual inspection cost will be normal hourly billing rate of the city's consulting engineer. Any unused moneys will be rebated, and moneys due will be billed at the completion of the construction.
(m) The owner or contractor shall post a performance bond issued to the city for all grading work, either excavation or filling operations. The amount of the bond shall be equal to the construction cost as estimated by the city engineer or as set by the city engineer if the construction cost cannot be reasonably established.
(Ord. No. 252, 3-19-1987)
Sec. 14-74. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 252, 3-19-1987)
CD15:1
Chapter 15
OFFENSES*
__________
* Cross References: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 22.
__________
Article I. In General
Sec. 15-1. Definitions.
Sec. 15-2. Construction of terms.
Sec. 15-3. Begging.
Sec. 15-4. Loitering on premises where illegal business is being conducted.
Sec. 15-5. Forfeiture of weapons.
Sec. 15-6. Penalty.
Secs. 15-7--15-40. Reserved.
Article II. Offenses Against Public Administration
Sec. 15-41. Interference with police authority or other city officers or employees.
Sec. 15-42. Impersonating a police officer or other city officer or employee.
Sec. 15-43. False alarms.
Sec. 15-44. False report of crime.
Sec. 15-45. Escape.
Sec. 15-46. Assisting escape.
Secs. 15-47--15-80. Reserved.
Article III. Offenses Against Persons
Sec. 15-81. Assault and battery.
Sec. 15-82. Harassment.
Sec. 15-83. Harassing communications.
Secs. 15-84--15-115. Reserved.
Article IV. Offenses Against Property
Sec. 15-116. Destruction of property.
Sec. 15-117. Tampering with a motor vehicle.
Sec. 15-118. Injuring property by reckless use of firearm.
Sec. 15-119. Unlawful procurement or damage to library or literary society materials.
Sec. 15-120. Trespassing generally.
Sec. 15-121. Trespassing upon the grounds of Roosevelt School prohibited.
Sec. 15-122. Larceny.
Sec. 15-123. Receiving stolen goods.
Sec. 15-124. Fraudulent procurement of food or lodging.
Sec. 15-125. Drawing checks with insufficient funds.
Sec. 15-126. Use of false checks, money, weights and measures.
Sec. 15-127. Use of false credit.
Sec. 15-128. Littering.
Secs. 15-129--15-160. Reserved.
Article V. Offenses Against Public Peace
Sec. 15-161. Definitions.
Sec. 15-162. Loitering.
Sec. 15-163. Loitering in a vehicle.
Sec. 15-164. Interfere with others.
Sec. 15-165. Presence on public building or structure; trespassing.
Sec. 15-166. Offensive noises.
Secs. 15-167--15-200. Reserved.
CD15:2
Article VI. Offenses Against Public Safety
Sec. 15-201. Use of chemical agents.
Sec. 15-202. Intoxicated persons not to possess firearms.
Sec. 15-203. Pointing of firearms at other persons.
Sec. 15-204. Reckless handling of a firearm.
Sec. 15-205. Throwing objects from moving vehicles.
Sec. 15-206. Throwing objects at persons or motor vehicles.
Secs. 15-207--15-240. Reserved.
Article VII. Offenses Against Public Morals
Sec. 15-241. Indecent or obscene conduct.
Sec. 15-242. Obscene language.
Sec. 15-243. Indecent exposure.
Sec. 15-244. Window peeping.
Sec. 15-245. Prostitution.
Sec. 15-246. Possession of marihuana.
Sec. 15-247. Controlled substances.
Sec. 15-248. Possession of controlled substance paraphernalia.
Sec. 15-249. Definitions
Sec. 15-250. Possession, sale, manufacture, creation, delivery
Sec. 15-251. Use of controlled substance
Sec. 15-252. Implements of manufacture of controlled substance
Sec. 15-253. Fraudulently obtaining controlled substance
Sec. 15-254. Recruiting, inducing, soliciting, or coercing minor
Sec. 15-255. Loitering where drugs or drug paraphernalia are present
Sec. 15-256. Drug paraphernalia defined
Sec. 15-257. Possession of drug paraphernalia
Sec. 15-258. Sale of drug paraphernalia
Secs. 15-259--15-280. Reserved.
Article VIII. Offenses Concerning Underage Persons
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 15-281. Use of firearms.
Sec. 15-282. Contributing to delinquency.
Sec. 15-283. Curfew.
Sec. 15-284. Parental responsibility.
Sec. 15-285. Furnishing alcohol to minors.
Sec. 15-286. Furnishing cigarettes to minors.
Sec. 15-287. Tobacco products on school property.
Sec. 15-288. Abandoned refrigerators.
Secs. 15-289--15-315. Reserved.
Division 2. Obscene Material
Sec. 15-316. Definitions.
Sec. 15-317. Distributing obscene matter to minor.
Sec. 15-318. Inapplicability of prohibition against dissemination to minor.
Sec. 15-319. Display of obscene matter to minor.
Sec. 15-320. Facilitative misrepresentation as to status as parent, guardian or age of minors.
Sec. 15-321. Injunction against dissemination of sexually explicit material to minors.
Secs. 15-322--15-345. Reserved.
Division 3. Alcohol and Drugs at House Parties
Sec. 15-346. Basis, intent.
Sec. 15-347. Definitions.
Sec. 15-348. Prohibition.
Sec. 15-349. Exemption.
Sec. 15-350. Sale of alcoholic liquor.
CD15:3
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 15-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Act or doing of an act includes an omission to act.
Disorderly person means a person who commits any offense or performs or does an act prohibited by this chapter.
Property includes any matter or thing upon or in respect to which any offense may be committed.
Public place means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access.
Writing and written and any term of like import includes words printed, painted, engraved, lithographed, photographed or otherwise copied, traced or made visible to the eye.
(Ord. No. 339, § 1.01, 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 15-2. Construction of terms.
The rule that a criminal statute is to be strictly construed shall not apply to this chapter or any of its provisions. All provisions of this chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law.
(Ord. No. 339, § 2.01, 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-3. Begging.
It shall be unlawful for any person without the permission of the city to wander about and beg in the street, or from house to house, or sit, stand or take a position in any place and beg from passersby, either by words, gestures or by the exhibiting of a sign.
(Ord. No. 339, § 3.01(A), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Person found begging in a public place deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364.
Sec. 15-4. Loitering on premises where illegal business is being conducted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly loiter in or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted.
(Ord. No. 339, § 3.01(C), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Person loitering in place where unlawful business is conducted deemed disorderly person, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364; frequenting gaming places, MCL 750.309, MSA 28.541.
CD15:4
Sec. 15-5. Forfeiture of weapons.
Any weapon seized by a police officer upon the arrest of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may, upon conviction of such person, be ordered forfeited by the court. Such weapon shall be turned over to the police authorities of the city for disposal, except that any weapon so seized which has been reported stolen shall be returned to the lawful owner upon determination of ownership by the court.
(Ord. No. 339, § 3.01(D), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Forfeiture of weapons, MCL 28.434, 750.239 et seq., MSA 28.100, 28.436 et seq.
Sec. 15-6. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 339, § 14.01, 4-16-1998)
Secs. 15-7--15-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION*
__________
* Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
__________
Sec. 15-41. Interference with police authority or other city officers or employees.
No person shall interfere with any police officer, any member of the police department, or any person duly empowered with police authority or any other city officer or employee while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty.
(Ord. No. 339, § 4.01(A), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479, MSA 28.747.
Sec. 15-42. Impersonating a police officer or other city officer or employee.
(a) No person other than an official police officer of the city shall wear or carry the uniform apparel, badge, identification card, or any other insignia of office like or similar to or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the city.
(b) No person shall act or pretend to be an official police officer of the city or any other city officer or employee.
(Ord. No. 339, § 4.01(b), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: False personation of officers, MCL 750.215 et seq., MSA 28.412 et seq.
Sec. 15-43. False alarms.
CD15:5
It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason, by telephone or otherwise, the police or the fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed.
(Ord. No. 339, § 4.01(C), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: False fire alarms, MCL 750.240.
Sec. 15-44. False report of crime.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or file with the police department any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the city.
(Ord. No. 339, § 4.01(D), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: False report of crime, MCL 750.411a.
Sec. 15-45. Escape.
No person shall escape or attempt to escape from the lawful custody of a police officer or a person duly empowered with police authority.
(Ord. No. 339, § 4.01(E), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Escapes, rescues, jail and prison breaking, MCL 750.183 et seq.
Sec. 15-46. Assisting escape.
No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a police officer, a member of the police department, or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or attempt to escape from such custody.
(Ord. No. 339, § 4.01(F), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Escapes, rescues, jail and prison breaking, MCL 750.183 et seq.
Secs. 15-47--15-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Sec. 15-81. Assault and battery.
(1) Assault. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully assault another or engage in or aid in a fight, quarrel or other disturbance and/or either attempt to commit a battery on another person or do an illegal act that causes another person to reasonably fear an immediate battery. A person who assaults an individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(2) Assault and battery. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a battery on another individual or to commit an assault and battery on another individual by a forceful or violent touching of another person or something closely connected with that person, whether or not that touching causes an injury. A person who assaults and batters an individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90
CD15:6
days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(3) Domestic assault and domestic assault and battery. An individual who assaults and batters his or her spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(4) (a) Deferral of proceedings; conditions. When an individual who has not been convicted previously of a violation of this Section or Section 81 or 81a of the Michigan Penal Code, Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, being MCL 750.81 and MCL 750.81a of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a violation of a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this or Section 81 of the Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of a violation of Section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, and the victim of the assault is the offender's spouse or former spouse, an individual who has a child in common with the offender, or an individual residing or having resided in the same household as the offender, the court, in without entering a judgment of guilty and with the consent of the accused and of the prosecuting attorney in consultation with the victim, may defer further proceedings and place the accused on probation, as provided in this section. However, before deferring proceedings under this subsection, the court shall contact the department of state police and determine whether, according to the records of the department of state police, the accused has previously been convicted under Section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, or under local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section or to Section 81 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, or has previously availed himself or herself of this section. If the search of the records reveals an arrest for a violation of Section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931 or this Ordinance or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section 81 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, but no disposition, the court shall contact the arresting agency and the court that had jurisdiction over the violation to determine the disposition of that arrest for purposes of this section.
(b) Upon a violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as otherwise provided in this section.
(c) An order of probation entered under this subsection may require the accused to participate in a mandatory counseling program. The court may order the accused to pay the reasonable costs of the program.
(d) The court shall enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as otherwise provided in this section if any of the following circumstances exist:
1. The accused commits an assaultive crime during a period of probation. As used in this Ordinance, "assaultive crime" means one or more of the following:
a. The term as defined in this section;
b. The term as defined in Section 9(a) of Chapter X, MCLA 770.9a;
c. A violation of Chapter XI of the Michigan Penal Code, Act No. 328 of the Public
CD15:7
Acts of 1931, being MCL 750.81, 750.90 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
2. The accused violates an order of the court that he or she receive counseling regarding his or her violent behavior.
3. The accused violates an order of the court that he or she have no contact with a named individual.
(e) Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceeding against the person. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt, and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime.
(f) There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any individual. This court shall submit a nonpublic record to be maintained by the department of state police of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section. this record shall be furnished to a court of police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action under Section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, this section, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section 81 of No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931 has already once availed himself or herself of this section.
(Ord. No. 339, § 5.01(A), 4-16-1998; Ord. No. 389, § 1.01, 3-21-2002)
State Law References: Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq.
Sec. 15-82. Harassment.
A person commits the offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he:
(1) Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him to physical contact;
(2) Follows a person in or about a public place;
(3) Engages in a course of conduct or repeatedly commits acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose.
(Ord. No. 339, § 5.01(B), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-83. Harassing communications.
(a) A person commits the offense of harassing communications if, with intent to harass or alarm another person, he communicates with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, or by telegraph, mail or any other form of written communications, in a manner likely to harass or cause alarm.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to use any service provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following:
(1) Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a telephone conversation;
CD15:8
(2) Falsely and deliberately reporting any telephone or telegraph message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime or of an accident;
(3) Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any communication service;
(4) Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone conversation.
(Ord. No. 339, § 5.01(C), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Malicious annoyance by writing, MCL 750.390; harassing communications, MCL 750.540e.
Secs. 15-84--15-115. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Sec. 15-116. Destruction of property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or wantonly injure, damage, deface, break, tamper with or otherwise harm or assume control over any property, public or private, real or personal, not his own.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(A), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq., MSA 28.609 et seq.
Sec. 15-117. Tampering with a motor vehicle.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to, intentionally and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle with intent to injure the vehicle or cause the vehicle to move without the consent of the owner. This subsection shall not apply in case of moving or starting of a motor vehicle by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(B), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 22.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.416, MSA 28.648.
Sec. 15-118. Injuring property by reckless use of firearm.
It shall be unlawful for any person to, because of carelessness, recklessness or negligence, but not willfully or wantonly, cause or allow any firearm under his control to be discharged so as to destroy or injure the property of another, real or personal.
CD15:9
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(C), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 752.862, MSA 28.436(22).
Sec. 15-119. Unlawful procurement or damage to library or literary society materials.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to procure or take in any way from any public library or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part of such materials, with intent to covert such materials to his own use, or with intent to defraud the owner of such materials, or who having procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part of such materials to thereafter covert such materials to his own use or fraudulently deprive the owner of such materials.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface or mutilate or write upon, or by other means injure or mar any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part of such materials belonging to or loaned to any public library, or to the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(D), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Larceny from libraries, MCL 750.364, MSA 28.596; maliciously injuring or mutilating library books, etc., MCL 750.391, MSA 28.623.
Sec. 15-120. Trespassing generally.
(a) Taking into consideration that there is limited public land for public use for recreational vehicles in the city, and that the location and boundaries of any such land is reasonably ascertainable, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain on the land of another for the purpose of operating a snowmobile or off-road or other motorized recreational vehicle without the written consent of the owner, lessee or agent of such land. The term "off-road vehicle" shall mean and include the following for purposes of this section: a motor-driven vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. It includes but is not limited to a multitrack or multiwheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel, three-wheel, or four-wheel vehicle and amphibious machine, a ground-effect air-cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. The vehicles which are the subject of this section do not include a farm vehicle being used for farming; a vehicle used for fire, emergency or law enforcement purposes; a construction or logging vehicle used in the performance of its common function; or a registered aircraft.
(b) In all other cases, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant; and it shall be unlawful for any person being upon the land or premises of another who, upon being notified to depart by the owner or occupant or the agent or servant of either, neglects or refuses to depart.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(E)(1), (2), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.552, MSA 28.820(1).
Sec. 15-121. Trespassing upon the grounds of Roosevelt School prohibited.
CD15:10
Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of Roosevelt School without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of Roosevelt School, upon being notified to depart by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(E)(3), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-122. Larceny.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of larceny by stealing the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release of any writ, process or public record. This section shall apply only if the property stolen has a value of less than $200.00.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(F), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Larceny, MCL 750.356, MSA 28.588.
Sec. 15-123. Receiving stolen goods.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or aid in the concealment of any stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted.
(b) Any person being a dealer in or collector of any merchandise or personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of such dealer or collector, who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the property given to him has a legal right to do so, shall be presumed to have bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may, however, be rebutted by proof.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(G), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.535, MSA 28.803.
Sec. 15-124. Fraudulent procurement of food or lodging.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, put up, board or lodge at any boardinghouse as a guest or boarder by the day, week or month, or to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, unless there is a distinct and express agreement made by such person with the owner, proprietor or keeper of such boardinghouse for credit, with intent to defraud such owner, proprietor or keeper out of the pay for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodations.
(b) Obtaining such food, lodging or accommodations by false pretense or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay on demand, or payment with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying or offering to pay, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(H), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.291--750.293, MSA 28.502--28.504.
Sec. 15-125. Drawing checks with insufficient funds.
CD15:11
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to defraud to make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise upon any bank or other depository knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker or drawer without sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its presentation, or for any person who, with the intent to defraud to make, draw, utter or deliver any check draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for payment when presentation for payment is made to the drawee.
(b) As against the maker or drawer, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee when presented in the usual course of business shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository; but such presumption shall be rebutted by the payment of the amount due, together with all costs and protest fee, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee.
(c) Where such check, draft or order is protested, on the grounds of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository.
(d) The word "credit" as used in this section shall be construed to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon presentation for payment.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(I), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Checks without sufficient funds, MCL 750.131 et seq., MSA 28.326 et seq.
Sec. 15-126. Use of false checks, money, weights and measures.
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to defraud or cheat, to designedly, by color of any false token or writing or by any false or bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by spurious coin or metal in the similitude of coin, or by any other false pretense, cause any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or mortgage any land or interest in land, or obtain the signature of any person to any written instrument, the making whereof would be punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any money or personal property or the use of any instrument, facility or article or other valuable thing or service, or by means of any false weights or measures obtain a larger amount of quantity of property than was bargained for, or by means of any false weights or measures sell or dispose of a less amount of quantity of property than was bargained for.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(J), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.218, MSA 28.415.
Sec. 15-127. Use of false credit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain credit, or purchase or attempt to purchase any goods, property or services, by the use of any false, fictitious or counterfeit credit card, credit number, telephone number or other credit device, or by the use of any credit card, without the authority of
CD15:12
the person to whom such card, number or device was issued, or by the use of any credit card, credit number, telephone number or other credit card, credit number or device has been revoked and notice or revocation has been given to the person to whom issued.
(Ord. No. 339, § 6.01(K), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Credit cards, MCL 750.157m et seq., MSA 28.354(13) et seq.
Sec. 15-128. Littering.
It shall be unlawful to dump garbage, rubbish or waste materials on any public street or public place or on any unlicensed private property.
(Ord. No. 84, § 6.01(7), 7-21-1964)
Cross References: Solid waste, ch. 18.
State Law References: Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq., MSA 13A.8901 et seq.
Secs. 15-129--15-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Sec. 15-161. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Public place means and includes any street, road, highway, alley, building, structure, playground, parking lot, sidewalk, and/or other place owned by the government and/or to which the public is invited and has access.
(Ord. No. 339, § 7.01(intro ¶), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 15-162. Loitering.
It shall be unlawful for a person to stand idly, linger, or delay in movement in any public place and concurrently:
(1) Obstruct or attempt to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of other persons.
(2) Knowingly acquiesce in illegal conduct being perpetrated in such person's presence.
(3) Be under the influence of alcohol, or of a controlled substance, as such term is defined in the Michigan Public Health Code; acting in such a manner as to endanger the safety of another person or property, or to cause a public disturbance.
(4) Consume any intoxicating liquor, beer and/or wine where the public place in question is not licensed to sell or is not a place authorized for consumption of such liquor, beer and/or wine.
CD15:13
(5) Urinate or defecate in a place not expressly designated as a bathroom or lavatory facility for such purpose.
(6) Interfere with local shopping or trade, e.g., remaining in a location which results in a discouragement of one or more persons from entering, walking or otherwise passing to one or more retail stores or service establishments. It is not intended by this provision to prohibit persons assembling with the specific purpose of exercising rights of free speech, such as lawful picketing and/or religious or political communicating.
(7) Remain on the premises of a concert/entertainment theater during a performance without a ticket of admission to such performance.
(8) Be in possession of any one or more of the following dangerous or deadly weapons: concealed firearm, switchblade knife or other knife with a blade that exceeds three inches, dirk, dagger, Bowie knife, knife-like throwing stars, karate sticks, numchucks, knuckles made of any metal, blackjack, billy club, razor, sword, gun, cane, stiletto and/or spear; and/or be in possession of any other device capable of inflicting a severe or fatal injury to a human being where such device is accessible for assault purposes.
(Ord. No. 339, § 7.01(A), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19.
State Law References: Loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364.
Sec. 15-163. Loitering in a vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for a person to, in a motor vehicle not situated on the public highway, sit or stand idly, linger or delay in movement in a public place, and concurrently:
(1) Obstruct or attempt to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of other motor vehicles or pedestrians.
(2) Knowingly acquiesce in illegal conduct being perpetrated in such person's presence.
(3) Be under the influence of alcohol or of a controlled substance as such term is defined in the Michigan Public Health Code.
(4) Consume any intoxicating liquor, beer and/or wine where the public place in question is not licensed to sell or is not a place authorized for the consumption of such liquor, beer and/or wine.
(5) Delay in movement of the vehicle for a period in excess of that period posted as the maximum time to park or stand in the location in question.
(6) Interfere with local shopping or trade, e.g., remaining in a location which results in a discouragement of one or more persons from entering, walking or otherwise passing to one or more retail stores or service establishments. It is not intended by this provision to prohibit persons assembling with the specific purpose of exercising rights of free speech, such as lawful picketing and/or religious or political communicating.
CD15:14
(7) Be in possession of any one or more of the following dangerous or deadly weapons: concealed firearm, switchblade knife or other knife with a blade that exceeds three inches, dirk, dagger, Bowie knife, knife-like throwing stars, karate sticks, numchucks, knuckles made of any metal, blackjack, billy club, razor, sword, gun, cane, stiletto and/or spear; and/or be in possession of any other device capable of inflicting a severe or fatal injury to a human being where such device is accessible for assault purposes.
(Ord. No. 339, § 7.01(B), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 22.
Sec. 15-164. Interfere with others.
It shall be unlawful for a person to, intentionally or with willful or wanton disregard for others, molest, jostle, crowd, shove and/or push one or more persons in a public place.
(Ord. No. 339, § 7.01(C), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Person found jostling or roughly crowding in public deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364.
Sec. 15-165. Presence on public building or structure; trespassing.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person, without express authorization, to climb upon and/or be or remain on any exterior portion of a public building or structure unless such portion of the building or structure is a place to which the public is invited, e.g., public stairs or porches.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to be or remain present in a public park after the time posted as the closing time of the park.
(Ord. No. 339, § 7.01(D), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-166. Offensive noises.
(a) Regulations. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit any of the following acts to occur out-of-doors:
(1) Sound amplification from vehicle or watercraft. Operation or control of a parked, moving vehicle, or parked, or moving watercraft with any sound amplification equipment in or on such vehicle or watercraft producing sound which is clearly audible more than 50 feet from it; however, if a person demonstrates in advance to the city council that this provision results in an unreasonable restraint upon desired expression, and that there are no other reasonable means of expression with respect to speech intended to be disseminated by such person, the city council shall grant such person the right to use sound amplification equipment for the specified time, place and manner which will reasonably afford the opportunity of expression.
(Ord. No. 413, 01-15-2009)
(2) Construction noises. The creation of noise which is clearly audible beyond the property from which it is emanating, resulting from the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, at any time prior to 7:00
CD15:15
a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, prior to 8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. Saturday and prior to 10:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m. on Sunday. No construction work shall take place on New Years Day, Christmas Day, Easter Sunday, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day. A deviation from such limitation shall be authorized if a permit is obtained in advance from the city manager upon a showing that the noise will not result in an unreasonable disturbance of one or more residential occupants.
(Ord. No. 444, 01-02-2013)
(3) Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing continuous or substantially continuous noise for more than 15 minutes which is clearly audible more than 50 feet from the property line on which the noise is emanating.
(4) Radio, stereo equipment and musical instruments on property, vehicle and/or watercraft. The playing of any radio, stereo equipment and television set, or musical instrument in a manner and/or with such volume, from any property, vehicle and/or watercraft so as to produce sound which is clearly audible more than 50 feet from the property from which it is emanating; however, this provision shall not be applicable to a commercial and noncommercial recreational institution with respect to such noises which occur after 8:00 a.m. and prior to 11:00 p.m., and shall not be applicable to a religious institution with respect to such noises which occur after 8:00 a.m. and prior to 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. No. 413, 01-15-2009)
(5) Loud expressions at night. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or the making of other loud noise by any person or persons between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. where such expressions are clearly audible more than 100 feet from the property line of the property from which such expressions are emanating.
(6) Removal of solid waste. The creation of noise audible more than 50 feet from the source of the noise in connection with the removal of solid waste from any premises, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(7) Unloading of materials. The creation of noise in connection with the loading or unloading of materials, goods or other merchandise by the use of motorized equipment, metal-tired hand trucks, racks, conveyors, or other types of equipment during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., where the noise from such loading and/or unloading is clearly audible more than 100 feet from the property from which the noise is emanating.
(8) Recreational equipment. Utilization of recreational equipment, such as skateboards, snowmobiles, off-the-road vehicles, and the like, after sundown and prior to 8:00 a.m. where the noise emanating from such activity is clearly audible more than 50 feet from the property line from which the noise is emanating.
(b) Exemptions. The terms and provisions of this section shall not apply to police, fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicles, and shall not apply to excavations or repairs of streets, highways, bridges and/or utilities on behalf of the county, city, state or federal government and/or duly authorized utility during the evening hours when the public health, safety and/or welfare renders it necessary and/or appropriate to perform
CD15:16
such work during the evening hours and/or on Sunday.
(c) Governing rules in event of conflict. In the event of conflicting ordinance provisions regulating noise and sound, the ordinance provision having the most restrictive regulation shall be applicable.
(Ord. No. 339, § 7.01(E), 4-16-1998)
(d) Severability. The various parts, sections and clauses of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected.
(e) Penalty Clause. Any person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this ordinance, upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation shall be responsible for a municipal infraction and shall pay a civil fine of up to $500.00. A repeat offender shall pay fines prescribed by the city council as follows:
a. Second offense within 12 months $200 civil fine;
b. Third offense within a 12 month period $300 civil fine; and
c. Fourth or subsequent offense within a 12 month period $500 civil fine.
(Ord. No. 413, § 15.166(1), (4), and (e) 1-22-09)
Secs. 15-167--15-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY
Sec. 15-201. Use of chemical agents.
(a) No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical agent or intentionally drink, eat or otherwise introduce any chemical agent into his respiratory or circulatory system. This shall not prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
(b) As used in this section, the term "chemical agent" means any substance containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the property of releasing toxic vapors. The term includes but is not limited to glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon derivatives.
(Ord. No. 339, § 8.01(A), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 752.271 et seq., MSA 28.643(11) et seq.
Sec. 15-202. Intoxicated persons not to possess firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any exhilarating or stupefying drug to carry, have in possession or under control, or use in any manner or discharge any firearm within this state.
(Ord. No. 339, § 8.01(B), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.237, MSA 28.434.
Sec. 15-203. Pointing of firearms at other persons.
CD15:17
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person.
(Ord. No. 339, § 8.01(C), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.233, MSA 28.430.
Sec. 15-204. Reckless handling of a firearm.
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or heedlessly or willfully or wantonly use, carry, handle or discharge any firearm without due caution and circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others.
(Ord. No. 339, § 8.01(D), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 752.863a, MSA 28.436(24).
Sec. 15-205. Throwing objects from moving vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 339, § 8.01(E), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Solid waste, ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, ch. 22.
State Law References: Littering, MCL 752.901 et seq., MSA 28.603(1) et seq.
Sec. 15-206. Throwing objects at persons or motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 339, § 8.01(F), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 22.
State Law References: Objects thrown at motor vehicles, MCL 752.901a, MSA 28.603(1a).
Section 15.207. Fireworks.
(a) Definitions.
As used in this Section, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth herein:
Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended.
Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101.
Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks.
CD15:18
Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1.
Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects.
Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
National holiday means New Year's Day (January 1); Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr (third Monday in January); Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4); Labor Day (first Monday in September); Columbus Day (second Monday in October); Veterans Day (November 11); Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); and Christmas Day (December 25).
Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following:
(i) Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap.
(ii) Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (i) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.
(iii) Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter.
(iv) Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices.
(b) General prohibition on ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks; exception
No person shall ignite, discharge, or use fireworks within the City at any time, except that:
(1) Fireworks may be discharged in strict compliance with any permit issued by the City in accordance with the Act.
(2) Consumer fireworks may be discharged only on the day before, the day of, and the day after, a National holiday. The (ignition, discharge or use of consumer
Fireworks) is prohibited on national Holidays between the hours of 12:00
CD15:19
Midnight and 8:00 a.m. except on New Year’s Day when (ignition, discharge
or use of consumer fireworks) is prohibited between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 450, 07-03-2013)
(3) This subsection (b) shall not apply to low impact fireworks
(c) Additional prohibitions
(1) Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used on public property, including streets and rights-of-way, or on school, church, or private property of another, without the express written permission from the person or entity legally in possession and control of that property to undertake such action.
(2) Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both.
(3) Low impact fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both
(d) Novelties not regulated
This Section does not apply to novelties.
(e) Enforcement
This Section may be enforced by the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, their designees, and any sworn law enforcement officers.
(f) Determination of Violation; seizure of fireworks
If an enforcing official determines that a violation of this Section has occurred, the official may seize the fireworks as evidence of such violation.
(g) Penalty
(i) A violation of this Section is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.00, plus any costs, damages, and expenses as provided in Section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances.
(ii) Upon a finding of responsibility for violation of this Section, the City may dispose of or destroy any consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks retained as evidence for prosecution of the violation.
CD15:20
(iii) In addition to any other penalty provided herein, a person found responsible for violation of this Section shall reimburse the City for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying any consumer or low impact fireworks seized as provided for herein.
(Ord. No. 437, 7-19-2012)
Secs. 15-208--15-240. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Sec. 15-241. Indecent or obscene conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral or obscene conduct in any public place.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(A), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Indecent language, MCL 750.103, 750.337, MSA 28.298, 28.569; person engaged in indecent or obscene conduct deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364.
Sec. 15-242. Obscene language.
It shall be unlawful for any person to utter vile, profane or obscene language in any public place.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(B), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Indecent language, MCL 750.103, 750.337, MSA 28.298, 28.569.
Sec. 15-243. Indecent exposure.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his person.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(C), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a, MSA 28.567(1).
Sec. 15-244. Window peeping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peeping in the windows of any inhabited place.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(D), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Window peeper deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364.
Sec. 15-245. Prostitution.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution.
(b) A person commits the offense of prostitution if she engages in or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another in return for a fee.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(E), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Common prostitute deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364; prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq., MSA 28.703 et seq.
Sec. 15-246. Possession of marihuana.
CD15:21
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally possess or use any amount of marihuana.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term "marihuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; its seeds; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the extracted resin, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(F)(1), (2), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar definition, MCL 333.7106, MSA 14.15(7106).
Sec. 15-247. Controlled substances.
(a) Except as authorized by the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, as adopted by the state as article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq., MSA 14.15(7101) et seq.), a person shall not manufacture, deliver, use or possess a controlled substance as defined by the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, including marihuana, also defined by the Uniform Controlled Substances Act.
(b) When a person who has not been previously convicted of an offense under the Uniform Controlled Substances Act as adopted by the state, or any statute of the United States or any other state, or any ordinance relating to controlled substances, including marihuana, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of possessing or using a controlled substance, or marihuana, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation upon terms and conditions. Upon violation of a term or condition, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilty and is not a conviction for purposes of this article or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime, including the additional penalties imposed by state law for second or subsequent convictions under the Uniform Controlled Substances Act. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section and other ordinance or state law as to an individual. The records and identifications division of the police department shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section. This record shall be furnished to a court or police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action involving the use of a controlled substance, including marihuana, has already once utilized the probation without judgment of guilt provisions in this section.
(c) If an individual is convicted of a violation of this section, the court as part of the sentence, during the period of confinement or the period of probation, or both, may require the individual to attend a course of instruction or rehabilitation program on the medical, psychological and social effects of the misuse of drugs. The court may order the individual to pay a fee for the instruction or program. Failure to complete the instruction or program shall be considered a violation of the terms of probation.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(F)(3), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq., MSA 14.15(7101) et seq.
Sec. 15-248. Possession of controlled substance paraphernalia.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess tools and implements suited particularly to the abuse of
CD15:22
controlled substances, including but not limited to a hypodermic needle, distilling implement, hash pipes of any description, or mechanical closing devices of any description, under such circumstances that they appear to have been adapted, designed or used for the abuse of controlled substances, and such person knowing the paraphernalia to be adapted and designed for the purpose of the abuse of controlled substances with the intent to use or employ the paraphernalia for such abuse.
(Ord. No. 339, § 9.01(F)(4), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Drug paraphernalia, MCL 333.7451 et seq., MSA 14.15(7451) et seq.
Sec. 15-249. Definitions.
(1) “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor included in schedules 1 through 5, of part 72, of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al.
(2) “Controlled substance analogue” means a substance the chemical structure of which is substantially similar to that of a controlled substance in schedule 1 or 2 and that has a narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system substantially similar to or greater than the narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or allucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance included in schedule 1 or 2 or, with respect to a particular individual, that the individual represents or intends to have a narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system substantially similar to or greater than the narcotic, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance included in schedule 1 or 2. Controlled substance analogue does not include 1 or more of the following:
(a) A controlled substance.
(b) A substance for which there is an approved new drug application.
(c) A substance with respect to which an exemption is in effect for investigational use by a particular person under section 505 of the federal food, drug and cosmetic act, chapter 675, 52 Stat. 1052, 21 U.S.C. 355, to the extent conduct with respect to the substance is pursuant to the exemption.
(d) Any substance to the extent not intended for human consumption before an exemption takes effect with respect to the substance.
(3) “Counterfeit prescription form” means a printed form that is the same or similar to a prescription form and that was manufactured, printed, duplicated, forged, electronically transmitted, or altered without the knowledge or permission of a prescriber.
(4) “Counterfeit substance” means a controlled substance that, or the container or labeling of which, without authorization, bears the trademark, trade name or other identifying mark, imprint, number, or device, or any likeness thereof, of a manufacturer, distributor, or dispenser other than the person who in fact manufactured, distributed, or dispensed the substance.
(5) “Deleterious drug” means a drug, other than a proprietary medicine, likely to be destructive to adult human life in quantities of 3.88 grams or less.
(6) “Deliver” or “delivery” means the actual, constructive, or attempted transfer from 1 person to another of a controlled substance, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
CD15:23
(7) “Drug” means a substance recognized as a drug in the official United States pharmacopoeia, official homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States, or official national formulary, or any supplement to any of them; a substance intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in human beings or animals; a substance other than food intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of human beings or animals; or, a substance intended for use as a component of any article specified in this subsection. It does not include a device or its components, parts, or accessories.
(8) “Human consumption” means application, injection, inhalation, or ingestion by a human being.
(9) “Manufacture” means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion, or processing of a controlled substance, directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis. It includes the packaging or repackaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container, except that it does not include:
(a) The preparation or compounding of a controlled substance by an individual for his or her own use.
(b) The preparation, compounding packaging, or labeling of a controlled substance:
(i) By a practitioner as an incident to the practitioner's administering or dispensing of a controlled substance in the course of his or her professional practice.
(ii) By a practitioner, or by the practitioner's authorized agent under his or her supervision, for the purpose of, or as an incident to, research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
(10) “Marihuana” means all parts of the plant Canabis sativa L., growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted there from, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
(11) “Narcotic drug” means 1 or more of the following, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of vegetable origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis:
(a) Opium and opiate, and any salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of opium or opiate.
(b) Any salt, compound, isomer, derivative, or preparation thereof which is chemically equivalent or identical with any of the substances referred to in subdivision (a), but not including the isoquinoline alkaloids of opium.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-250. Possession, sale, manufacture, creation, delivery, or possession with intent to manufacture, create, or deliver a controlled substance classified in schedule 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al., a controlled substance analogue, a counterfeit substance, a deleterious drug, a prescription form, or a counterfeit prescription form.
A person shall not knowingly or intentionally possess, sell, offer for sale, manufacture, create or deliver a controlled substance classified in schedule 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al., a controlled substance analogue, a counterfeit substance, a deleterious drug, a prescription form, a counterfeit prescription form, unless the controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, deleterious drug, or prescription form was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription
CD15:24
or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of the practitioner's professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by law.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. The court may place a person who has not previously been convicted of violating this section on probation subject to the terms and conditions set forth in MCL 333.7411.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-251. Use of a controlled substance or controlled substance analogue.
A person shall not use a controlled substance classified in schedule 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, MCL 333.7201 et. al., or controlled substance analogue unless the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of the practitioner's professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by law.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. The court may place a person who has not previously been convicted of violating this section on probation subject to the terms and conditions set forth in MCL 333.7411.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-252. Implements of manufacture of controlled substance.
(1) A person shall not do any of the following:
(a) Own, possess, or use a vehicle, building, structure, place, or area that he or she knows or has reason to know is to be used as a location to manufacture a controlled substance in violation of this Article or a counterfeit substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of this Article.
(b) Own or possess any chemical or any laboratory equipment that he or she knows or has reason to know is to be used for the purpose of manufacturing a controlled substance in violation of this Article or a counterfeit substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of this Article.
(c) Provide any chemical or laboratory equipment to another person knowing or having reason to know that the other person intends to use that chemical or laboratory equipment for the purpose of manufacturing a controlled substance in violation of this Article or a counterfeit substance or a controlled substance analogue in violation of this Article.
(2) This section does not prohibit the person from being charged with, convicted of, or punished for any other violation of law committed by that person while violating or attempting to violate this section.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-253. Fraudulently obtaining controlled substance or prescription from health care provider.
CD15:25
(1) A person shall not fraudulently obtain or attempt to obtain a controlled substance or a prescription for a controlled substance from a health care provider.
(2) As used in this section, "health care provider" means a health professional, health facility, or local health department as that term is defined in section MCL 333.9206.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. The court may place a person who has not previously been convicted of violating this section on probation subject to the terms and conditions set forth in MCL 333.7411.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-254. Recruiting, inducing, soliciting, or coercing minor to violate this Article.
A person 17 years of age or over who recruits, induces, solicits, or coerces a minor less than 17 years of age to commit or attempt to commit any act that would be a violation of this Article, if committed by an adult, is guilty of a Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-255. Loitering where drugs or drug paraphernalia are present.
No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building, apartment, store, motor vehicle, boat, boathouse, aeroplane or other place of any description whatsoever where a controlled substance or drug parahernalia is used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-256. “Drug paraphernalia” defined.
As used in this Article, “drug paraphernalia” means any equipment, product, material, or combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting; manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing; testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing; injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the following:
(a) An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance.
(b) Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
(c) A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance.
(d) A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose,
CD15:26
and lactose, specifically designed for use with a controlled substance.
(e) A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
(f) An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body.
(g) A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
(h) A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.
(i) A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade and a mirror.
(j) A device, commonly known as a bullet that is specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user.
(k) A device, commonly known as a snorter that is specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose.
(l) A device, commonly known as an automotive safe that is specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled substances.
(m) A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-257. Possession of drug paraphernalia.
A person shall not knowingly or intentionally possess drug paraphernalia.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Sec. 15-258. Sale of drug paraphernalia.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall not sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, knowing that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.
CD15:27
(2) Before a person is arrested for a violation of subsection (1), the prosecuting attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less than 2 business days before the person is to be arrested, that the person is in possession of specific, defined material that has been determined by the prosecuting attorney to be drug paraphernalia. The notice also shall request that the person refrain from selling or offering for sale the material and shall state that if the person complies with the notice, no arrest will be made for a violation of subsection (1).
(3) If a person complies with a notice sent under subsection (2), the compliance is a complete defense for the person against a prosecution under this section, as long as the compliance continues.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both.
(Ord. No. 435, 6-21-2012)
Secs. 15-259--15-280. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
OFFENSES CONCERNING UNDERAGE PERSONS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 15-281. Use of firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to use or possess any firearm or to use and possess any handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling BBs not exceeding .177 caliber by means of spring, gas, or air, outside the curtilage of his domicile unless he is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(A), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 752.891, MSA 28.436(41).
Sec. 15-282. Contributing to delinquency.
No person shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(B), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.145, MSA 28.340.
Sec. 15-283. Curfew.
(a) No child under the age of 17 years shall be permitted or allowed to be upon the public streets, or in any other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b) Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply when the child is with the parent, legal guardian or adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to be with the child or if the child is over 12 years of age and is
CD15:28
upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian and has proof of such permission.
(c) Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply when the child is with the parent, legal guardian or adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to be with the child or if the child is over 12 years of age and is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian and has proof of such permission.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(C)(3)(i)--(iii), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Juvenile curfew, MCL 722.751 et seq., MSA 28.342(1) et seq.
Sec. 15-284. Parental responsibility.
(a) Purpose. This section is declared necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and is intended to address situations where parents have failed to act responsibly and reasonably in the supervision of their minor children to the detriment of the general public.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Delinquent acts means those acts which violate the laws of the United States, or the statutes of the state, or the ordinances of the city, or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court as defined by MCL 712A.2, MSA 27.3178(598.2), but does not include civil infraction traffic violations.
Illegal drugs means controlled substances obtained without a legal prescription.
Juvenile delinquent means those minors whose behavior interferes with the rights of others or menaces the welfare of the city.
Minor means any person under the age of 18 years residing with a parent.
Parent means mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody of a minor or any person acting in the parents stead who have custody or control of the minor.
(c) Parental duties.
(1) It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act.
(2) Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable parental control are the following parental duties:
a. To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal firearms locked in places that are inaccessible to the minor.
b. To know the curfew stated in section 15-283 of the city and to require the minor to observe the curfew.
CD15:29
c. To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school permission.
d. To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be absent.
e. To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from maliciously or willfully destroying real, personal or mixed property which belongs to the city or is located in the city.
f. To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary.
(d) Parental notification.
(1) Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any delinquent act within the city, the parent of the minor shall be immediately notified by the police department, advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason, and the parent's responsibility under this section.
(2) A record of such notification shall be kept with the incident report by the police department.
(e) Parental violation and penalty.
(1) No parent or guardian of any minor under the age of 18 years shall fail to exercise reasonable parental control over such minor. An adjudication that the minor has violated a provision of this section which is a misdemeanor, or a finding that the minor is responsible for a violation of this section which is deemed a civil infraction shall be prima facie evidence that the parent or guardian failed to exercise reasonable parental control.
(2) Pursuant to the violation of this section, the parent/guardian of a minor shall be held civilly responsible for the damages caused by the commission of any delinquent act within the city.
(3) Upon the first conviction of a violation of this subsection, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75.00 nor more than $100.00.
(4) Upon the second conviction of a violation of this subsection, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and in addition shall be sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent participate in, through completion, a court-approved, community-based treatment program (such as parenting skills, family services, employment and training, etc.,) or, at the discretion of the court, be imprisoned for a period up to 30 days.
(5) Upon the third or subsequent violation and conviction of this subsection, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 and at the discretion of the court be imprisoned for a period up to 90 days.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(C), 4-16-1998)
CD15:30
Sec. 15-285. Furnishing alcohol to minors.
No person shall willfully give or furnish any alcoholic beverage to a minor except upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(D), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Alcoholic liquors, ch. 3.
State Law References: Selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor to person less than 21 years of age, MCL 436.1701, MSA 18.1175(701).
Sec. 15-286. Furnishing cigarettes to minors.
(a) No person under the age of 18 shall purchase, offer or attempt to purchase, have in his possession or use any product which is used for the formation of a smoking device, tobacco, tobacco snuff, chewing tobacco, or tobacco in any other form.
(b) No person shall sell, furnish, give or deliver any product which is used for the formation of a smoking device, tobacco, tobacco snuff, chewing tobacco, or tobacco in any other form to any person under the age of 18.
(c) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(E), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Youth tobacco act, MCL 722.641 et seq., MSA 25.281 et seq.
Sec. 15-287. Tobacco products on school property.
(a) Limited. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, a person shall not use a tobacco product on school property.
(b) Penalty. A person who violates subsection (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00.
(c) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
School district means a school district, local act school district, or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the school code of 1976, Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.1 et seq., MSA 15.4001 et seq.); a joint high school district formed under part 3a of Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.171 et seq., MSA 15.4171 et seq.); or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these.
School property means a building, facility or structure and other real estate owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a school district.
Tobacco product means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed or placed in a person's mouth.
Use a tobacco product means any of the following:
CD15:31
(1) The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device.
(2) The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product.
(3) The placing of a tobacco product within a person's mouth.
(d) Exceptions. Subsection (a) does not apply to those parts of school property consisting of outdoor areas, including but not limited to an open-air stadium, during either of the following time periods:
(1) Saturdays, Sundays and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours.
(2) After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(F), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-288. Abandoned refrigerators.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child in the container without first removing the snaplock or other locking device from the lid or cover.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(I)(G), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Abandoned or unattended icebox or refrigerator, MCL 750.493d, MSA 28.761(4).
Secs. 15-289--15-315. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
OBSCENE MATERIAL
Sec. 15-316. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Disseminate means to sell, lend, give, exhibit, or show or to offer or agree to do the same.
Erotic fondling means touching a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if the person is female, breasts, for the purpose of sexual gratification or stimulation.
Exhibit means to do one or more of the following:
(1) Present a performance.
(2) Sell, give, or offer or agree to sell or give a ticket to a performance.
(3) Admit a minor to premises where a performance is being presented or is about to be presented.
CD15:32
Harmful to minors means sexually explicit matter which meets all of the following criteria:
(1) Considered as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest of minors as determined by contemporary local community standards.
(2) It is patently offensive to contemporary local community standards of adults as to what is suitable for minors.
(3) Considered as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational and scientific value for minors.
Local community means the county.
Minor means a person under 18 years of age.
Nudity means the lewd display of the human male or female genitals or pubic area.
Prurient interest means a lustful interest in sexual stimulation or gratification. In determining whether sexually explicit matter appeals to the prurient interest, the matter shall be judged with reference to average 17-year-old minors. If it appears from the character of the matter that it is designed to appeal to the prurient interest of a particular group of persons, including but not limited to homosexuals or sadomasochists, the matter shall be judged with reference to average 17-year-old minors within the particular group for which it appears to be designed.
Sadomasochistic abuse means either of the following:
(1) Flagellation or torture, for sexual stimulation or gratification, by or upon a person who is nude or clad only in undergarments or in a revealing or bizarre costume.
(2) The condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained for sexual stimulation or gratification, of a person who is nude or clad only in undergarments or in a revealing or bizarre costume.
Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Sexual intercourse means intercourse, real or simulated, whether genital-genital, oral-genital, anal-genital, or oral-anal, whether between persons of the same or opposite sex or between a human and an animal.
Sexually explicit matter means sexually explicit visual material, sexually explicit verbal material, or a sexually explicit performance.
Sexually explicit performance means a motion picture, exhibition, show, representation, or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual excitement, erotic fondling, sexual intercourse, or sadomasochistic abuse.
CD15:33
Sexually explicit verbal material means a book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter reproduced in any manner, or sound recording which contains an explicit and detailed verbal description or narrative account of sexual excitement, erotic fondling, sexual intercourse or sadomasochistic abuse.
Sexually explicit visual material means a picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation which depicts nudity, sexual excitement, erotic fondling, sexual intercourse or sadomasochistic abuse, or a book, magazine or pamphlet which contains such a visual representation. An undeveloped photograph, mold or similar visual material may be sexually explicit material notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make its sexually explicit content apparent.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(II)(A), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 15-317. Distributing obscene matter to minor.
(a) A person is guilty of distributing obscene matter to a minor if that person does either of the following:
(1) Knowingly disseminates to a minor sexually explicit visual or verbal material that is harmful to minors; or
(2) Knowingly exhibits to a minor a sexually explicit performance that is harmful to minors.
(b) A person knowingly disseminates sexually explicit matter to a minor when the person knows both the nature of the matter and the status of the minor to whom the matter is disseminated.
(c) A person knows the nature of matter if the person either is aware of the character and content of the matter or recklessly disregards circumstances suggesting the character and content of the matter.
(d) A person knows the status of a minor if the person either is aware that the person to whom the dissemination is made is under 18 years of age or recklessly disregards a substantial risk that the person to whom the dissemination is made is under 18 years of age.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(II)(B), 4-16-1998)
State Law References: Distribution of obscene material to minors, MCL 722.671 et seq., MSA 25.254(1) et seq.
Sec. 15-318. Inapplicability of prohibition against dissemination to minor.
Section 15-317 does not apply to the dissemination of sexually explicit matter to a minor by any of the following persons:
(1) A parent or guardian who disseminates sexually explicit matter to his child or ward.
(2) A teacher or an administrator at a public or private elementary or secondary school which complies with the provision of Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.1 et seq., MSA 15.4001 et seq.), who disseminates sexually explicit matter to a student as part of a school program permitted by law.
CD15:34
(3) A licensed physician or certified psychologist who disseminates sexually explicit matter in the treatment of a patient.
(4) A librarian employed by a library of a public or private elementary or secondary school which complies with the provisions of Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.1 et seq., MSA 15.4001 et seq.), or employed by a public library, who disseminates sexually explicit matter in the course of that person's employment.
(5) Any public or private college or university or any other person who disseminates sexually explicit matter for a legitimate medical, scientific, governmental or judicial purpose.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(II)(C), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-319. Display of obscene matter to minor.
(a) A person is guilty of displaying obscene matter to a minor if that person possesses managerial responsibility for a business enterprise selling visual matter which depicts sexual intercourse or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors, and that person knowingly permits a minor who is not accompanied by a parent or guardian to examine that matter.
(b) A person knowingly permits a minor to examine visual matter which depicts sexual intercourse or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors, if the person knows both the nature of the matter and the status of the minor permitted to examine the matter.
(c) A person knows the nature of the matter if the person either is aware of the character and content of the matter or recklessly disregards circumstances suggesting the character and content of the matter.
(d) A person knows the status of a minor if the person either is aware that the person who is permitted to examine the matter is under 18 years of age or recklessly disregards a substantial risk that the person who is permitted to examine the matter is under 18 years of age.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(II)(D), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-320. Facilitative misrepresentation as to status as parent, guardian or age of minors.
(a) A person is guilty of facilitative misrepresentation when that person knowingly makes a false representation that he is the parent or guardian of a minor, or that a minor is 18 years of age or older, with the intent to facilitate the dissemination to the minor of sexually explicit matter that is harmful to minors.
(b) A person knowingly makes a false representation as to the age of a minor or as to the status of being the parent or guardian of a minor if the person either is aware that the representation is false or recklessly disregards a substantial risk that the representation is false.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(II)(E), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-321. Injunction against dissemination of sexually explicit material to minors.
A prosecuting attorney may commence an action against a person, other than a person described in section 15-318, to enjoin that person from disseminating to a minor sexually explicit matter that is harmful to
CD15:35
minors.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(II)(F), 4-16-1998)
Secs. 15-322--15-345. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
ALCOHOL AND DRUGS AT HOUSE PARTIES*
__________
* Cross References: Alcoholic liquor, ch. 3.
__________
Sec. 15-346. Basis, intent.
The city council has found that the unregulated use of alcohol and drugs by minors creates social problems, and that the use of alcohol and drugs by minors can have devastating effects on not only the minors but on the public at large, including, without limitation, injuries caused by vehicles operated by persons under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. The city council has further found and concluded that adults could significantly alleviate alcohol and drug problems in minors by assuming the responsibility for house parties which occur at their residences. It is the intent of this division to encourage adults to assume such responsibility.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(III)(A)(1), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-347. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult means a person 17 years of age or older.
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Liquor Control Code, Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq., MSA 18.1175(101) et seq.).
Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes.
Control means any form of regulation or dominion, including the exercise of an ownership and/or possessory right.
Drug means a controlled substance as defined by article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq., MSA 14.15(7101) et seq.).
House party means a gathering of persons at a residence, other than and/or in addition to the owner or those with rights of possession, or their immediate family members, on the premises by express permission or by acquiescence.
CD15:36
Minor means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess or consume alcoholic beverages pursuant to MCL 436.1701, MSA 18.1175(701).
Residence means a home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, together with the curtilage of such dwelling unit.
Work location means, as applicable, either the specific place or places of employment, or the territory or territories regularly visited by the person in pursuance of the person's occupation, or both.
(Ord. No. 128, § 1.01, 7-20-1972; Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(III)(B), 4-16-1998)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 15-348. Prohibition.
An adult having control of any residence shall not allow a house party to take place at such residence if any alcoholic beverage or drug is possessed or consumed at such residence by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic beverage or drug was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at such residence, and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at such residence.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(III)(C), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-349. Exemption.
The provisions of this division shall not apply to legally recognized religious observances or legally recognized educational activities which are conducted under the guidance of an ordained or duly licensed person.
(Ord. No. 339, § 10.01(III)(D), 4-16-1998)
Sec. 15-350. Sale of alcoholic liquor.
(a) A person under the age of 21 shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this section. A person under the age of 21 who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions:
(1) For the first violation a fine of not more than $100.00.
(2) For a violation of this subsection following a prior violation of this subsection, section 703 of Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq., MSA 18.1175(101) et seq.) or section 33b(1) of former Public Act No. 8 of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.), a fine of not more than $200.00.
(3) For a violation of this subsection following two or more prior violations of this subsection, section 703 of Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq., MSA 18.1175(101) et seq.) or section 33b(1) of former Public Act No. 8 of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.), a fine of not more than $500.00.
CD15:37
(b) A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person under the age of 21, or notwithstanding subsection (a) a person under the age of 21 who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both.
(c) A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person under the age of 21 has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor. A person under the age of 21 who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required in this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00.
(d) The city police department, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq., MSA 25.244(1) et seq.) allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased or attempted to consume, possess or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a) shall notify the parent, custodian or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the city police department. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the city police department determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq., MSA 25.244(1) et seq.). The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice, including but not limited to notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), his parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection.
(e) This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his employment if employed by a person licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq., MSA 18.1175(101) et seq.), by the state liquor control commission, or by an agent of the state liquor control commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his personal consumption.
(f) The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of 21 who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course.
(g) The consumption by a person under the age of 21 of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue or temple is not prohibited by this section.
(h) Subsection (a) does not apply to a person under the age of 21 who participates in either or both of the following:
(1) An undercover operation in which the person under the age of 21 purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.
CD15:38
(2) An undercover operation in which the person under the age of 21 purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person under the age of 21 was not under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation.
(i) The state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a person under the age of 21 for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a) of this section or section 15-285.
(Ord. No. 128, § 1.01, 7-20-1972)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703, MSA 18.1175(703).
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, acquisition of property for public use, § 2.3(a); police powers of the council, parks and recreational facilities, § 5.2.
Cross References: Environment, ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; vegetation, ch. 24; waterways, ch. 25.
State Law References: Power of city to acquire and maintain parks, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 23; acquisition of parks, MCL 141.321 et seq., MSA 5.2440(1) et seq.; authority to operate system of public recreation, MCL 123.51 et seq., MSA 5.2421 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq., MSA 17.470(1) et seq.
__________
Sec. 16-1. Use of city-owned parks and beaches.
Sec. 16-2. Penalties.
Sec. 16-1. Use of city-owned parks and beaches.
(a) The following shall be prohibited in city-owned parks and beaches:
(1) Admittance from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(2) Open fires, except in designated grills.
(3) Alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs.
(4) Glass containers.
(5) Pets.
(6) Motorized vehicles, except in designated parking areas.
(7) Anchoring or mooring of watercraft.
(8) Launching of watercraft, except from the Dollar Lake Boat Ramp.
(9) No golfing, except for events approved by the City of Keego Harbor.
(10) Sunbathing, bathing, or swimming in the nude.
(11) Littering or dumping of garbage, yard waste, or debris.
(b) Use of the Dollar Lake Boat Ramp is limited to authorized users subject to the regulations adopted by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 212, § 6.01, 1-20-1983; Ord. No. 268, § 1.01, 4-19-1990; Ord. No. 359, § 1.01, 8-17-2000)
Sec. 16-2. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 212, § 9.01, 1-20-1983; Ord. No. 301, § 9.01, 7-20-1995)
Chapter 17
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation and licensing of hawkers and peddlers, § 2.3(nn).
Cross References: Businesses, ch. 6; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19.
State Law References: Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq., MSA 19.691 et seq.; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq., MSA 3.240(1) et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq., MSA 3.240(31) et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq., MSA 4.1241 et seq.; home solicitations sales, MCL 445.111 et seq., MSA 19.416(201) et seq.
__________
Sec. 17-1. Definitions.
Sec. 17-2. License required.
Sec. 17-3. Dissemination of food subject to contamination prohibited.
Sec. 17-4. Permit application.
Sec. 17-5. Referral of license applications.
Sec. 17-6. City council authorized to adopt other regulations.
Sec. 17-7. Granting of license.
Sec. 17-8. Inspection of foodstuffs.
Sec. 17-9. Physical examination required.
Sec. 17-10. Compliance with traffic regulations.
Sec. 17-11. Obstructing traffic prohibited.
Sec. 17-12. Exhibition of license.
Sec. 17-13. Revocation, suspension of license.
Sec. 17-14. Hours prohibited.
Sec. 17-15. Violation; penalty.
Sec. 17-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Hawker or peddler means any person who goes from house to house, or from place to place, or from or upon the streets, alleys or public places within the city selling or offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, or who takes order for goods, wares or merchandise, for future delivery. It shall include magazine salesmen, fruit and vegetable vendors, or persons selling household appliances, clothing, novelties or any other merchandise by the above method. However, nothing contained in this definition shall apply to the sale of daily or weekly newspapers or to milk delivery vehicles or to the wholesale and delivery of food to retail stores in the city.
(Ord. No. 42, § 1.01, 4-22-1959)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 17-2. License required.
No person shall engage or assist as a helper in the business of hawking or peddling within the city without a license.
(Ord. No. 42, § 2.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-3. Dissemination of food subject to contamination prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hawk, peddle or vend any meat or meat products of any kind and/or any fresh, cured or smoked fish of any kind, and/or any ice cream or frozen custard desserts or similar products, and/or beverages, and/or any other food which might be deemed by the city council to be subject to contamination by this method of merchandising, from door to door or from or upon the streets, alleys or public places in the city.
(Ord. No. 42, § 3.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-4. Permit application.
(a) Any person desiring to engage in the business of hawking or peddling within the city shall make application in writing for permission to do so, to the city clerk, upon blanks to be provided by the city clerk, who shall refer all such applications to the city council for investigation and approval, when it is proposed to sell food for human consumption. The city clerk shall require such applicant to state in writing upon such blanks:
(1) His full name, residence and post office address.
(2) The class of license for which he is applying.
(3) The kind of goods, wares or merchandise he proposes to sell.
(4) The length of time for which he wishes to obtain a license.
(5) Whether the applicant expects to use a vehicle and the description of such vehicle, together with the vehicle license number.
(b) Such application shall be accompanied by two photographs of the applicant at least two inches square and a set of fingerprints made by the police department.
(c) Such applicant shall also give the names and addresses of two persons as reference.
(Ord. No. 42, § 4.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-5. Referral of license applications.
All applications for license for the sale of food for human consumption shall be referred to the city council for its approval and determination as to whether the applicant proposes to sell any foodstuffs the peddling or vending of which is prohibited by section 17-3, and no such license shall be issued by the city clerk under this chapter until the application has been approved by the city council.
(Ord. No. 42, § 5.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-6. City council authorized to adopt other regulations.
The city council may from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, as they may deem necessary to regulate and govern the peddling, hawking or vending of any foodstuffs intended for human consumption, upon streets, sidewalks or public places of the city.
(Ord. No. 42, § 6.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-7. Granting of license.
The city clerk is empowered, upon payment of the proper fees, to grant a license to any person presenting an application in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Such license shall not be transferable or assignable. The fees for such license shall be set from time to time. All licenses issued under this section shall expire on May 31 of each year following the date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 42, § 7.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-8. Inspection of foodstuffs.
If the applicant for a license under this chapter proposes to sell fruits, vegetables or other perishable foodstuffs, he shall take them to the city manager for inspection and must obtain a certificate from the city manager each day, showing that such fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are fit for human consumption, and that the methods and means of conveying and delivering are sanitary and safe so as to protect the health of the public.
(Ord. No. 42, § 8.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-9. Physical examination required.
No person who is affected with any infectious disease or with any venereal disease in a communicable form shall work or be permitted to work as a hawker or peddler. Whenever required by the city council, any person so employed shall submit to a physical examination by a physician approved by the city council. If as a result of such examination such person shall be found to be affected with any infectious disease, or with any venereal disease in a communicable form, such employment shall immediately cease; and such person shall not engage in hawking and peddling until such time as the city council shall, after a physical examination, issue a permit entitling him to resume work.
(Ord. No. 42, § 10.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-10. Compliance with traffic regulations.
Licensees under this chapter shall comply with all traffic provisions and shall not remain standing at one place on any of the streets, alleys or public places for a longer period of time than five minutes while engaging in such business.
(Ord. No. 42, § 11.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-11. Obstructing traffic prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to stand or be on any public street, alley or public place, or in any building or place of business abutting on any street, alley or public place and attract persons or induce persons to congregate on any public sidewalk, street, alley or public place so as to tend to obstruct traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular.
(Ord. No. 42, § 12.01, 4-22-1959)
Cross References: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 22.
Sec. 17-12. Exhibition of license.
It shall be the duty of every licensee under this chapter to exhibit the license to the city manager or a city police officer or any person when requested to do so, and the failure to show the license upon request shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 42, § 14.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-13. Revocation, suspension of license.
The city manager shall have authority to revoke or suspend any license issued under this chapter for the violation of any of the terms of this chapter or the violation of the health and/or food laws of the state or the violation of the criminal statutes of the state or of the United States. Such revocation shall be by giving written notice to the licensee signed by the city manager; however, in the event of such revocation or suspension of any license, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council if such hearing is demanded in writing and presented to the city clerk within ten days from the date of revocation or suspension of license. Such hearing shall be commenced at the following regular meeting of the city council; and the council, after hearing both sides of the question, shall act as sole judge as to whether or not the revocation or suspension shall stand.
(Ord. No. 42, § 16.01, 4-22-1959)
Sec. 17-14. Hours prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in hawking and peddling upon the streets, alleys and public places within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day during the months of June, July and August and between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day during other months.
(Ord. No. 127, § 1.01, 5-18-1972)
Sec. 17-15. Violation; penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 42, § 18.01, 4-22-1959)
CD 18:1
Chapter 18
SOLID WASTE*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation and control of the disposition and handling of garbage and refuse, § 2.3(gg).
Cross References: Dead animals, § 4-44; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; water supply and waste disposal for swimming pools, § 5-302; environment, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 13; littering as an offense against property, § 15-128; throwing objects from moving vehicles, § 15-205; utilities, ch. 23; littering prohibited in waterways, § 25-47.
State Law References: Solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq., MSA 13A.11501 et seq.; solid waste facilities, waterworks, sewers and disposal systems, MCL 324.4301 et seq., MSA 13A.4301 et seq.; garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq., MSA 5.2726(1) et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq., MSA 13A.11101 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq., MSA 13A.14501 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.471 et seq., MSA 13A.11201 et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 18-1--18-30. Reserved.
Article II. Collection and Disposal
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18-31. Definitions.
Sec. 18-32. Violation; penalty.
Sec. 18-33. Public nuisance.
Secs. 18-34--18-55. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 18-56. Required.
Sec. 18-57. Issuance.
Secs. 18-58--18-80. Reserved.
Division 3. Residential
Sec. 18-81. Provided by city.
Secs. 18-82--18-105. Reserved.
Division 4. Commercial and Industrial
Sec. 18-106. Restrictions.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 18-1--18-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1.
CD 18:2
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Family unit means one or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, inclusive of household servants. A number of persons living and cooking together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit having a continuing nontransient domestic character though not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, group of students, association, lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie or organization which is not a recognized religious order, nor include a group of individuals whose association is temporary and resort/seasonal or similar to a boardinghouse, motel or hotel, or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or terms on a similar determinable period.
Garbage includes all animal or vegetable wastes which accumulate in the course of marketing, processing, preparing and serving foods.
Refuse or wastes and waste materials means garbage, rubbish and yard wastes, but do not include materials which may be retained and processed for their salvage value.
Residential unit means a structure or any part of a structure, together with any connected land area set aside or retained for the use of a single-family unit.
Rubbish means all forms of dry waste material which may accumulate in the home, in places of business, in industrial establishments, or in public buildings and institutions.
Yard wastes means grass clippings, leaves, trimmings from shrubs and any other wastes that accumulate from the normal maintenance of lawns and landscaping, excluding earth.
(Ord. No. 84, § 2.01, 7-21-1964)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-32. Violation; penalty.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7, except that persons violating the provisions of division 3 shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 84, § 7.01, 7-21-1964)
Sec. 18-33. Public nuisance.
All violations of this article are declared to be a public nuisance per se and notwithstanding the penal provisions of this article may be abated by injunctive or other appropriate relief.
(Ord. No. 84, § 8.01, 7-21-1964)
CD 18:3
Secs. 18-34--18-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, licenses, § 2.3(q).
__________
Sec. 18-56. Required.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as denying to any person the right to transport or dispose of the wastes originating in his own home or business establishment in any lawful manner; but every person desiring to collect refuse on a commercial basis with one or more regular customers, and to transport garbage or other refuse on the streets and ways of the city must first obtain a license for refuse collection and transportation from the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.01, 7-21-1964)
Sec. 18-57. Issuance.
The city clerk is authorized and directed to issue licenses to contractors who wish to handle commercial wastes upon their compliance with the following conditions:
(1) Submission of a letter of application accompanied by proof that the applicant:
a. Owns and will use standard, fully enclosed, watertight equipment.
b. Is fully covered by public liability insurance of types and in amounts as established by the city council.
c. Owns or has access to adequate disposal facilities.
(2) Posts a surety bond in an amount as established by the city council running to the city to guarantee compliance with this article, and the conduct of his operations so as not to create a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 84, § 3.02, 7-21-1964)
Secs. 18-58--18-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
RESIDENTIAL
Sec. 18-81. Provided by city.
CD 18:4
(a) Rules. The city will provide for the regular collection of refuse or waste materials from single-family residential units according to a published schedule, in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated from time to time.
(b) Procedure. Containers and bundles shall be placed at the curb or at the edge of the shoulder of the roadway not earlier than 6:00 pm of the day before collection, and the empty containers must be removed from the street not later than noon of the day following collection. All trash containers to be stored in a garage or behind the house so that trash containers are not visible from the street.
(Ord. No. 84, § 4.01, 7-21-1964, Ord. No. 414, 5-21-2009)
Secs. 18-82--18-105. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL*
__________
* Cross References: Businesses, ch. 6.
__________
Sec. 18-106. Restrictions.
(a) Procedure. Containers and bundles shall be placed at the curb or at the edge of the shoulder of the roadway not earlier than 6:00 pm of the day before collection, and the empty containers must be removed from the street not later than noon of the day following collection. All trash containers to be stored in a garage or behind the house so that trash containers are not visible from the street.
(b) It is not the intent of this article to restrict the handling of commercial and industrial refuse more than is necessary for the protection of public health, safety and convenience.
(Ord. No. 84, § 5.01, 7-21-1964, Ord. No. 414, 5-21-2009)
CD19:1
Chapter 19
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, establishment and vacation of streets, alleys, public ways and other public places, and the use, regulation, improvement and control of the surface of such streets, alleys, public ways and other public places, and of the space above and beneath them, § 2.3(f); a plan of streets and alleys within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the municipal limits, § 2.3(h).
Cross References: Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(10); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(11); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 12; land development, ch. 14; loitering, § 15-162; parks and recreation, ch. 16; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 17; telecommunications, ch. 21; traffic and vehicles, ch. 22; utilities, ch. 23; vegetation, ch. 24; waterways, ch. 25; zoning, ch. 26.
State Law References: City control of highways, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 29; liability of local government for injury the result of not keeping highway in reasonable repair, MCL 691.1402, MSA 3.996(102).
__________
Article I. In General
Sec. 19-1. Posting handbills, similar materials prohibited.
Secs. 19-2--19-35. Reserved.
Article II. Excavations
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 19-36. Guarding excavations and obstructions.
Sec. 19-37. Duties of police.
Sec. 19-38. Failure to comply with regulations.
Secs. 19-39--19-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 19-61. Required.
Sec. 19-62. Application.
Sec. 19-63. Deposit required.
Sec. 19-64. Granting.
Sec. 19-65. Record of permits.
Sec. 19-66. Requirements for work under permit.
Secs. 19-67--19-90. Reserved.
Division 3. Improved Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Sec. 19-91. Openings in paved streets.
Sec. 19-92. Openings in streets or other public places prior to scheduled improvement.
Secs. 19-93--19-125. Reserved.
Article III. Culverts, Ditches and Driveways
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 19-126. Location.
Sec. 19-127. Fees.
Sec. 19-128. Penalties.
Secs. 19-129--19-150. Reserved.
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 19-151. Required.
CD19:2
Secs. 19-152--19-175. Reserved.
Division 3. Construction
Sec. 19-176. Regulations.
Secs. 19-177--19-210. Reserved.
Article IV. Snow and Ice Removal
Sec. 19-211. Definitions.
Sec. 19-212. Required.
Sec. 19-213. Enforcement.
Sec. 19-214. Failure to clear.
Sec. 19-215. Depositing of snow on public ways.
Sec. 19-216. Waivers.
Sec. 19-217. Penalties.
Secs. 19-218--19-230. Reserved.
Article V. Rights-of-Way
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 19-231. Short title.
Sec. 19-232. Purpose/Legislative findings.
Sec. 19-233. Definitions.
Secs. 19-234--19-240. Reserved.
Division 2. Disruption of City Rights-of-Way
Sec. 19-241. Disruption of right-of-way.
Sec. 19-242. Permit application procedures.
Sec. 19-243. Disruption permit fee.
Sec. 19-244. Disruption permit term and extension.
Sec. 19-245. Permit terms and conditions.
Sec. 19-246. Permittee's disruption of city right-of-way.
Sec. 19-247. Indemnification.
Sec. 19-248. Insurance.
Sec. 19-249. Revocation of permit.
Sec. 19-250. Revocation procedure.
Sec. 19-251. No waiver.
Secs. 19-252--19-260. Reserved.
Division 3. Use and Occupancy of City's Rights-of-Way
Sec. 19-261. Use permit required.
Sec. 19-262. Exemption.
Sec. 19-263. Permit application procedures.
Sec. 19-264. Use permit fee.
Sec. 19-265. Use permit term and renewal.
Sec. 19-266. Use permit terms and conditions.
Sec. 19-267. Permittee's use and occupancy of city right-of-way.
Sec. 19-268. Indemnification.
Sec. 19-269. Insurance.
Sec. 19-270. Revocation of permit.
Sec. 19-271. Revocation procedure.
Sec. 19-272. No waiver.
Secs. 19-272--19-280. Reserved.
Division 4. Miscellaneous
Sec. 19-281. Violations/penalties.
Sec. 19-282. Notices.
Sec. 19-283. Underground installation.
CD19:3
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 19-1. Posting handbills, similar materials prohibited.
No person shall post, paste, nail or paint or in any way attach any placard, poster, handbill, card or advertising matter of any kind, upon any fence, post, wall, tree, pole or upon any other structure in any street, highway, alley or public place in the city.
(Ord. No. 185, § 2.01, 3-15-1979)
State Law References: Destruction or injury of trees on public highways, MCL 247.235, MSA 9.355.
Secs. 19-2--19-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
EXCAVATIONS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 19-36. Guarding excavations and obstructions.
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the city street or sidewalks, such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon such place of excavation and upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to streets suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night during the maintenance of such obstructions, and such lights shall also be kept burning at all times when visibility is such that the law requires lighting of motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided there for the protection of the public.
(Ord. No. 228, § 9.01, 9-20-1984)
State Law References: Covering or fencing excavation, MCL 750.493c, MSA 28.761(3).
Sec. 19-37. Duties of police.
All police officers shall be vigilant in the enforcement of this article, and shall report through proper channels any violations of this article to the city manager on observing or being informed of the opening or excavation in any street and shall require the person making such opening or excavation to exhibit the permit; and if none has been given or if the exhibition is refused, the officer shall, without delay, enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 228, § 12.01, 9-20-1984)
Sec. 19-38. Failure to comply with regulations.
In case any person to whom a permit has been granted shall fail to comply with the terms of the permit,
CD19:4
such permit shall become null and void; and any and all expense which may be incurred by the city in refilling the excavation or restoring the street or sidewalk to its proper condition shall be borne by the permittee. If the person to whom a permit is granted shall fail to leave the street or sidewalk in as good condition as it was previous to any work being done under the permit, any and all expense which may be incurred by the city in restoring the street to its proper condition shall be borne by the permittee. Violation of this article is a civil infraction and is subject to the provisions of section 1-7. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day that a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 228, § 11.01, 9-20-1984)
Secs. 19-39--19-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PERMIT
Sec. 19-61. Required.
Unless acting under a contract with the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized city official or employee in the course of his employment, to make or cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the limits of the city without first having obtained and having in force a permit as provided in this division. In case of an emergency arising out of office hours, at night, Sundays or legal holidays, when an immediate excavation is necessary for the protection of public or private property, the necessary excavation may be made upon the express condition that an application be made in the manner provided in this division, on or before 12:00 noon of the next following business day.
(Ord. No. 228, § 2.01, 9-20-1984)
Sec. 19-62. Application.
(a) Any person desiring to procure a specific permit as provided in this division shall file with the city manager at least 72 hours before the time proposed to begin such work a written application upon a blank form prepared and provided by the city.
(b) Such application shall state the:
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Name of the street, alley, sidewalk or public place in or under which it is desired to make the excavation or opening;
(3) Kind of pavement or sidewalk;
(4) Purpose, size and location, as near as can be determined, of the proposed excavation or opening; the name, address, lot and subdivision of the person for whose benefit the work is to be done; and
CD19:5
(5) Time during which it is desired such opening is to be permitted.
The application shall be accompanied by a plat or pencil tracing or sketch showing the location, character and dimensions of the proposed excavation or opening for the installation of new work, or the location and character of the alterations involving the location of pipes, poles, conduits, wires or other conductors. However, any public utility operating in the state under the jurisdiction and control of the state public service commission, upon written application and upon filing an annual bond and the payment of an annual fee as provided in this division shall be granted a permit under the provisions of this division for the installation, maintenance or repair of any public utility installations in the public street, good for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Every such corporation performing any construction work under such permit, at the end of each week or whenever required by the city manager, shall file a written report showing all construction work performed by it within the city during such week under the provisions of such permit. Such annual permit shall not authorize any opening in any concrete, asphalt, brick or other pavement without the special permission of the city manager, in each case.
(Ord. No. 228, § 3.01, 9-20-1984)
Sec. 19-63. Deposit required.
Before a permit under this division shall be issued, the city manager shall require of the applicant a deposit of such sum of money as shall be deemed by the city manager sufficient to cover and pay all the expenses for furnishing such material, doing such work, making such inspection, and taking means as shall be required properly to restore and secure against settlement of the street and sidewalk, pavement, curb and gutter necessary to be replaced in consequence of making such excavation, opening or disturbance. The sum of money so collected and deposited shall be paid into the city treasury by the city clerk and be used solely for the purpose of paying for the repairing and replacing of any such pavement or surface broken into or disturbed for any of the purposes mentioned in this article. After completion of the work to the satisfaction of the city engineer, he shall determine the cost of the work and the amount of any surplus remaining from the amount deposited in such case; and such surplus shall thereupon be returned to the proper claimant. If for any reason the amount of such deposit shall have been insufficient to cover the cost of such work or if any damage shall have been done not contemplated in the original estimate which shall have caused increased expenditure, the amounts of such deficiency or damage shall be collected from the person to whom the permit was issued. No further permits shall be granted to such person or any other person on his behalf until the amount of such deficiency or damage shall have been paid. However, any public utility to which a yearly or specific permit has been issued under the provisions of this division, in lieu of making such deposit, may deposit with the city manager a purchase order upon such company in favor of the city, for the payment by such company to the city, when determined, of all costs and expenses provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 228, § 4.01, 9-20-1984)
Sec. 19-64. Granting.
The city manager, upon filing of the application and the payment of a permit fee set from time to time and the deposit required in this division, may, in his discretion, issue a permit which shall state the name and address of the applicant; the locations, nature, purpose and extent of the excavation or opening; the kind of pavement to be disturbed; the amount of the deposit paid by the applicant; and the dates of granting and expiration of the permit. All permits shall be consecutively numbered and shall be made in duplicate, one copy to be given to the applicant and one copy to be delivered to the city manager. Such permit shall at all times be
CD19:6
prominently posted on the job. This section shall not apply where inconsistent with the permit fee provisions of the ordinances regulating sewers and drains, plumbing and sidewalks, nor to a public utility to which an annual permit shall have been issued under the provisions of this division. The annual fee for a yearly permit issued hereunder shall be set from time to time, payable in advance.
(Ord. No. 228, § 5.01, 9-20-1984)
Sec. 19-65. Record of permits.
The city manager shall prepare and keep a record of permits issued, numbered in the order in which they were issued, name and address of person to whom issued, location, nature, purpose and extent of excavation or opening, time in which street is to be restored, permit fee and amount of deposit paid, and such other and further items as will enable anyone to obtain a complete history of each permit from its issuance to its termination. The copies of the permit kept by the city manager, properly bound, may be used as a basis for such record.
(Ord. No. 228, § 6.01, 9-20-1984)
Sec. 19-66. Requirements for work under permit.
(a) All work under a permit shall be under the supervision of the city manager and in conformity with the following requirement:
(1) All work shall be pursued diligently and continuously until completed. When in consequence of the weather or any process of the law, or any other unexpected obstacle, the work shall be stopped for so long a time that public travel shall be unreasonably obstructed, the excavation or opening shall be refilled and repaved as if the work contemplated in a permit were actually completed.
(2) In no case shall a person open or remove a greater area of surface and at no other location than that specified in the original or supplementary application; however, at the time of actually doing the work, if it shall be necessary to open or remove a greater area of surface than originally applied for the applicant shall first notify and procure the consent of the city manager to do so upon the express condition that he shall and will before noon of the following business day file a supplementary permit for the making of an additional excavation.
(3) All work shall be performed in such a way as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and restriction to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. No dirt or other materials shall be placed on sidewalks. Not more than half the width of the street shall be opened at one time; the other half shall remain untouched for the accommodation of traffic until the first half is restored for safe use. All work shall be prosecuted so as not to interfere with any access to fire houses, fire hydrants and United States mail boxes.
(4) The person to whom a permit is granted shall at his expense sustain, secure and protect the pipes, poles, mains or conduits of any corporation from injury and replace and pack the earth wherever it shall have been removed, loosened or disturbed, under or around them, so that they shall be well and substantially supported. If any person shall fail to sustain, secure or protect such pipes, poles, mains or conduits from injury or to replace and pack the earth under or around them, as the provisions of this section require, the work may be done by the corporation to whom the
CD19:7
materials may belong; and the cost and all damages sustained by such corporation shall be paid by such person; and in default thereof, such corporation may maintain an action against him.
State Law References: Protection of facilities during construction activities, MCL 460.701 et seq., MSA 22.190(1) et seq.
(5) Paving materials and earth or gravel removed must be kept separate, and such materials capable of being reused shall be preserved. The width of the excavation or opening shall be used when deemed necessary by the city manager. At the direction of the city manager, sheeting and bracing may be cut off one foot below the surface pavement and left in place when the opening is refilled. The street, alley, sidewalk or other public place must be opened in a manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit of the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter. Excavations shall be made by open cut method. No tunneling shall be done except as authorized by the city manager and then only under such conditions as he may impose. In case of slips or slides of the sides of the excavation, they will be trimmed to solid earth and the top surface cut back to the limit of the excavation before any backfilling is commenced.
(6) Upon the completion of the work, all equipment, materials, tools, tool boxes, temporary buildings, excavated materials and such, shall be promptly removed from the street, alley or public place. The surface of the street, sidewalk, lawn and private property shall be cleaned, leaving them in as neat, clear and usable condition as originally found. Trees damaged or removed shall be replaced. Lawns damaged by the work shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the city manager.
(7) All excavations shall be backfilled in accordance with city specifications and must be inspected by the city engineer before the cut is graveled or paved as the case may be.
(8) a. The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets, broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work, to its original condition in accordance with specifications of the city engineer. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except when the surface is to be replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab shall be made with suitable material well tamped into place; and this fill shall be topped with a minimum of at least one inch of bituminous mixture which is suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until permanent restoration can be made. The crown of the temporary restoration shall not exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall exercise special care in making such temporary restorations and must maintain such restorations in safe traveling condition until such time as permanent restorations are made. The asphalt which is used shall be in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer. If in the judgment of the city engineer it is not expedient to replace the surface over any cut or excavation made in the street upon completion of the work allowed under such permit by reason of the looseness of the earth or weather conditions, he may direct the permittee to lay a temporary surface of suitable material designed by him over such cut or excavation to remain until such time as the repair of the original surface may be properly made.
b. Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the city engineer to restore the street to its original and proper condition, or as near as may be.
CD19:8
c. Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the city engineer shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and his surety under surety bond for incomplete or defective work if discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. The city engineer's presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of his responsibility under this article.
(9) If any part of a slab or sidewalk is cracked or damaged in any way, the entire slab shall be replaced.
(10) If it is necessary to cut a concrete pavement throughout its entire width, the entire slab, so cut, shall be replaced.
(11) If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by such permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the city engineer, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost and 25 percent of such cost in addition for general overhead and administrative expenses. The city shall have a cause of action for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it for such work and shall apply in payment of the amount due it any funds of the permittee deposited as provided in this article, and the city shall also enforce its rights under the permittee's surety bond provided.
(b) It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition.
(Ord. No. 228, § 10.01, 9-20-1984)
Secs. 19-67--19-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
IMPROVED STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Sec. 19-91. Openings in paved streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or permit or cause to be made any excavation or opening in or under a pavement authorized after this article becomes effective for any purpose whatsoever, within a period of two years from and after the time of construction of any such paving or resurfacing. The city manager may, on account of an emergency affecting public health or public safety and public welfare, and which could not have been foreseen, suspend the operation of this two-year rule; and in such cases, upon the granting of the permit, such work may be performed within the two-year period; but the mere failure or neglect of the applicant or other persons to do or have the work done before such two-year period, or the convenience, by reason of such failure or neglect to property along the particular street or in the particular public place described in the application shall not be considered to be an emergency. The two-year period shall be deemed to begin at the time of the completion and final acceptance by the city of any such construction, paving, resurfacing or repaving.
CD19:9
(Ord. No. 228, § 7.01, 9-20-1984)
Sec. 19-92. Openings in streets or other public places prior to scheduled improvement.
Before any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall be paved, resurfaced, repaved, widened or otherwise improved, notice shall be furnished to all public service corporations and similar persons concerned. Prior to any excavation or treatment of existing surfaces by the city, state or their contractor, such corporation or other persons shall lay all wires, pipes, poles, cables, conduits and the like which may be deemed necessary or contemplated by the utility during the life of the improvement. On the recommendation of the city manager the city council may, by resolution, set a reasonable time limit prior to which all work on all such wires, pipes, poles, cables, conduits and the like in the street, alley, sidewalk or other public places to be improved must be completed. Any person who, without the written consent of the city manager, continues to do such work after the expiration of the time set shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. Failure of the city to give or receive notice to or from specific persons shall not affect the other provisions of this article or the penalties imposed by this article, and shall not be deemed to create an emergency within the meaning of section 19-91.
(Ord. No. 228, § 8.01, 9-20-1984)
Secs. 19-93--19-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
CULVERTS, DITCHES AND DRIVEWAYS*
__________
* State Law References: Driveways, MCL 247.321 et seq., MSA 9.140(21) et seq.
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 19-126. Location.
Culverts, ditches, driveways and all other improvements may be located only upon approval by the city and such other county and state authorities as required by law. However, such approval shall not be given where such facilities will cause an unreasonable increase in traffic hazards or violate clear vision zone requirements.
(Ord. No. 309, § 2.01, 6-20-1996)
Sec. 19-127. Fees.
The owner of the property shall be responsible for payment of the permit fees as prescribed by the city council.
(Ord. No. 309, § 4.01, 6-20-1996)
Sec. 19-128. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction and
CD19:10
shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day that a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 309, § 5.01, 6-20-1996)
Secs. 19-129--19-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PERMIT
Sec. 19-151. Required.
(a) No person shall dig or tear up any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or dig and/or fill any holes, ditch, drain or sewer, or work within a city right-of-way, street, alley or public property without first obtaining a permit from the city.
(b) It shall be the duty of such person, upon being granted a permit, to maintain all traffic control devices and to immediately refill and restore, resurface or repave such street, alley or other public property so that they will be in as good condition as before. It shall further be the duty of such person to erect and maintain during the progress of the work a good and sufficient barrier around any cut, trench or excavation in such manner as to prevent accidents, and to place and keep upon such barrier suitable and sufficient colored lights during the night.
(c) A separate permit must be obtained for each occasion; and such permit shall specify the location of the cut, trench or excavation to be made.
(d) Applications for permits required by this section shall be made upon forms prescribed by the city. Such permits may be revoked by the city for failure to comply with this article, including the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed as an agreement by the applicant to complete all work according to submitted and approved drawings, to promptly complete any work within a time limit within which the proposed work will be completed, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection with such work, repair all damage done to the public right-of-way, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection with the permit.
(Ord. No. 309, § 1.01, 6-20-1996)
Secs. 19-152--19-175. Reserved.
CD19:11
DIVISION 3.
CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 19-176. Regulations.
(a) The following standards shall apply to residential construction that consists of one or more of the following; new construction of a single family home, and/or alterations to an existing house of a value of 40% or greater of the taxable value.
(b) The entire driveway and parking area shall consist of an improved surface of concrete, asphalt or brick pavers.
(c) Driveways may be no wider than 12 feet with the exception of that portion of a driveway within 30 feet of the front of a garage and directly in front of the garage doors. The maximum driveway width in front of the garage shall not exceed 24 feet.
(d) All driveways consisting of an unapproved surface, shall conform to the provisions of this Section within one (1) year of the date this Ordinance takes effect.
(e) The minimum distance between any drive approach and a public crosswalk shall be five feet.
(f) The minimum distance between drive approaches, except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet.
(g) Driveway aprons must be constructed of either concrete, asphalt or other hard surfaces.
(h) Driveway aprons shall be suitable for the width of the driveway, with the street end of the driveway at least three feet wider than the sidewalk end. No ribbon driveway aprons shall be permitted.
(i) Concrete driveway aprons shall be at least five inches thick. Asphalt driveway aprons shall consist of a subbase of at least four inches of gravel or crushed limestone, and the asphalt applied shall be at least two inches thick.
(j) Culverts shall be 12-inches minimum diameter or oval nine inches by 15 inches and be of either corrugated metal or corrugated plastic material with watertight joints.
(k) There shall be a minimum of one foot of cover over the culvert unless otherwise approved by the city.
(l) All ditching shall be constructed as to be mowable and have a positive minimum slope of 0.20 percent unless otherwise approved by the city.
(m) Location and elevation of ditching must be approved by the city prior to construction.
CD19:12
(n) Sidewalks crossing drives shall be flat level and match side to side.
(Ord. No. 309, § 3.01, 6-20-1996, Ord. No. 439, 08-23-2012)
Secs. 19-177--19-210. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, compelling of owners or occupants of real property within the city to keep sidewalks abutting upon their property clear from ice, snow or other obstructions, and if the owner or occupant fails to comply with such requirements, to remove such snow, ice or other obstructions and assess the cost against the abutting property in accordance with section 14.17 of this Charter, § 2.3(v).
__________
Sec. 19-211. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Roadway means that portion of a street or alleyway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent paved property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part is open to the use of the public for vehicular travel.
(Ord. No. 210, § 1.01, 8-19-1982)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 19-212. Required.
No person shall permit any snow or ice to remain on the sidewalks in the front, rear or sides of any house, premises, building or lot owned, occupied or controlled by him, and shall clear all ice and snow from sidewalks adjoining such lot or premises within 24 hours after the end of snowfall. When any ice shall form on any sidewalk, that person shall immediately remove the ice. Rock salt, sand or sifted coal is to be spread upon the ice in such manner and in such quantity as to prevent the sidewalk from being slippery and dangerous to pedestrians; and that person shall remove the ice as soon thereafter as shall be possible.
(Ord. No. 210, § 2.01, 8-19-1982)
Sec. 19-213. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 210, § 3.01, 8-19-1982; Ord. No. 300, § 3.01, 7-20-1995)
CD19:13
Sec. 19-214. Failure to clear.
If any person shall neglect or fail to clear ice or snow from the sidewalk adjoining his premises within the time limited, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on such sidewalk, he shall be guilty of a violation of this article; and in addition, the city manager may cause the sidewalk to be cleared as soon as practicable after such failure; and the expense of removal shall become a debt to the city from the occupant or owner of such premises and shall be collected as any other debt to the city.
(Ord. No. 210, § 4.01, 8-19-1982)
Sec. 19-215. Depositing of snow on public ways.
No person shall plow, shovel or otherwise deposit snow or ice or cause snow or ice to be plowed, shoveled or otherwise deposited from private property or driveway approach between the sidewalk and gutter line upon any street or alley pavement, sidewalk or other public way in the city. No person shall plow, shovel or otherwise deposit snow or ice, or cause snow or ice to be plowed, shoveled or otherwise deposited any closer than four feet from any corner or cross street and no higher than three feet.
(Ord. No. 210, § 5.01, 8-19-1982)
Sec. 19-216. Waivers.
The elderly and disabled persons who have been assessed charges for removal of the ice and snow by the city may petition the city clerk for a waiver of those fees; and upon the recommendation of the city council, the city manager may waive the payment of such fees; not to exceed $200.00 in any one snow and ice season. A petition may not be a waiver on a vacant lot, parcel of land or a rental piece of property.
(Ord. No. 210, § 7.01, 8-19-1982)
Sec. 19-217. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 210, § 6.01, 8-19-1982; Ord. No. 300, § 6.01, 7-20-1995)
Secs. 19-218--19-230. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 19-231. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Keego Harbor Right-of-Way Management Ordinance."
CD19:14
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.01.01, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 9-232. Purpose; legislative findings.
(1) Pursuant to Section 29 of Article 7 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, and other applicable state and federal legislation, including MCL 247.183, the City of Keego Harbor has the authority to exercise reasonable control over its highways, streets, alleys and public places. The City of Keego Harbor finds that, in the furtherance of control and to ensure and protect the public health, safety and welfare, it is appropriate for the city to monitor, review and approve requests by persons and other entities seeking to disrupt and/or use and/or occupy the city's rights-of-way, easements and public places.
(2) This article is further intended to minimize the disruption, disturbance and/or damage to the city's rights-of-way, easements and public places, and also to exercise reasonable control over, and monitor the use of the same, as well as to maintain aesthetic, quality, and property values by requiring those parties or entities who seek to disrupt the city's rights-of-way, easements and public places, and those parties who seek to use the city's rights-of-way, easements and/or public places by constructing, installing, locating, operating, using and/or maintaining improvements, including telecommunications, gas and/or electric transmission systems therein, to obtain a disruption permit and/or a use permit and pay fair and reasonable permit fees.
(3) The city further finds that requiring the payment of the permit fees will assist in protecting the city's interests in its rights-of-way, easements and public places by allowing the city to cover the fixed and variable costs of maintaining, monitoring, and ensuring quality control with regard to its rights-of-way, easements and/or public places.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.01.02, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-233. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
Appliance means any sanitary or storm sewer, main, pipe, catch basin or any other structure or instrumentality used for the accumulation or transportation of water, sewage runoff, sewage, liquid or gas.
City public right-of-way means any and all public rights-of-way, streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, thoroughfares, public easements and public places located within the city, including, but not limited to, rights-of-way, public easements and public places within and/or under the jurisdiction of the city, as well as the curbs, shoulders, landscaped areas and/or other areas incidental and/or appurtenant thereto.
Conduit shall include any overhead or underground cable, wire and/or a combination thereof, for the transmission of electrical energy, telephone service, telecommunications services and/or the transmission of other signals, including service connections and any other item protecting said cable or wire, and other appurtenant devices used in connection therewith.
Disruption means a physical change, modification, alteration, disturbance, injury and/or damage to the city's right-of-way, including, but not limited to, construction, installation, location, maintenance, modification, alteration, replacement, and/or repair of improvements in the city's right-of-way.
CD19:15
Disruption permit means a nonexclusive limited permit issued by the city to a person and/or entity pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article for the purpose of allowing a person and/or entity to undertake an activity which will result in disruption to the city's right-of-way.
Electric transmission shall mean and include the, transmission and/or distribution of electricity for sale to persons or entities intending to further transmit and/or distribute, or to persons or entities who are end users.
Franchise is a nonexclusive limited authorization to transact, conduct and/or operate a use in the city, including, but not limited to, the operation and/or use of improvements in the city's right-of-way, which authorization has, prior to the date of enactment of this article, been awarded by the city to the grantee by an article and confirmed by a contract between the grantee and the city, and the term of which has not yet expired.
Grantee means the holder of a valid and effective franchise granted by the city.
Improvement shall mean any appliance, conduit, facility, pipes, poles, structures, wires, cables, fibers, buildings and/or any other man-made object and/or item, including, but not limited to, telecommunications system facilities, gas and/or electric transmission facilities, and other facilities.
Ordinances mean all laws, codes and regulations duly enacted and adopted by the City of Keego Harbor.
Permittee means a person who has been issued a disruption and/or a use permit pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article.
Person means a natural person, company, corporation, partnership, joint venture, voluntary association, organization or other legal entity.
Public easement shall mean any easement which has been granted and/or dedicated to the city and/or dedicated to public use, including, but not limited to, road and/or right-of-way easements, utility easements, water main and sewer line easements, access easements, drainage easements, recreational and/or conservation easements.
Public place shall mean any area owned, under the jurisdiction of and/or controlled by the city.
Street means the paved or designated area for vehicular travel within the right-of-way, and the word "street" shall be synonymous with the words "highway" and/or "road."
Telecommunications provider means a person who provides telecommunications services.
Telecommunications services means regulated and unregulated services offered to customers for the transmission of two-way interactive communication and other associated and similar usages. Telecommunications services shall not include one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services.
Telecommunication system means conduit, improvements and/or items which are designed and/or used to provide telecommunications services.
CD19:16
Use permit means a nonexclusive limited permit issued by the city to a person pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article to allow persons to use and/or occupy the city's right-of-way for the purpose of operating and/or using an improvement therein.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.01.03, 9-21-2000)
Secs. 19-233--19-240. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
DISRUPTION OF CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 19-241. Disruption of right-of-way.
(1) Generally. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall undertake and/or perform any activity which causes and/or results in any disruption to any city right-of-way unless a disruption permit is first obtain from the city and the activity is performed in accordance with the disruption permit and in the manner provided for in this article. No person shall place any improvement or obstruction in any city right-of-way, except under the conditions permitted in this article.
(2) Exceptions. In the event of a disruption emergency, including, but not limited to, a natural disaster, war and/or severe weather condition a person and/or a permittee may disrupt the city's right-of-way without first receiving a disruption permit from the city, provided that the city manager and/or his designee has approved the emergency disruption before the emergency disruption takes place. Moreover, this section shall not prohibit:
(a) Those temporary obstructions which are incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises;
(b) The lawful operation and parking of vehicles within the part of the city's right-of-way;
(c) The lawful and customary use of property by adjoining homeowners for such things as the installation of a mail box and customary landscaping, provided, such activities may not undermine public use or improvement needs, and, provided further that, any applicable permits or approvals must be obtained from other governmental agencies having jurisdiction, and, undertaking such activities in the right-of-way shall be at the owners risk in the event the area in question is needed for public use; and
(d) A property owner desiring to make use of an adjoining right-of-way may make application to the city council for an exemption not specifically mentioned above, which may be granted with or without conditions.
(3) Violation. Failure to obtain a disruption permit under this section shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the violating person to the penalties provided for in this article. A person who violates this section shall pay the required disruption permit fee, as well as an additional charge to be established by resolution of the city council for that period of time that the person did not have a valid
CD19:17
disruption permit pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.01, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-242. Permit application procedures.
(1) A person that wants to undertake and/or perform any activity that causes and/or results in any disruption to the city's rights-of-way shall apply to the city for a disruption permit pursuant to this section. Every applicant must complete and file four sets of an application with the city building official's office on forms that will be provided by the city building official.
(2) At the time of filing an application, the applicant must pay to the city treasurer a nonrefundable application fee, with the amount of the application fee to be established by resolution of the city council in an amount necessary to reimburse the city for the costs in reviewing, processing, investigating, granting and/or denying the disruption permit.
(3) The applicant's application for a disruption permit shall include, without limitation, the following information:
(a) The name, and address of the applicant in the case of a natural person, and if the applicant is not a natural person, and is not a publicly held corporation, the names and addresses of each of its officers, directors and partners, as well as the names and addresses of those stockholders holding more than a ten percent interest in the stock of the entity.
(b) The name, phone number, and address of the person who will serve as the proposed contact person for the applicant, and, if different, the resident agent for accepting service of process if the applicant is a corporation or other person required to have a resident agent, and the address of the person's principal business office and headquarters.
(c) The character of the business the applicant engages in and the length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the business of that character and where said business has been conducted.
(d) A statement, description and plans showing and detailing the existing improvements located in the right-of-way, trees that may have to be removed, and the proposed disruption to the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, a statement, description and plans of any construction, installation, location, maintenance and/or repairs of improvements in the city right-of-ways, with a detailed description of the exact type, kind and amount of the construction, installation, location, maintenance and/or repair of improvements. Plans shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer.
(e) Detailed map and plans showing those city rights-of-way that the applicant proposes to disrupt, and the map and plans shall clearly designate the exact location of the proposed disruption and shall designate whether the disruption will be underground and/or aboveground.
(f) A schedule and timetable for the disruption activities, including commencement and completion dates for the disruption activities.
CD19:18
(g) A detailed description of the services to be provided, and the location of known and projected customers, i.e., persons to be served.
(h) A detailed description of the method by which disputes between and among all relevant persons involved in the process of providing the product or service, and the ultimate consumption thereof, so as to avoid an interruption in providing the product or service.
(4) An application shall not be accepted for filing by the city building official unless the application is complete, the disruption application and permit fee has been paid and the application contains all of the information required by this article.
(5) Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city building official shall approve or deny a disruption permit within 90 days from the date the applicant files a completed application for disruption permit with the city building official's office.
(a) Within 60 days after the date that the applicant files with the city building official a complete application, the city shall provide public notice of the application, which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall be published not less than 14 days before the day on which the permit is issued.
(b) After the public notice, the city building official shall within 90 days from the filing of the application approve and/or deny the application, shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
(c) The 90-day time requirement for the city building official to make a decision from the date that the applicant files a completed application, as well as the 60-day time period for public notice and the 30-day period for making a decision after the public notice may be waived and/or extended by both parties if they agree to waive said time periods in writing.
(6) The city building official may impose conditions on any disruption permit it approves, which conditions shall be limited to the applicant's disruption activities and shall be necessary to ensure and protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city building official may require as a condition of the permit that a bond, in the form of a letter of credit or cash escrow, be posted by the applicant, which bond shall not exceed the reasonable costs to ensure that the city's rights-of-way that are to be disrupted by the applicant are returned and restored to their original condition after the applicant's disruption of the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.02, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-243. Disruption permit fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee set forth in this article, and any other applicable fees for permits or approvals required by city ordinances and/or other applicable laws, the permittee shall pay a disruption permit fee in an amount which will cover all of the city's administrative costs, inspection costs, consulting costs, plan review costs, monitoring costs and all other costs incurred by the city in conjunction with the permittee's disruption of the city right-of-way. At the time the city issues the disruption permit to the permittee, the permittee shall immediately pay to the city an estimated disruption permit fee in an amount that the city has estimated that its administrative costs, inspection costs, consulting costs, plan review costs,
CD19:19
monitoring costs and all other costs in conjunction with the disruption are likely to be, and upon completion of the disruption activities, the permittee shall pay to the city any costs incurred in conjunction with the disruption activities that are over and above the amount paid to the city by the permittee as estimated disruption permit costs. The city shall reimburse to the permittee any excess funds over the amount incurred.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.03, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-244. Disruption permit term and extension.
(1) The disruption permit granted to the permittee by the city shall be for a specified time period established by the city building official after taking into consideration the information in the permittee's disruption permit application.
(2) Prior to the expiration of the term of the disruption permit, a permittee may apply to the city building official for an extension of the permit, which shall be granted by the city building official if the permittee demonstrates a substantial hardship for why the disruption activities could not be completed during the term initially established for the disruption permit by the city building official. For purposes of seeking an extension of its disruption permit, the applicant, instead of completing the application required by this article, may complete an abbreviated application entitled "Disruption Permit Extension Application" which shall be available from the city building official, and shall pay an extension application fee to the treasurer in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The city shall have the right to impose conditions on those disruption permit extensions.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.04, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-245. Permit terms and conditions.
(1) Nonexclusive permit. A disruption permit granted by the city to a permittee shall be nonexclusive and shall not restrict or prevent the city from at any time approving additional permits to other persons for the same city right-of-way, and the granting of a disruption permit does not establish any priority for the disruption or use of a city right-of-way.
(2) Compliance with permit/ordinances. A permittee shall strictly comply with all of the terms and conditions of the disruption permit issued by the city to the permittee, as well as comply with all city ordinances, codes and applicable statutes, laws and other legal requirements.
(3) Building permits/other permits and approvals. In addition to the disruption permit required by this division, a permittee shall not commence construction on, across and/or under any city right-of-way without first obtaining a building permit as required by the city and paying the required building permit fees, and, further, a permittee shall not disrupt any city right-of-way without first obtaining all other permits and approvals and paying all other applicable fees that are required by ordinance, code and/or statute.
(4) Transfer/Assignment. A permittee shall not transfer, convey and/or assign any of the rights/privileges granted to it by the city in its disruption permit:
(a) In whole or in part, voluntarily, involuntarily, or by operation of law, including by merger or consolidation, substantial change in the ownership or control of the permittee's business, or by other means, without prior written consent of the city council. A substantial change in the
CD19:20
ownership or control of a permittee's business means any changes in the voting stock ownership of the permittee aggregating at least 35 percent, computed from the date of issuance of a permit.
(b) Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in paragraph (a), above, a permittee may grant a security interest in its rights under a permit in favor of a third party qualified financial institution (as defined herein) without first obtaining the consent of the city. Qualified financial institution for purposes of this provision shall mean an entity which:
1. Does not operate, and is not affiliated with any entity directly or indirectly that operates a business providing the service of the permittee;
2. Receives over 50 percent of its revenues from the provision of regulated financial services; and
3. Has assets of at least five billion dollars.
Affiliated, for purposes of this provision, shall mean a person or entity that directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries' controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a qualified financial institution. In the event a qualified financial institution must enforce its security interest and execute on the collateral, such qualified financial institution will assume the position of the permittee with all of its rights and responsibilities under, and subject to the conditions of, the permit granted under this division. The authorization contained in this subsection (b) shall not be effective to allow a qualified financial institution to assume the position of a permittee unless at least 15 days prior to taking possession of the collateral, the qualified financial institution shall give written notice to the city of its intent to take possession of the collateral, and such notice shall be accompanied by all information relating to the qualified financial institution required of an applicant under section 19-242(3)(a) through (c). In the event a qualified financial institution shall take possession of the collateral, such qualified financial institution will use its best efforts to expeditiously transfer or assign the collateral within 180 days to a prospective transferee or assignee with the city's prior written consent.
(c) If a permit is assigned in whole or in part with the approval of the city, the terms and conditions of the permit shall be binding upon the successors or assigns of the permittee or of a qualified financial institution.
(5) As-built plans. A permittee shall submit to the city as-built plans for any improvements constructed and installed during the permitted disruption of the city's right-of-way within 60 days after completion of the same. Unless waived by the city, the permittee shall provide the city with a digital copy of the as-built plans in a form acceptable to the city building official.
(6) G.I.S. If requested by the city, a permittee shall, within 60 days, provide the city with a geographical information system layer in a media form acceptable to the city that accurately portrays the permittee's as-built improvements that were constructed and installed in the city's right-of-way during the permittee's disruption of the right-of-way.
(7) Additional future use. The issuance of a disruption permit to a permittee does not confer to the
CD19:21
permittee the rights to any additional uses of the city's right-of-way, except for those uses specifically granted and described in the disruption permit.
(8) City future use. The issuance of a disruption permit to a permittee does not prohibit the city from using the city's right-of-way in a manner which may interfere with the permittee's disruption activities, and the permittee acknowledges and accepts this risk and shall not be entitled to receive any compensation from the city in the event that the city uses the city right-of-way in the aforementioned manner. The expense of making any necessary modifications of its improvements in order to accommodate a conflict shall be borne by the permittee.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.05, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-246. Permittee's disruption of city right-of-way.
(1) No interference on city rights-of-way. A permittee shall not disrupt the city's rights-of-way in such a manner that it would interfere with the city and/or other permittees' and/or grantees' use of said city rights-of-way, and/or interfere with existing water mains, gas lines, sanitary sewer lines, drains and/or drain pipes, and other improvements that are existing in the city's right-of-way. Any portion of the permittee's improvements that interfere with the city's, and/or other permittees' and/or grantees' use of the city's right-of-way or interfere with existing water mains, gas lines, drains and/or drainage pipes and/or other improvements, shall, at the request of the city, be removed and/or modified by the permittee at the permittee's own cost, and the permittee shall not be entitled to receive any compensation from the city for removal and/or modification of the same. Such removal or modification shall be made within a reasonable time of request, as stated in a written notice from the city. If the removal or modification is not made within such time, the city may remove or modify the interfering improvement(s) to the extent required, and bill the permittee for the expenses incurred in doing so. With regard to interferences with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian, vehicular or other related purposes, all activities of a permittee shall be undertaken in a manner to minimize interference, and all due precautions shall be taken to maximize public safety.
(2) Disruption costs. The permittee's disruption of the city's right-of-way shall conform to and be in compliance in all respects with the disruption plans submitted to and approved by the city, and all permits issued to the permittee by the city. All costs associated with the permittee's disruption of the city's rights-of-way shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee and shall be borne entirely by the permittee. All disruption activities performed by the permittee and its contractors, including the construction and installation of any improvements, shall be promptly done by the permittee and its contractors in compliance with the schedule submitted to and approved by the city and in a good and workmanlike fashion in accordance with recognized construction industry standards and other applicable industry standards and subject to the required inspections of the city and also subject to the final approval of the city. The permittee's disruption activities in the city's right-of-way shall not commence until such time as permittee has obtained all required building permits and other permits and approvals, has paid all applicable fees and has received approval of its plans and specifications for said construction.
(3) Restoration of property. The permittee shall, as soon as is reasonably possible, restore, at permittee's sole cost and expense, any portion of the city's right-of-way that is disrupted by the permittee. The disrupted right-of-way shall be restored and returned to a condition that is as good as that which existed at the time the disruption occurred. The time period and the manner in which the restoration is to take place by the permittee shall be established by the city, and, in the event that the permittee does not complete the restoration in the time period specified by the city and/or does not undertake the restoration in the manner approved by the
CD19:22
city, the city may, upon written notice to the permittee, complete the repair and restoration and apply the bond posted by the permittee with the city toward the city's cost of restoration and repair. In the event the bond does not cover all of the costs incurred by the city, the permittee shall immediately pay the outstanding balance of the costs to the city, and shall be liable to the city for the same until paid.
(4) Permittee's personnel. Personnel of permittee conducting disruption activities shall at all times wear or have a clearly visible identification as a representative of permittee, and every service vehicle of permittee shall also be clearly identified as one of the permittee's vehicles.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.06, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-247. Indemnification.
(1) The city, and its officers, employees, agents, representatives and contractors, shall not be liable and/or responsible for any damages and/or injuries that occur to and/or are suffered by any person, property and/or other item which is caused by or results from the permittee's disruption of the city's right-of-way, and as a condition to the permittee being issued a permit by the city, the permittee shall execute and deliver to the city an indemnification agreement in a form approved by the city attorney, in which the permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees, agents, representatives and contractors from any and all damages, injuries, liability, claims, actions, losses, demands and/or law suits, including attorney fees and costs that arise out of the permittee and/or its contractors, agents and representative's disruption of the city's right-of-way.
(2) The permittee also agrees to indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents, representatives harmless from any claims or other encumbrances which may be imposed as a result of any indebtedness or amounts owing by the permittee to any contractors, subcontractors and/or any other persons providing services, labor, materials and/or other items to the permittee. In the event that the city discovers that such a claim and/or encumbrance has been placed on and/or against the city's right-of-way, the city shall notify the permittee in writing of the existence of said claim and/or encumbrance, and the permittee shall remove the same within 30 days from said notice, and failure to remove such a claim is grounds for revocation of the permittee's permit. In the event that the permittee fails to remove the claim and/or encumbrance from the city's right-of-way within 30 days from the city's written notice to the permittee of the existence of said lien and/or encumbrance, the city may apply the bond posted by the permittee with the city towards the city's cost of completely removing the claim and/or encumbrance against the city's right-of-way. The permittee shall have the affirmative obligation to inform the city of any claims and/or encumbrances that the permittee is aware have been placed on and/or against the city's right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.07, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-248. Insurance.
The permittee shall, at its own cost, maintain in full force and effect during the entire term of its disruption permit the following kinds of insurance with the limits set forth, with said insurance and the company to be providing the same to be approved first by the city:
(1) Comprehensive. Comprehensive general liability insurance, with liability limits in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council, which liability insurance coverage shall include, but not be limited to, coverage for operational liability, products liability, contractors' liability,
CD19:23
subcontractors' liability and shall also contain the coverage commonly referred to as XCU coverage.
(2) Automobile. Automobile liability insurance covering any and all vehicles owned, leased and/or used by the permittee, its employees, agents, representatives, contractors and/or subcontractors, with said insurance to comply in all respects with Michigan no-fault statutes, and to have personal protection and property protection insurance and liability limits in amounts to be established by resolution of the city council.
(3) Additional insured. The city and its officers, employees, agents, contractors and representatives shall be named as additional insurers on the comprehensive general liability insurance and the automobile liability insurance to be obtained by permittee.
(4) Proof of insurance/cancellation. The permittee shall furnish to the city certificates of insurance and certified copies of each insurance policy that the permittee is required by this section to obtain. No insurance policy and coverage that the permittee is required to obtain and keep in full force and effect by this section shall be canceled and/or changed and/or subject to cancellation or reduction during the entire period of the reduction without the prior written consent and approval of the city, and the insurance policy and/or coverage shall contain express language prohibiting termination or cancellation without 30 days advance notice to the city. In the event that the permittee changes and/or cancels the insurance required by this section prior to the expiration of the permittee's disruption permit without the written consent and/or approval of the city, said cancellation and/or change may, at the city's sole discretion, be grounds for revocation of the permittee's disruption permit by the city pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.08, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-249. Revocation of permit.
In addition to any other rights and/or remedies that the city may have pursuant to this article and any other applicable law, which rights and/or remedies the city may pursue in its sole discretion, the city council, if it finds the existence of an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, may order a stoppage of work pending a hearing before the city council, or, the city council may also revoke a permittee's disruption permit for any of the following reasons, subject to undertaking the revocation procedure in the next section:
(1) Permittee's violation of and/or non-compliance with this article.
(2) Permittee's failure to comply with any of the standards, conditions and/or requirements of its disruption permit, including, but not limited to, failure to perform its disruption activities in the city's right-of-way in compliance with the permit, building permit and any and all construction and other plans submitted to and approved by the city.
(3) Permittee's failure to obtain permits and other approvals and to timely pay any fees required by this article and/or any other applicable ordinances, codes, statutes or laws.
(4) Violation of any ordinance, code, state, law and/or any other applicable law and/or legal requirement.
CD19:24
(5) The permittee's change to and/or cancellation of the insurance policies and coverage required by this article without the prior written approval and consent of the city.
(6) The cessation of operation, termination, dissolution and/or disbanding of the permittee.
(7) Causing and/or maintaining a nuisance as determined by the city in the city's right-of-way.
(8) Failure to timely pay to the city any real property taxes, personal property taxes, assessments and/or other obligations.
(9) Failure to remove any liens or encumbrances from the city's right-of-way.
(10) A change of circumstance relating to the right-of-way that results in a material adverse condition in which to permit a continuation of permittee's use.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.09, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-250. Revocation procedure.
In the event that the city determines that the permittee's disruption permit is subject to revocation under this article, the city shall do the following prior to the formal revocation of the permittee's permit:
(1) Mail or deliver a written notice of hearing to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing, containing the following information:
a. Notice of the city's proposed action.
b. Reasons for the city's proposed action.
c. Date, time and location of hearing.
d. A statement that at the hearing the permittee may present witnesses, evidence, information and arguments on its behalf, and that the permittee has the right to be represented by counsel.
(2) Hold a hearing as scheduled. The permittee shall be given an opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present witnesses, evidence, information and arguments. Other interested persons shall also be permitted to attend the hearing and may present information and comments on the matters addressed at the hearing.
(3) Following the public hearing, the city council shall make a decision as to whether or not to revoke the permittee's disruption permit, and, in the event that the city council decides to revoke the permittee's disruption permit, the city council shall state the reasons for its revocation on the record and shall mail or deliver a written copy of its action to the permittee.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.10, 9-21-2000)
CD19:25
Sec. 19-251. No waiver.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any of the rights, remedies and/or authority of the city pursuant to any laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the city, and the city reserves the right to exercise all authority and take any and all action granted to it by any constitution, law, city ordinance, code and/or regulation. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit and/or preclude the city from exercising its right of eminent domain.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.02.11, 9-21-2000)
Secs. 19-252--19-260. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
USE AND OCCUPANCY OF CITY'S RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 19-261. Use permit required.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall use and/or occupy the city's rights-of-way for the purpose of using and/or operating any improvements within said rights-of-way unless a use permit has first been applied for and issued by the city pursuant to this article. For purposes of this article, a person providing local exchange service or other local telecommunications services shall be considered to be using the city's right-of-way if such person is the owner of the improvement or obtains the use of the improvement from another party under a lease, contract, interconnection or other similar arrangement.
(2) Failure to obtain a use permit under this section shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the violating person to the penalties provided for in this article, and a person who violates this section shall pay the required use permit fee, as well as an additional charge to be established by resolution of the city council for that period of time that the person did not have a valid permit pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.01, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-262. Exemption.
The terms and provisions of this article shall not apply to any person that currently has a valid, effective and unexpired franchise from the city to use and occupy the city's rights-of-way for the use and operation of improvements, and, further, shall not apply to those telecommunication carriers who have continuously used and occupied public rights-of-way under a claim of entitlement based on an alleged grant of authority by the state predating the Michigan Constitution of 1909 and have provided universal services for many years and/or provided telecommunications services within the city pursuant to MCLA 484.4 prior to the enactment of the Michigan Constitution of 1909. Provided, however, this exemption shall not be applicable if and immediately when a court of competent jurisdiction in any action in michigan determines that the city is not required to exempt a person purportedly granted rights in this section.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.02, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-263. Permit application procedures.
(1) A person that wants to use and/or occupy the city's rights-of-way and/or place improvements
CD19:26
therein shall apply to the city for a use permit pursuant to this article. Every applicant must complete and file four sets of an application with the city building official's office on forms that will be provided by the city building official. At the time of filing an application, the applicant must pay to the city treasurer a nonrefundable application fee, with the amount of the application fee to be established by resolution of the city council in an amount necessary to reimburse the city for the costs in reviewing, processing, investigating, granting and/or denying the permit.
(2) The applicant's application for a use permit shall include, without limitation, the following information:
(a) The name and address and phone number of the applicant in the case of a natural person, and if the applicant is not a natural person, and is not a publicly held corporation, the names, addresses and phone number of each of its officers, directors and partners, as well as the names and addresses of those stockholders holding more than a ten percent interest in the stock of the entity.
(b) The name, phone number, and address of the person who will serve as the proposed contact person to the applicant, and, if different, the resident agent for accepting service of process if the applicant is a corporation or other person required to have a resident agent, and the address of the entity's principal business office and headquarters.
(c) The character of the business the applicant engages in and the length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the business of that character and where the business has been conducted.
(d) Copies of the articles of incorporation of an applicant that is a corporation or a limited liability corporation, as well as copies of the corporation's last three annual reports, and in the case of a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement.
(e) Copies of the financial statements of the applicant for the last three years.
(f) A statement, description and plans showing and describing in detail the proposed use and occupancy of the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, a statement, description and plans detailing the construction, installation, location, use and/or operation of the improvements in the city rights-of-way, with a detailed description of the exact type, kind and amount of the construction, installation, location, use and/or operation of the improvements, including who does and who will own, operate and use the same, and a detailed description of the purpose or purposes for which the improvements are intended to be used.
(g) Detailed map and plans showing those city rights-of-way in which the applicant proposes to construct, install, locate, use and/or operate the improvements, and the map and plans shall clearly designate the proposed route and exact location of the same, and shall designate whether the improvements are to be located underground and/or aboveground.
(h) A map showing the manner in which the proposed improvements will interconnect with existing and proposed improvements in other municipalities.
(i) A schedule and timetable for the construction and installation of the improvements, including the
CD19:27
commencement and completion dates for the construction, as well as a commencement date for when the actual operation and use of the improvement in the city right-of-way will begin to take place.
(j) A statement of all activities anticipated to be performed within the right-of-way after completion of initial construction.
(k) A detailed description of the services to be provided, and the location of known and projected customers, i.e., persons to be served.
(3) An application shall not be accepted for filing by the city building official unless the application is complete, the application fee and use permit fee has been paid and the application contains all of the information required by this article.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city building official shall approve or deny a use permit within 90 days from the date the applicant files a completed application for a use permit with the city building official's office.
(a) Within 60 days after the date that the applicant files with the city building official a complete application, the city shall provide public notice of the application, which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall be published not less than 14 days before the day on which the permit is to be issued.
(b) After the public notice, the city building official shall within 90 days of the filing of the application, approve and/or deny the application, and the city building official shall not unreasonably deny an application for a use permit.
(c) The 90-day time requirement for the city building official to make a decision from the date that the applicant files a completed application, as well as the 60-day time period for providing a public notice, and the 30-day period for making a decision after the public notice may be waived and/or extended by both parties if they agree to waive said time periods in writing.
(5) The city building official may impose conditions on any use permit necessary to ensure and protect the public health, safety and welfare limited to the applicant's use and occupancy of the city's right-of-way. The city building official may require as a condition of the use permit that a bond, in the form of a letter of credit or cash escrow, be posted by the applicant, which bond shall not exceed the reasonable costs to ensure that the city's right-of-way that are used and/or occupied by the applicant are retained and restored to their original condition during and after the applicant's use and occupancy of the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.03, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-264. Use permit fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee set forth in this article, and any other applicable fees for permits or approvals required by city ordinances and/or other applicable laws, the permittee shall pay for each year that the use permit is in effect on or before the last business day prior to January 1 of each year an annual use permit fee to the city in an amount established from time-to-time by resolution of the city council. The
CD19:28
amount of the use permit fee shall be fair and reasonable, competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory and shall not exceed the fixed and variable cost to the city in maintaining the city's rights-of-way used and occupied by the permittee. The amount of the annual fee per lineal foot shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council for above-ground improvements and underground improvements. All applications shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis for the purpose of determining whether the improvements of a permittee create any more or less impact upon the fixed and variable costs to the city. In making such determination, the city building official shall take into consideration the following factors:
(1) The annual fixed and variable cost to the city in maintaining the right-of-way in or under or over which the permittee's use occurs.
(2) The total amount of area that the permittee will be using and occupying in the city right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the length in lineal feet of right-of-way being occupied by the permittee, and the size of improvements authorized to be constructed.
(3) The frequency and unit cost of monitoring the rights-of-way in or under or over on a regular basis to ensure that the use by permittee conforms with applicable law, ordinance and permit conditions, and that such use has not created the need for public attention.
(4) The proportionate cost of maintaining and administering records of right-of-way use, including administration to assist in the avoidance of conflicts in the use of the rights-of-way by other users, and auditing of the extent of permittee's use.
(5) Any unique aspects of permittee's use or improvements that are likely to increase the cost to the city of permittee's use of the rights-of-way.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.04, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-265. Use permit term and renewal.
The first use permit granted to the permittee shall be valid from the date the city building official grants the use permit through December 31 of the tenth year following the date the use permit was granted. Thereafter, the permittee may apply to the city for ten-year renewals of its use permit, which renewal periods would run from January 1st to December 31 of each ten-year term. Unless earlier terminated by the permittee and/or the city, a permittee must file an application for renewal of its use permit with the city building official not less than 120 days before the expiration of the current valid permit, and pay a renewal application fee to the city treasurer in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The city building official shall, by November 1st of the year in which the renewal application is filed, publish a public notice of all requests for use permit renewals, and shall not later than December 1st of each year approve and/or deny all use permit renewal requests. The city shall have the right to impose additional reasonable conditions on those use permit renewals it grants.
Although permits are to be granted with a ten year duration, as specified above, the city building official shall also conduct an interim review at the end of the third and sixth years of a permit, for two purposes: the review shall first determine whether the fee schedule then in effect is adequate. If the engineer determines that it is inadequate, a new fee shall be established and shall be effective for the balance of the term of the permit. The second purpose of the review shall be to require the permittee to demonstrate all of the following:
CD19:29
(1) The permittee has complied with all use permit terms and requirements.
(2) The permittee has timely paid to the city the annual use permit fee and has timely paid personal property taxes and real property taxes and/or any obligations due and payable to the city.
(3) The permittee's performance has been in compliance with this article relative to specific issues presented to the permittee in advance of the review by the city building official.
If at such review the permittee fails to make the demonstration specified above, the city building official may impose further conditions upon the continuation of the use permit, or, if the failure represents a material breach of the terms and intent of this article, the city council may terminate a use permit.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.05, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-266. Use permit terms and conditions.
(1) [Nonexclusive nature of use permit.] A use permit granted by the city to a permittee shall be nonexclusive and shall not restrict or prevent the city from at any time approving additional permits to other persons to use and/or occupy the same city right-of-way, and the granting of a use permit does not establish any priority for the use and/or occupancy of township right-of-way.
(2) Compliance with use permit/ordinances. A permittee shall strictly comply with all of the terms and conditions of the use permit issued by the city to the permittee, as well as comply with all applicable laws, codes, restrictions and ordinances.
(3) Permits and approvals. In addition to the use permit required by this article, a permittee shall not commence construction on, across and/or under any city right-of-way without first obtaining disruption and building permits as required by the city and paying the required building permit fees, and, further, a permittee shall not use and/or occupy any city right-of-way for the purpose of using and/or operating any improvement therein not included within a valid ordinance or use permits without first obtaining all other permits and approvals and paying all other applicable fees that are required by ordinance, code and/or statute.
(4) Transfer/Assignment. A permittee shall not transfer, convey and/or assign any of the rights/privileges granted to it by the city in its use and/or occupancy permit:
(a) In whole or in part, voluntarily, involuntarily, or by operation of law, including by merger or consolidation, substantial change in the ownership or control of the permittee's business, or by other means, without prior written consent of the city council. A substantial change in the ownership or control of a permittee's business means any changes in the voting stock ownership of the permittee aggregating at least 35 percent, computed from the date of issuance of a permit.
(b) Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in paragraph (a), above, a permittee may grant a security interest in its rights under a permit in favor of a third party qualified financial institution (as defined herein) without first obtaining the consent of the city. Qualified financial institution for purposes of this provision shall mean an entity which:
1. Does not operate, and is not affiliated with any entity directly or indirectly that operates a
CD19:30
business providing the service of the permittee;
2. Receives over 50 percent of its revenues from the provision of regulated financial services; and
3. Has assets of at least five billion dollars.
Affiliated, for purposes of this provision, shall mean a person or entity that directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a qualified financial institution. In the event a qualified financial institution must enforce its security interest and execute on the collateral, such qualified financial institution will assume the position of the permittee with all of its rights and responsibilities under, and subject to the conditions of, the permit granted under this division. The authorization contained in this subsection (b) shall not be effective to allow a qualified financial institution to assume the position of a permittee unless at least 15 days prior to taking possession of the collateral, the qualified financial institution shall give written notice to the city of its intent to take possession of the collateral, and such notice shall be accompanied by all information relating to the qualified financial institution required of an applicant under section 19-263(2)(a) through (e). In the event a qualified financial institution shall take possession of the collateral, such qualified financial institution will use its best efforts to expeditiously transfer or assign the collateral within 180 days to a prospective transferee or assignee with the city's prior written consent.
(c) If a permit is assigned in whole or in part with the approval of the city, the terms and conditions of the permit shall be binding upon the successors or assigns of the permittee or of a qualified financial institution.
(5) As-built plans. A permittee shall submit to the city as-built plans for the construction, installation, location, maintenance, use and/or operation of its improvements that are in the city right-of-way within 60 days after completion of the same. Unless waived by the city, the permittee shall provide the city with a digital copy of the as-built plans in a form acceptable to the city building official.
(6) G.I.S. If requested by the city, a permittee shall within 60 days provide the city with a geographical information system layer in a media form acceptable to the city which accurately portrays the permittee's as-built improvements, and the permittee shall update said layer to accurately reflect any changes to the same which are approved by the city.
(7) Additional and/or future use. The issuance of a use permit to a permittee does not confer to the permittee the rights to any additional uses of the city's right-of-way, except for those uses specifically granted and described in the use permit.
(8) City future use. The issuance of a use permit to a permittee does not prohibit the city from using the city's right-of-way in a manner which may interfere with, disrupt and/or prevent the permittee's use and/or occupancy of the same, and the permittee acknowledges and accepts this risk and shall not be entitled to receive any compensation from the city in the event that the city uses the city right-of-way in the aforementioned manner. The expense of making any necessary modifications of its improvements in order to accommodate a conflict shall be borne by the permittee.
CD19:31
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.06, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-267. Permittee's use and occupancy of city right-of-way.
(1) No interference in city rights-of-way. A permittee shall not construct, install, locate, maintain, use and/or operate its improvements in the city's rights-of-way in such a manner that would interfere with the city and/or other permittees' and/or grantees' use of said city rights-of-way, and/or interfere with existing water mains, gas lines, sanitary sewer lines, drains and/or drain pipes, and other improvements that are existing in the city's right-of-way. Any portion of the permittee's improvements that interfere with the city's, and/or other permittees' and/or grantees' use of the city's right-of-way or interfere with existing water mains, gas lines, drains and/or drainage pipes and/or other improvements, shall, at the request of the city, be removed and/or modified by the permittee at the permittee's own cost, and the permittee shall not be entitled to receive any compensation from the city for removal and/or modification of the same. Such removal or modification shall be made within a reasonable time of request, as stated in a written notice from the city. If the removal or modification is not made within such time, the city may remove or modify the interfering improvement(s) to the extent required, and bill the permittee for the expenses incurred in doing so. With regard to interferences with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian, vehicular or other related purposes, all activities of a permittee shall be undertaken in a manner to minimize interference, and all due precautions shall be taken to maximize public safety.
(2) Construction, installation, use and occupancy costs. The construction, installation and location by the permittee of its improvements in the city's right-of-way, and the permittee's use and/or occupancy of the city's rights-of-way, shall conform to and be in compliance in all respects with the construction/building plans, and the operation and use plans submitted to and approved by the city, and all permits issued to the permittee by the city. All costs of the permittee's construction, installation, maintenance, use and/or operation of its improvements in the city's rights-of-way, and all of the costs of the permittee's use and occupancy of the right-of-way shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee and shall be borne entirely by the permittee. All construction and installation of the improvements in the city's rights-of-way, as well as the permittee's use and/or occupancy of the rights-of-way, shall be performed by the permittee in compliance with the schedule submitted to and approved by the city building official and shall be done in a good and workmanlike fashion in accordance with recognized construction industry standards and other applicable industry standards and subject to the required inspection of the city and also subject to the final approval of the city. The construction and installation of the permittee's improvements in the city's right-of-way, and its use and occupancy thereof, shall not commence until such time as permittee has obtained all required building permits and other permits and approvals, has paid all applicable fees and has received all required approval of its plans and specifications.
(3) Restoration of property. The permittee shall, as soon as reasonably possible, restore, at permittee's sole cost and expense, any portion of the city's right-of-way that is disrupted by the construction, installation, location, maintenance, use and/or operation of its improvements. The disrupted right-of-way shall be restored and returned to a condition that is as good as that which existed at the time the disruption occurred. The time period and the manner in which the restoration is to take place by the permittee shall be established by the city, and, in the event that the permittee does not complete the restoration in the time period specified by the city and/or does not undertake the restoration in the manner approved by the city, the city may, upon written notice to the permittee, complete the repair and restoration and apply the bond posted by the permittee with the city toward the city's cost of said restoration and repair. In the event that the bond does not cover all of the costs incurred by the city, the permittee shall immediately pay the outstanding balance of the costs to the city, and shall be liable to the city for the same until paid.
CD19:32
(4) Maintenance and repair. During the term of the use permit, the permittee shall, at its sole expense and cost, maintain and repair the permittee's improvements, and if at anytime during the term of the use permit the permittee fails to maintain and/or repair the improvement to the satisfaction of the city, the city shall send a written notice to the permittee advising the permittee that the permittee has 14 days to correct and/or maintain the defective condition, and if the defective condition is not corrected within 14 days, the city shall be entitled, at its sole discretion, to draw upon the bond posted by the permittee and perform said maintenance and repair, correct the defect and/or remove the improvement, and bill the cost of the same to the permittee for any excess amounts, which the permittee shall pay to the city within 30 days of the date of billing, or the city may declare the permittee in default of its use permit and revoke the permittee's use permit as provided in this division.
(5) Removal and/or relocation. A permittee shall, at its own cost and expense, remove, relocate and/or disconnect any portion of its improvements located in the city's rights-of-way when the permittee is advised in writing by the city that removal, relocation and/or disconnection of the same is necessary for the city to undertake and complete any construction, excavation, maintenance, repair and/or any other work in the city right-of-way, and/or when said removal, relocation and/or disconnection is necessary for the city to undertake any activity which is in the furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare. The city may remove, relocate, damage, disrupt and/or disconnect keep permittee's improvements in the event of an emergency, including, but not limited to, a war, disaster, fire and/or severe weather occurrence if the same is determined to be necessary by the city's supervisor and/or his or her duly appointed designees, with the city not being liable to the permittee and/or any persons receiving the permittee's services for any damages or injuries caused by the removal, relocation, damage and/or disconnection.
(6) Vacation/abandonment. If a right-of-way is vacated, discontinued, abandoned, terminated and/or released, the permittee's right to use and/or occupy the city right-of-way shall immediately terminate, and the permittee shall, at its own cost, remove its improvements therefrom.
(7) Expiration or termination of use permit. At the expiration and/or termination of the permittee's use permit, and/or in the event that the permittee abandons and/or ceases operating and/or using its improvements in the city's rights-of-way, the permittee shall, at its own cost and expense, and within a time period established by the city, remove all of its improvements from the city's right-of-way, and shall, at its own cost, restore and return the area to the condition that existed prior to the construction, installation, location, maintenance, use and/or operation of its improvements in the city right-of-way. In the event the permittee and the city both agree that it would not be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare for the permittee to remove its improvements from the city right-of-way, the permittee shall convey and give the improvements to the city, at no cost to the city, and the city shall become the owner of the improvements in the city's right-of-way, and the city shall be permitted to use the same in any manner that the city sees fit. The decision as to whether a permittee shall remove its improvements from the city's right-of-way is in the sole discretion of the city.
(8) Co-location. To the extent possible, but only with the prior written permission of the city, a permittee shall, if physically and financially feasible, utilize existing improvements to construct or install its improvements. The determination of physical and financial feasibility shall be determined in the discretion of the city building official. An applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that use of an existing facility is unfeasible.
CD19:33
(9) Activities of permittee and/or its contractors. All activities of the permittee and/or its contractors that involve any construction, erection, installation, disruption, alteration to and/or any maintenance of any of the permittee's improvements in the city's right-of-way shall only be performed after the permittee has contacted the city's building department and advised it that said activities will be taking place, except for those activities which are necessitated by an emergency. Personnel of permittee conducting such activities shall at all times wear clearly visible identification, and every service vehicle of permittee shall also be clearly identified as one of the permittee's vehicles. The issuance of a use permit shall not be in lieu of a disruption permit or building permit, and such disruption permits and building permits, as applicable, must be obtained.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.07, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-268. Indemnification.
(1) The city and its officers, employees, agents, representatives and contractors shall not be liable and/or responsible for any damages and/or injuries that occur to and/or are suffered by any person, property and/or other item which are caused by or results from the permittee's and/or its contractor's construction, installation, location and/or maintenance of its improvements in the city's right-of-way and/or are caused by or result from the permittee's use and/or occupancy of the right-of-way, and as a condition to the permittee being issued a use permit by the city, the permittee shall execute and deliver to the city an indemnification agreement in a form approved by the city attorney, in which the permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees, agents, representatives and contractors from any and all damages, injuries, liability, claims, actions, losses, demands and/or law suits, including attorney fees and costs that arise out of the permittee and/or its contractor's construction, installation, location and/or maintenance of improvements in the city's right-of-way and/or are caused by or result from the permittee's use and/or occupancy of the right-of-way.
(2) The permittee also agrees to indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents, representatives and contractors harmless from any claims and/or any other encumbrances which may be imposed as a result of any indebtedness or amounts owing by the permittee to any contractors, subcontractors and/or any other persons providing services, labor, materials and/or other items to the permittee. In the event that the city discovers that such a claim and/or encumbrance has been placed on and/or against the city's right-of-way, easement and/or public place, the city shall notify the permittee in writing of the same within 30 days from said notice, and failure to remove such a claim is grounds for revocation of the permittee's permit. In the event that the permittee fails to remove the claim and/or encumbrance from the city's right-of-way within 30 days from the city's written notice to the permittee of the existence of said claim and/or encumbrance, the city may apply the bond posted by the permittee with the city towards the city's cost of completely removing the claim and/or encumbrance against the city's right-of-way. The permittee shall have the affirmative obligation to inform the city of any claims and/or encumbrances that the permittee is aware have been placed on and/or against the city's right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.08, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-269. Insurance.
The permittee shall, at its own cost, maintain in full force and effect during the valid term of its use permit the following kinds of insurance with the limits set forth, with said insurance and the company to be providing the same to be approved first by the city:
CD19:34
(1) Comprehensive. Comprehensive general liability insurance, with liability limits in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council, which liability insurance coverage shall include, but not be limited to, coverage for operational liability, products liability, contractors' liability, subcontractors' liability and shall also contain the coverage commonly referred to as XCU coverage.
(2) Automobile. Automobile liability insurance covering any and all vehicles owned, leased and/or used by the permittee, its employees, agents, representatives, contractors and/or subcontractors, with said insurance to comply in all respects with Michigan no-fault statutes, and to have personal protection and property protection insurance and liability limits in amounts to be established by resolution of the city council.
(3) Additional insured. The city and its officers, employees, agents, contractors and representatives shall be named as additional insured on the comprehensive general liability insurance and the automobile liability insurance to be obtained by permittee.
(4) Proof of insurance/cancellation. The permittee shall furnish to the city certificates of insurance and certified copies of each insurance policy that the permittee is required by this section to obtain. No insurance policy and coverage that the permittee is required to obtain and keep in full force and effect by this section shall be canceled and/or changed and/or subject to cancellation or reduction during the entire period of the reduction without the prior written consent and approval of the city, and the insurance policy and/or coverage shall contain express language prohibiting termination or cancellation without 30 days advance notice to the city. In the event that the permittee changes and/or cancels the insurance required by this section prior to the expiration of the permittee's use permit without the written consent and/or approval of the city, said cancellation and/or change may, at the city's sole discretion, be grounds for revocation of the permittee's use permit by the city pursuant to this division.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.09, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-270. Revocation of permit.
In addition to any other rights and/or remedies that the city may have pursuant to this division and any other applicable law, which rights and/or remedies the city may pursue in its sole discretion, the city manager, if he finds the existence of an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, may order a stoppage of work pending a hearing before the city council, or, the city council may also revoke a permittee's use permit for any of the following reasons, subject to undertaking the revocation procedure in the next section:
(1) Permittee's violation of and/or non-compliance with this division.
(2) Permittee's failure to comply with any of the standards, conditions and/or requirements of its use permit, including, but not limited to, failure to construct, install, locate, maintain, use and/or operate improvements in the city's right-of-way in compliance with the permit, building permit and any and all construction and other plans submitted to and approved by the city.
(3) Permittee's failure to obtain permits and other approvals and to timely pay any fees required by this division and/or any other applicable ordinances, codes, statutes or laws.
CD19:35
(4) Violation of any ordinance, code, state law and/or any other applicable law and/or legal requirement.
(5) The permittee's change to and/or cancellation of the insurance policies and coverage required by this division without the prior written approval and consent of the city.
(6) The cessation of operation, termination, dissolution and/or disbanding of the permittee.
(7) Causing, allowing and/or maintaining a nuisance as determined by the city in the city's right-of-way.
(8) Failure to timely pay to the city any real property taxes, personal property taxes, assessments and/or other obligations.
(9) Failure to remove any liens or encumbrances from the city's right-of-way.
(10) A material change of circumstance relating to the right-of-way that results in a material adverse condition in which to permit a continuation of permittee's use.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.10, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-271. Revocation procedure.
In the event that the city determines that the permittee's use permit is subject to revocation under this article, the city shall do the following prior to the formal revocation of the permittee's use permit:
(1) Mail or deliver a written notice of hearing to the permittee at least ten days prior to the hearing, containing the following information:
a. Notice of the city's proposed action.
b. Reasons for the city's proposed action.
c. Date, time and location of hearing.
d. A statement that at the hearing the permittee may present witnesses, evidence, information and arguments on its behalf, and that the permittee has the right to be represented by counsel.
(2) Hold a hearing as scheduled. The permittee shall be given an opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present witnesses, evidence, information and arguments. Other interested persons shall also be permitted to attend the hearing and may present information and comments on the matters addressed at the hearing.
(3) Following the public hearing, the city council shall make a decision as to whether or not to revoke the permittee's use permit, and, in the event that the city council decides to revoke the
CD19:36
permittee's use permit, the city council shall state the reasons for its revocation on the record and shall mail or deliver a written copy of its action to the permittee.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.11, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-272. No waiver.
Nothing in this division shall be construed as a waiver of any of the rights, remedies and/or authority of the city pursuant to any laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the city, and the city reserves the right to exercise all authority and take any and all action granted to it by any constitution, law, city ordinance, code and/or regulation. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit and/or preclude the city from exercising its right of eminent domain.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.03.12, 9-21-2000)
Secs. 19-273--19-280. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 19-281. Violations/penalties.
(1) Any person and/or entity violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days in the Oakland County Jail, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, plus costs of prosecution.
(2) In addition to proceeding by an appearance ticket in district court for violations of this division, the city may, in its sole discretion, seek relief in the Oakland County Circuit Court and/or may proceed administratively by seeking revocation of the permittee's disruption and/or use permit as provided in this division, and/or may seek any other relief that is permitted by law.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.04.01, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-282. Notices.
Any notices required to be sent to the permittee by this division may be delivered, or may be sent by first-class mail to the permittee at the address listed in the permittee's disruption and/or use permit application, and any notices required to be sent to the city may be delivered or forwarded to the city by first-class mail addressed to: City Clerk, at the city offices.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.04.02, 9-21-2000)
Sec. 19-283. Underground installation.
Except those improvements that must be established on or above the surface of the ground, and except to the limited extent that an applicant/permittee is exempted by law from this requirement, all installations of improvements shall be underground. It shall be the burden of the applicant/permittee to establish that an exception applies.
(Ord. No. 363, § 1.04.03, 9-21-2000)
CD19:37
DIVISION 5.
MAILBOXES
Sec. 19-284. Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to establish requirements for the installation of mailboxes along street rights-of-way that provide for efficient snow removal, right-of-way maintenance, enhanced traffic safety and to establish standards for reimbursing property owners for damage done to mailboxes by City equipment.
Sec. 19-285. Requirements for the Installation of Mailboxes
(1) All curbside mailboxes installed must comply with the following installation requirements:
a. The bottom of the mailbox shall be between 41 inches and 45 inches from the top of the pavement as defined by United States Postal Service (USPS) installation requirements.
b. The front face of the mailbox shall be set back 6-8 inches from the face of the curb or on streets with no curb, the edge of the pavement, as defined by USPS installation requirements.
c. The mailbox support post construction shall meet the following standards:
i. The mailbox support structure may be constructed of masonry or concrete material manufactured for that purpose.
ii. Mailbox support structures shall comply with AASHTO’s Roadside Design Guide, Section 4.6.5 Mailbox Supports, and Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Standards.
iii. Mailbox support structures shall:
1. If wood, be no greater than either 4 inches by 4 inches if the structure is square or 4 inches in diameter if the structure is round;
2. If metal, have strength no greater than a 2 inch diameter standard strength steel pipe; and
3. Not be imbedded more than 24 inches into the ground nor set in concrete.
4. Premanufactured plastic and decorative mailbox support structures are allowed provided all locational requirements have been met and approved by United States Postal Service.
(2) Mailboxes not conforming to the requirements of this policy that were located within the street right-of-way before the effective date of this ordinance are permitted for a period not exceeding six (6) months after the date of adoption of this Ordinance subject to the following conditions:
CD19:38
a. No alteration or addition to a non-conforming mailbox is permitted except in conformity with this ordinance.
b. If any non-conforming mailbox is damaged or destroyed by any means, or if a non-conforming mailbox is removed due to street or utility construction or similar work, repair or reconstruction will be permitted only in conformity with this ordinance.
c. No mailbox will be allowed to exist within the City’s rights-of-way if it interferes with the traveling public or the function, maintenance or operation of the City’s street system.
Sec. 19-286. Mailbox Damage Reimbursement
(1) The City will reimburse for damaged mailboxes along City streets only when it has been determined that:
a. The damage was caused by actual physical contact with City equipment;
b. The mailbox is of standard design and placed in conformance with this policy; and
c. The mailbox and post were in good condition.
(2) The City will not reimburse for mailboxes damaged along City streets when the City has determined that:
a. The mailbox was not of a standard design or not placed in conformance with this ordinance even though it might have been damaged by City equipment;
b. The mailbox and post were not in good condition; or
c. The weight of the plowed snow resulted in damage to the mailbox and/or support structure.
The City will reimburse for qualified damaged mailboxes upon receipt of a paid invoice up to $30 to cover the cost of materials for the repair and replacement of the mailbox. The City of Keego Harbor will not install mailbox posts or mailboxes.
(Ord. No. 447, 4-18-2013)
Chapter 20
TAXATION*
__________
* Charter References: General taxation, § 12.1 et seq.
Cross References: Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(3); any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(4); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(6); any ordinance levying or imposing special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(10); any ordinance not codified in this Code that levies, imposes or otherwise relates to taxes, exemption from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes saved from repeal, § 1-11(a)(14); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 6.
State Law References: General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq.
__________
Sec. 20-1. Meeting of board of review.
Sec. 20-2. Endorsement of roll; validity.
Sec. 20-1. Meeting of board of review.
The board of review shall meet in two sessions in each year at such time and place as shall be designated by the council. The first session of the board shall convene on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in March of each year, at which time the assessor shall submit to the board the assessment roll for the current year as prepared by him; and the board shall proceed to examine and review the roll; and during that day and the day following, if necessary, the board shall examine and review the roll. In each case where the assessed value is increased or any property added to the rolls by the board, the secretary shall forthwith give notice to the owners as shown by such roll by first class mail, stating forth the date, time, place and purpose of the second session. The second session of the board shall be on the second Monday in March at 9:00 a.m. and shall continue in session during that day and the day following for at least six hours on each day to consider only those cases in which the assessed value of property was increased and of property which was added to the assessment roll by the board at the first session. No assessment shall be changed in any way at any session of the board except by a motion regularly made and adopted by a majority of the members of the board, which motion shall state the amount at which the assessment is fixed as reviewed by the board. Each day's proceedings of the board shall be read, approved and signed by the chairman. At the conclusion of the review of the roll, the board shall immediately prepare a signed statement showing the final amended amount in gross and the additions or deductions made in total of assessed value of the real and personal property made by the board.
(Ord. No. 69, § 1.01, 12-18-1962)
Editors Note: In accordance with MCL 211.30a, MSA 7.30(1), this section of the Code apparently supersedes section 12.10 of the city's Charter.
Sec. 20-2. Endorsement of roll; validity.
After the board of review shall complete its review of the assessment roll, a majority of its members shall immediately endorse and sign a statement to the effect that the roll is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not effect the validity of such roll. Upon the completion of the roll and from and after 12:00 midnight following the last day of the meeting of the board of review, the roll shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school and city taxes and for any other taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law and shall be conclusively presumed by all courts and
tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes set forth in the general tax laws of the state.
(Ord. No. 69, § 2.01, 12-18-1962)
Editors Note: In accordance with Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.30a, MSA 7.30(1)) this section of the Code apparently supersedes section 12.11 of the city's Charter.
Chapter 21
TELECOMMUNICATIONS*
__________
* Cross References: Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 23.
State Law References: Michigan Telecommunications Act, MCL 484.2101, MSA 22.1469(101).
__________
Sec. 21-1. City cable communications ordinance not affected by Code.
Sec. 21-1. City cable communications ordinance not affected by Code.
The validity of the city's cable communications ordinance, Ordinance No. 227, adopted May 17, 1984, as amended by Ordinance No. 289, adopted January 20, 1994, is not affected by anything in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code. A copy of the cable communications ordinance is available for inspection at the office of the city clerk during the normal business hours of the office of the city clerk.
Chapter 22
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation and control of traffic and the parking of automobiles and other vehicles upon the public streets or alleys of the city, prohibition of parking on designated highways, streets and alleys or parts thereof, impounding of vehicles parked in violation of such regulation or prohibitions, and of vehicles abandoned and left on the streets, highways and alleys of the city, and the sale of any impounded vehicle which shall not be claimed and the impounding and other charges paid, § 2.3(hh).
Cross References: Offenses, ch. 15; tampering with a motor vehicle, § 15-117; loitering in a vehicle, § 15-163; throwing objects from moving vehicles, § 15-205; throwing objects at persons or motor vehicles, § 15-206; peddlers and solicitors obstructing traffic prohibited, § 17-11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; zoning, ch. 26.
State Law References: Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 22-1--22-30. Reserved.
Article II. Traffic Code
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 22-31--22-50. Reserved.
Division 2. State Vehicle Code
Sec. 22-51. Adopted by reference.
Sec. 22-52. Resolution of conflicts.
Secs. 22-53--22-70. Reserved.
Division 3. Uniform Traffic Code
Sec. 22-71. Adopted by reference.
Sec. 22-72. Purpose of code.
Sec. 22-73. References in code.
Sec. 22-74. Amendments.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 22-1--22-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
TRAFFIC CODE*
__________
* State Law References: Authority to adopt the Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.951, MSA 9.2651; authority to adopt amendments to the Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.953, MSA 9.2653; authority to adopt Michigan Vehicle Code by reference, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073, (k).
__________
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 22-31--22-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
STATE VEHICLE CODE
Sec. 22-51. Adopted by reference.
The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference.
State Law References: Authority to adopt the Michigan Vehicle Code by reference, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073, (k).
Sec. 22-52. Resolution of conflicts.
(a) In the event of a conflict between the state vehicle code adopted by section 22-51 and the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by section 22-71 the state vehicle code shall prevail.
(b) In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by section 22-71 and this code or an ordinance, this code or the ordinance shall prevail.
(c) In the event of a conflict between the state vehicle code adopted by section 22-51 and this code or an ordinance, the state vehicle code shall prevail.
Secs. 22-53--22-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
Sec. 22-71. Adopted by reference.
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated by the director of state police and published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code and amendments as published in the Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Public Act No. 62 of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq., MSA 9.2651 et seq.), are hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. No. 172, § 1.01, 10-20-1977)
State Law References: Authority to adopt the Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.951, MSA 9.2651.
Sec. 22-72. Purpose of code.
The purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code is to regulate the operation of vehicles; to provide for the regulation and use of streets, highways, alleys, and other public and semipublic places within the city and to provide penalties for the violation of such code.
(Ord. No. 214, § 2.01, 3-17-1983; Ord. No. 280, § 2.01, 12-12-1991)
Sec. 22-73. References in code.
References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to the term "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Keego Harbor, Michigan.
Sec. 22-74. Amendments.
The amendments to the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by the city shall be as set out in this section. All references to section numbers in the text of this section are references to sections of the Uniform Traffic Code.
2.36. No stopping, standing or parking zones.
The chief of police may determine and designate zones where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited due to hazardous conditions which may exist or where conditions exist which would cause undue delay to traffic. Such zones shall be designated by posting proper signs at such locations. The distance between any two such signs shall be that distance determined by the chief of police as an appropriate distance.
2.36a(d). Tow-away zones.
(d) Such two-away zones shall be designated by posting signs reading "Tow-away zone." Such signs shall be posted independently or as an extra panel attached below the posted signs prohibiting stopping, standing or parking at the location. The distance between any two such signs shall be that distance determined by the chief of police as an appropriate distance.
2.59. Current regulations.
All intersection stops and yield right-of-way requirements, regulations on stopping, standing or parking; one way streets, roadways and alleys; crosswalks; restricted turns; through streets; play streets; angle parking zones; all night parking restrictions; curb loading zone; public carrier stands; parking meter zones and spaces; weight restrictions; no passing zones; speed limits and traffic control devices heretofore established and effective on the effective date of this code, shall be deemed established hereunder and shall remain effective until rescinded or modified as herein provided.
5.8a. Making a false report.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly make to any police officer a fictitious report giving false information relating to a traffic accident or violation of a city traffic or ordinance violation, knowing the same to be false.
5.51. Boarding of alighting from vehicles; hitching to vehicles.
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. No person shall climb onto or hitch on any moving vehicle with or without the operator's consent, and no operator shall knowingly permit such action.
5.12. Violations of signs.
It shall be prima facie unlawful to exceed the speed stated on signs erected in accordance with the traffic ordinance of this governmental unit or which have been placed or erected by authority of any other public body or official having jurisdiction, and it shall be unlawful to drive at a speed lower than the posted minimum speed on any freeway except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
5.60a. Riding outside of confines of a moving vehicle.
(a) No person shall ride in or operate any motor vehicle unless all portions of such person's body are entirely within that portion of the vehicle designed for the carrying of passengers or merchandise or as otherwise permitted by this section; however, this section does not apply to any person whose employment makes it necessary to ride otherwise.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to allow any person to ride in the same motor vehicle unless all portions of such person's body are entirely within that portion of the vehicle designed for the carrying of passengers or merchandise; however, this section does not apply to the operator of a motor vehicle whose business makes it necessary to ride otherwise.
5.100. Freeways, entry, use, stopping restricted.
No person shall stop a vehicle on the paved road of an expressway or on the paved portions of any ramp connecting such expressway to any other street or highway, for the purpose of boarding or discharging passengers or pedestrians.
8.25. Parking on private property.
No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property in this city without the expressed or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Complaint for the violation of this section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property.
9.3. Penalties; civil infraction and misdemeanor.
Any provision of this section which describes an act or omission which constitutes a civil infraction under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code (Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.)) shall be processed as a civil infraction; and any person found to have committed a civil infraction may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00 and costs in accordance with section 907 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (Public Act No. 700 of 1949 (MCL 257.907, MSA 9.2607)).
Violation of any other provision of this section not constituting a civil infraction, as herein provided, shall be punishable as a misdemeanor in accordance with section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances, Keego Harbor, Michigan.
(Ord. No. 172, § 4.01, 10-20-1977; Ord. No. 173, §§ 1.01, 1.02, 10-20-1977; Ord. No. 189, § 1.01, 6-21-1979; Ord. No. 214, § 3.01, 3-17-1991; Ord. No. 280, § 3.01, 12-12-1991; Ord. No. 294, 12-15-1994; Ord. No. 311, §§ 1--3, 6-20-1976)
Chapter 23
UTILITIES*
__________
* Charter References: Municipal utilities, § 16.1 et seq.
Cross References: Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; plumbing code, § 5-66 et seq.; mechanical code, § 5-101 et seq.; electrical code, § 5-136 et seq.; water supply and waste disposal for swimming pools, § 5-302; electrical for swimming pools, § 5-304; businesses, ch. 6; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 12; health and sanitation, ch. 13; land development, ch. 14; solid waste, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; telecommunications, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 26.
State Law References: Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by a city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 24; collection of water and sewerage charges, MCL 123.161 et seq.; authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq.; sewage disposal and water supply districts, MCL 323.151 et seq.; sewerage contracts between political subdivisions, MCL 123.231 et seq.; sewerage systems, operation, construction and inspection, MCL 324.4101 et seq.; mandatory sanitary sewer connection, MCL 333.12753 et seq.; safe drinking water act, MCL 325.1001 et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Secs. 23-1--23-30. Reserved.
Article II. Cross Connections Control Regulations
Sec. 23-31. Title.
Sec. 23-32. Purpose.
Sec. 23-33. Authority.
Sec. 23-34. Plan.
Sec. 23-35. Designated agent.
Sec. 23-36. Water discontinuance.
Sec. 23-37. Relationship of article to plumbing codes.
Sec. 23-38. Penalties.
Secs. 23-39--23-70. Reserved.
Article III. Water Service
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 23-71. Definitions.
Sec. 23-72. City/county approval required.
Sec. 23-73. Title.
Sec. 23-74. Enforcement.
Sec. 23-75. Violation; penalty.
Sec. 23-76. Repealer; amendment.
Secs. 23-77--23-100. Reserved.
Division 2. Rates, Charges and Fees
Sec. 23-101. Measurement; determination of charges.
Sec. 23-102. Free service.
Sec. 23-103. Charges constitute lien.
Sec. 23-104. Fiscal year.
Sec. 23-105. Supervision, control.
Secs. 23-106--23-130. Reserved.
Division 3. Use
Sec. 23-131. Temporary emergency sprinkling restrictions.
Secs. 23-132--23-165. Reserved.
Article IV. Sewers
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 23-166. Definitions.
Sec. 23-167. Use of system.
Sec. 23-168. Connection to system.
Sec. 23-169. Fiscal year.
Sec. 23-170. Operation, maintenance, management.
Sec. 23-171. Enforcement.
Sec. 23-172. Violation; penalty.
Secs. 23-173--23-205. Reserved.
Division 2. Rates, Charges and Fees
Sec. 23-206. Connection fee generally.
Sec. 23-207. Connection fee for improved premises.
Sec. 23-208. Number of connected units.
Sec. 23-209. User charge system.
Sec. 23-210. Late payment penalty.
Sec. 23-211. Charges constitute lien.
Secs. 23-212--23-245. Reserved.
Article V. Sewers, City of Detroit
Sec. 23-246. Detroit wastewater and collection system discharge ordinance not affected by Code.
Secs. 23-247--23-280. Reserved.
Article VI. Sewers, Oakland County
Sec. 23-281. Ordinance involving Oakland County wastewater facilities not affected by Code.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 23-1--23-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
CROSS CONNECTIONS CONTROL REGULATIONS*
__________
* Editors Note: Ord. No. 382, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 21, 2002, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 23-31--23-37, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 366, adopted Dec. 21, 2000.
__________
Sec. 23-31. Title.
The City of Keego Harbor adopts by reference the water supply cross connection control rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Public Act 399, 1976 R 325.11401 through R 325.11407 of the administrative code and any amendments thereto subsequently approved by the state. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Keego Harbor Cross Connection Control Regulations."
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Sec. 23-32. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by the
prevention and elimination of cross connections which have been recognized as the cause of public health problems due the the hazard caused to drinking water quality.
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Sec. 23-33. Authority.
The Oakland County Drain Commissioner Operations and Maintenance Division shall be the designated authority and administrator of the cross connection control program.
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Sec. 23-34 Plan.
(1) Pursuant to Michigan Public Act 399, 1976 R 325.11404 of the administrative code, a comprehensive cross connection control plan shall be developed and submitted to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for review and approval.
(2) The plan shall outline the conduct of the City of Keego Harbor cross connection control program, including the method for performing initial inspections, determining inspection/reinspection frequencies, backflow prevention assembly tracking and testing schedules, annual reporting, generation of compliance, noncompliance, pertinent piping information requests, and water service shut-off notices.
(3) Upon approval by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, the plan will become an instrument of this article for providing program conduct and policies.
(4) Any changes to the approved plan will be submitted to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for review and approval before final approval by the authority/agent.
(5) The cross connection control plan is available in the office of the city clerk for public examination.
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Sec. 23-35. Designated agent.
The authority has the right to appoint a designated agent to administer the cross connection control program and perform inspections in accordance with the approved cross connection control program plan.
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Sec. 23-36. Water discontinuance.
(1) The authority/agent shall have the right to enter any facility for the sole purpose of inspecting for cross connections. Failure on the facilities part to allow the authority/agent entry shall be deemed of having a cross connection that is an immediate hazard to the public and as such, the authority/agent will follow the steps as outlined in the approved cross connection control plan.
(2) If a facility fails to comply in correcting any deficiencies identified during the cross connection inspection and subsequent reinspection, follow-up inspection, and the steps as outlined in the approved cross connection control plan, the water service to the facility will be discontinued until such time that the deficiencies
are corrected and approved by the authority/agent.
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Sec. 23-37. Relationship of article to plumbing codes.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to nullify any provision of the Plumbing Code of the City of Keego Harbor, as amended, or any other statute or legally adopted ordinance or code of the City of Keego Harbor.
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Sec. 23-38. Penalties.
(1) Violation of any provision of these regulations is a municipal civil infraction and subjects the violator to the fines and penalties specified in section 1-7 of this Code.
(2) In addition to the penalty in subsection (1), at the request of the authority/agent, the city council will authorize the city attorney to bring an action for injunctive relief or other appropriate action in the name of the people of the City of Keego Harbor to enforce these regulations, or an order issued pursuant to these regulations.
(Ord. No. 382, § 2, 2-21-2002)
Secs. 23-39--23-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
WATER SERVICE
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 23-71. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Charges for water supply services or charges means the amount charged to each premises in the city connected to the system for water supply services, which may include an amount for debt service.
Inspection and approval fee means the amount charged to each applicant by the city at the time an application is made to the city to connect the premises to the system to cover the cost of inspecting and approving the physical connection to the system and the issuance of a connection permit.
Premises means the lands included within the boundaries of a single description as set forth from time to time on the general tax rolls of the city as a single taxable item in the name of a taxpayer or taxpayers at one address but in the case of platted lots shall be limited to a single platted lot unless an existing building or structure is so located on more than one lot as to make the same a single description for purposes of assessment or conveyance.
System refers to the water supply system as now or hereafter established and constructed by the county and leased to the city to serve the residents of the city.
Water supply district or district means Keego Harbor Water Supply District, as described in the resolution of the county board of supervisors, adopted October 5, 1964, or any amendments to such resolution.
Water supply services refers to the transportation and distribution and sale of water to the premises now or hereafter connected, directly or indirectly, to the water supply system.
Water supply system means the Keego Harbor Water Supply System established and constructed by the county under contract with the city dated January 5, 1966, and leased to the city, and all extensions, enlargements and improvements to such system.
(Ord. No. 92, § 1.01, 6-21-1966)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 23-72. City/county approval required.
Plats for premises subdivided into three or more lots or parcels and permits to improve platted or unplatted premises shall not be approved or issued on behalf of the city and none of such premises shall be improved by the erection of a building or structure for human use or occupancy unless water mains and connections to serve all of the premises, as subdivided or to be occupied, and connected to the system are available as part of the system or shall be installed at private cost or by special assessment (or a bond furnished or the estimated cost thereof deposited with the city as otherwise provided by law) unless the city council and the board of public works of the county shall both determine by specific resolution that compliance with this section will work an unreasonable hardship on the owner of the premises involved.
(Ord. No. 92, § 2.01, 6-21-1966)
Sec. 23-73. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Keego Harbor Water Supply Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 92, § 9.01, 6-21-1966)
Sec. 23-74. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus or otherwise, in any court having jurisdiction. Any violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se.
(Ord. No. 92, § 10.01, 6-21-1966)
Sec. 23-75. Violation; penalty.
Any person convicted of obtaining or using water in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article or failing to connect with available public water as provided in this article, or in any other way violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 92, § 11.01, 6-21-1966)
Sec. 23-76. Repealer; amendment.
(a) All ordinances and resolutions or parts of ordinances and resolutions, insofar as they may be in conflict with this article, are repealed.
(b) The city specifically reserves the right to amend this article, in whole or in part, at one or more times, or to repeal this article, and by such amendment or repeal to abandon, increase, decrease or otherwise modify any of the fees, charges or rates provided in this division, with the understanding, however, that the adoption of this article or its subsequent amendment or repeal shall in no wise change, relieve or release the contractual and legal obligation of the city to make the required payments to the county under and as set forth in the contract pertaining to the city water supply system or under applicable law or the contractual and legal obligation pursuant to such contract and applicable law to levy a tax or to use any other means or available funds to make the required payments to the county; and this article shall not be deemed to be a part of any contractual obligation or bond contract pertaining to the system.
(Ord. No. 92, § 13.01, 6-21-1966)
Secs. 23-77--23-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
RATES, CHARGES AND FEES
Sec. 23-101. Measurement; determination of charges.
Water to be furnished by the system to each premises shall be measured by a meter installed and controlled by the city. Charges for water supply services to each premises within the city connected with the water supply system shall be determined by the council, as provided in the agreement with the county, and shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution adopted and amended from time to time by the council and subject to any obligations and limitations set forth in such agreement pertaining to the system between the city and the county, or any amendments. Charges for the following shall be set from time to time:
(1) Water consumption charge. A quarterly charge for water service shall be made to each premises connected to the system in the amount of $14.54 per 1,000 cubic feet of water consumed, with a minimum quarterly charge of $23.26, plus a meter service charge.
(2) Meter service charge.
(3) Debt service charge.
(4) Water service installation.
(Ord. No. 92, § 3.01, 6-21-1966; Ord. No. 99, § 1.01, 8-29-1967; Ord. No. 134, § 1.01, 11-9-1972; Ord. No. 144, § 1, 6-20-1974; Ord. No. 160, § 1.01, 3-17-1976; Ord. No. 199, § 1.01, 9-18-1980; Ord. No. 207, § 1.01, 4-15-1982; Ord. No. 216, § 1.01, 4-21-1983; Ord. No. 224, § 3.01, 7-1-1994; Ord. No. 229, § 1.01, 3-21-1985; Ord. No. 240, § 3.01, 4-17-1984; Ord. No. 258, § 3.01, 4-21-1988; Ord. No. 270, § 3.01, 4-19-1990; Ord. No. 277, § 3.01, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 283, § 3.01, 7-1-1992; Ord. No. 290, § 1.01, 7-1-1994; Ord. No. 296, § 3.01, 7-1-1995; Ord. No. 308, § 3.01, 5-16-1996; Ord. No. 324, § 3.01, 6-19-1997; Ord. No. 347, § 3.01, 7-1-1998; Ord.
No. 351, § 1.01, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. 355, § 1.01, 7-1-2000; Ord. No. 368, § 1.01, 6-21-2001)
Sec. 23-102. Free service.
No free service shall be furnished by the system to the city or to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. The city shall pay an annual flat charge for water used or available through hydrants as set from time to time payable on or before October 1 of each year. Charges for services furnished by the system shall be billed and collected quarterly, the first such charges for each premises to be due and payable on the first day of the calendar quarter following by at least one month the date such premises are connected to the system and successive charges to be due and payable on the first day of each quarter annual period thereafter. Charges shall be billed at least one month before their due date.
(Ord. No. 92, § 4.01, 6-21-1966; Ord. No. 191, § 1.01, 9-20-1979)
Sec. 23-103. Charges constitute lien.
Charges for water supply services furnished by the system to any premises shall be a lien on the premises as of their due date; and on May 1 of each year the city clerk shall certify any such charges which have been delinquent 90 days or more, plus accrued penalties, to the council, who shall cause the charges to be entered upon the next city tax roll against the premises to which such services shall have been rendered; and such unpaid charges, with accrued penalties, shall be collected and said lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll; provided, that when a tenant is responsible for the payment of any such charge against any premises, and the council is so notified in writing, with a true copy of the lease of the affected premises (if there is one) attached, no such charge shall become a lien against such premises from and after the date of such notice. However, in event of the filing of such notice, no further service shall be rendered by the system to such premises until a cash deposit equal to three times the average periodical charge to such premises shall have been made as security for the payment of charges; provided, in any case the city may require a deposit set from time to time at the time application is made for water service, to guarantee the prompt payment of water bills and the return to the city of the water meter in good condition, the amount of such deposit to be fixed with reference to the estimated amount of water to be used.
(Ord. No. 92, § 6.01, 6-21-1966)
Sec. 23-104. Fiscal year.
The system shall be operated upon the basis of a fiscal year beginning on July 1 of each year and ending on June 30 of the following year.
(Ord. No. 92, § 7.01, 6-21-1966)
Sec. 23-105. Supervision, control.
The operation, maintenance and management of the system, which is a county system, shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the council or of the county, acting through its board of public works as its agent if it shall be so designated.
(Ord. No. 92, § 8.01, 6-21-1966)
Secs. 23-106--23-130. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
USE
Sec. 23-131. Temporary emergency sprinkling restrictions.
(a) Whenever the city manager receives notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department in conjunction with the water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that the supply or pressure demand for water cannot be accommodated and general welfare is likely to be endangered, or conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city, the city manager shall determine that a state of emergency exists and prescribe the following emergency regulations which shall apply in the city for all properties connected to the city water system. Sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall only be allowed for properties with even-numbered addresses on even-numbered dates within a month and for properties with odd-numbered addresses on odd-numbered dates within a month.
(b) Whenever the city manager receives notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that provisions in subsection (a) of this section are not sufficient, or conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city, the following emergency regulations shall apply in the city for all properties connected to the city water system. Sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall not be allowed.
(c) The city and the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department shall, within 24 hours of notification, cause these regulations to be posted at city hall and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the stations with a normal operating range covering the city and may cause such announcement to be further declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become effective immediately after notice of enforcement of this division as posted at the offices for the city. Upon notification from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that the emergency regulations are no longer necessary, the city shall cause a public announcement lifting the water restrictions.
(d) Any person violating any provisions of this division shall be deemed responsible for a civil infraction and will be responsible to pay a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation.
(e) It shall be the responsibility of the city to enforce this division.
(Ord. No. 313, § 1, 8-15-1996)
Secs. 23-132--23-165. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
SEWERS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 23-166. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Charges for sewage disposal services or charges shall be deemed to mean the amount charged to each premises in the city for sewage disposal services.
Connection fee means the amount charged at the time and in the amount provided in this article to each premises in the city for connecting to the system.
Inspection and approval fee means the amount charged to each applicant by the city at the time an application is made to the city to connect the premises to the system to cover the cost of inspecting and approving the physical connection to the system and the issuance of a connection permit.
Sewage disposal services refers to the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage emanating from properties connected directly or indirectly to the sewage disposal system.
Sewage disposal system means the city sewage disposal system established and constructed by the county and leased to the city under an agreement dated October 12, 1959.
System refers to the sewage disposal system leased by the city from the county.
Unit means any premises from which emanates that quantity of sanitary sewage ordinarily arising from the occupancy of a residence building by a single family of ordinary size.
(Ord. No. 60, § 1.01, 11-15-1960)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 23-167. Use of system.
The system shall be used for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage only. Downspouts, footing drains, weep tile, or any conduit that carries stormwater or groundwater, alone or in combination with sanitary sewage, shall not be connected to the system, directly or indirectly. Industrial and commercial waste shall be discharged into the system only in compliance with the standards and regulations of the county.
(Ord. No. 60, § 2.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-168. Connection to system.
Premises within the city from which sanitary sewage emanates shall not be used or occupied unless such premises are connected to the sewage disposal system; provided, that premises within the city from which sanitary sewage is emanating shall be connected to the system within six months after the completion of the system, but in any event on or before July 1, 1961. Plats for premises subdivided into three or more lots or parcels shall not be approved on behalf of the city, and none of such lots or parcels shall be improved by the erection of a building unless lateral sewers to serve all of such lots or parcels and to connect them to the system are available as part of the system or shall be installed at private cost (or the estimated cost deposited with the city) in the manner,
size and location approved by the county.
(Ord. No. 60, § 3.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-169. Fiscal year.
The system shall be operated upon the basis of a fiscal year beginning on July 1 of each year and ending on June 30 of the following year.
(Ord. No. 60, § 10.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-170. Operation, maintenance, management.
The operation, maintenance and management of the system shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the council or of the county as its agent if it shall be so designated.
(Ord. No. 60, § 11.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-171. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus or otherwise in any court having jurisdiction. Any violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se.
(Ord. No. 60, § 13.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-172. Violation; penalty.
Any person convicted of disposing of sewage in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article, or failing to connect with an available public sewer as provided in this article, or in any other way violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 60, § 14.01, 11-15-1960)
Secs. 23-173--23-205. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
RATES, CHARGES AND FEES
Sec. 23-206. Connection fee generally.
(a) Owners of premises within the city from which sanitary sewage emanates shall pay a connection fee for connection to the system, as set from time to time.
(b) Any such owner may discharge the obligation to pay such connection fee by a cash payment in an amount set from time to time in cash for each unit at the time of paying an inspection and approval fee to the city, or within six months thereafter, but with no credit for installments previously paid or then due and payable.
(Ord. No. 60, § 4.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-207. Connection fee for improved premises.
Any owner of premises within the city for which direct connection to the system is available but from which sanitary sewage does not emanate who thereafter improves the premises by the erection of a building on the premises shall pay a connection fee for such direct connection to the system as set from time to time in cash for each unit at the time a construction permit is issued by the city and an inspection and approval fee is paid. If the premises shall be directly connected to a lateral sewer installed at the private expense of the owner, or any predecessor in title, the connection fee for such indirect connection to the system shall in such case be an amount set from time to time in cash for each unit payable as provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 60, § 5.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-208. Number of connected units.
The number of units to be assigned to any particular premises used for other than single-residence purposes shall be determined by the board of public works of the county, and its decision shall be final. The board of public works, if the circumstances justify, may assign more than one unit to a single-family dwelling. No less than one unit shall be assigned to each premises; but, for purposes of computing the connection fee, units in excess of one may be computed and assigned to the nearest tenth. Once any premises has been connected to the system and has been assigned one or more units, subsequent changes in the character of the use of the premises (including destruction, removal or abandonment of any or all improvements) shall not abate the obligation to continue the payment of connection charges in the amount and for the period provided for the number of units assigned at the time of connection or for such lesser number of units as the changed character of the use of the premises will justify, but in no event for less than one unit; and if such subsequent changes increase the amount of sanitary sewage emanating from the premises, the board of public works may increase the number of units assigned to the premises; and thereafter connection fees per year per unit set from time to time, computed on the basis of the increased number of units, shall be payable in installments during the remainder of the 30-year period, or, if the connection fee was originally paid in full in cash, a connection fee per unit computed from time to time for the additional units assigned to the premises for each year or part of a year remaining in such period, may be paid in full in cash at the time such change in use occurs.
(Ord. No. 60, § 6.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-209. User charge system.
(a) Established basis for computations.
(1) Rates and charges for the use of the wastewater system of the city shall be based upon the methodology in the user charge system approved by the state department of natural resources. Revisions to the rates for total sewer service charges are to be established by resolution of the city which shall be enacted apart from the published ordinances as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenues in meeting operation, maintenance and replacements, as well as debt service.
(2) User charges for operation, maintenance and replacement shall be subject to the annual review of the user charge system. User charges shall be the same for all customers of the system regardless of geographical boundaries.
(b) Annual notification. All customers of the city will receive an annual notification, either printed on the bill or enclosed in a separate letter, which will show the breakdown of the sewer service charge into its
components for administration, operation, maintenance and replacement and for debt service.
(Ord. No. 281, § 1.00, 1-16-1992)
Sec. 23-210. Late payment penalty.
If any charges or connection fee installments are not paid on or before the due date, a penalty of ten percent shall be added; and commencing 90 days after the due date, such charges or connection fee installments shall draw interest at the rate of six percent per annum. If the charges for any such services furnished to any premises or the connection fee installment shall not be paid within 120 days after the due date, all services furnished by the sewage disposal system may be discontinued. Service so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing, including penalties and interest, shall be paid, plus a shutoff and turnon charge set from time to time.
(Ord. No. 60, § 8.01, 11-15-1960)
Sec. 23-211. Charges constitute lien.
Charges for services furnished by the system to any premises and the connection fee installments pertaining to any premises shall be a lien on the premises as of the due date; and on June 1 of each year the city clerk shall certify any such charges and connection fee installments which have been delinquent 90 days or more, plus accrued penalties and interest, to the city assessor, who shall enter them upon the next tax roll against the premises to which such services shall have been rendered and against which such connection fee has been placed; and the charges and connection fee, with accrued penalties and interest, shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll.
(Ord. No. 60, § 9.01, 11-15-1960)
Secs. 23-212--23-245. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
SEWERS, CITY OF DETROIT
Sec. 23-246. Detroit wastewater and collection system discharge ordinance not affected by Code.
The validity of Ordinance No. 256 adopted by the city council on June 18, 1987, regulating and controlling wastewater discharged into the waste collection system of the City of Detroit, Michigan, is not affected by anything in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code. A copy of Ordinance No. 256 is available for inspection at the office of the city clerk during the normal business hours of the office of the city clerk.
Secs. 23-247--23-280. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
SEWERS, OAKLAND COUNTY
Sec. 23-281. Ordinance involving Oakland County wastewater facilities not affected by Code.
The validity of Ordinance No. 379 adopted by the city council on December 20, 2001, or any subsequent ordinance of the same subject adopted by the city council regarding federal amendments affecting the discharge of wastewater into wastewater collection and treatment systems which are binding upon the City of Keego Harbor; the streamlining of necessary procedures for compliance with those federal amendments affecting the discharge of wastewater into wastewater collection and treatment systems and for the improving of the efficiency, operation and implementation of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department's industrial pretreatment program; the establishing of new regulatory requirements for centralized waste treatment facility dischargers and for groundwater dischargers; the placing of new responsibility upon industrial users for conducting self-monitoring and waste minimization activities; and the modifying of the appeal and reconsideration process available to industrial users for redressing administrative actions by the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and the City of Keego Harbor is not affected by anything in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code. A copy of Ordinance No. 379 is, or any subsequent ordinance of the same subject will be available for examination at the office of the city clerk during the normal business hours of the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 390, § 1, 3-21-2002)
Chapter 24
VEGETATION*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, regulation of planting and setting of trees, shrubs, flowers and plants in the streets of the city, and jurisdiction over all diseased or noxious trees, shrubs and plants, § 2.3(ff).
Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, ch. 10; land development, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19.
State Law References: Planting of trees along highways, MCL 247.231 et seq., MSA 9.351 et seq.; care of trees and shrubs along highways, MCL 247.241 et seq., MSA 9.361 et seq.; destruction of trees and shrubs, MCL 750.382, MSA 28.614; injury or destruction of trees on public highways, MCL 19.142, MSA 4.202; destruction of or injury to trees on public highways, MCL 247.235, MSA 9.355.
__________
Sec. 24-1. Definitions.
Sec. 24-2. Permits.
Sec. 24-3. Public nuisance.
Sec. 24-4. Chemicals, fire, gas, smoke.
Sec. 24-5. Construction, electricity, house moving.
Sec. 24-6. Enforcement.
Sec. 24-7. Penalty.
Sec. 24-8. Interference.
Sec. 24-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Park includes all public parks having individual names.
Public highway includes all land lying between property lines on either side of all city streets, alleys and boulevards.
Public places includes all other areas owned by the city or to which the public has free access.
Trees and shrubs includes all woody vegetation.
(Ord. No. 141, § 1.01, 10-18-1973)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 24-2. Permits.
No person shall do, or cause to be done by others, without the written permission of the city manager any of the following acts:
(1) Remove, cut, prune, break, injure, deface or in any way interfere with any tree or shrub, or part of a tree or shrub, either above or below ground, growing on any public highway, park or public place.
(2) Plant any tree or shrub on any public highway, park or public place until such tree or shrub shall
have first been approved and the planting space designated.
(3) Spray with any chemical any tree or shrub on any public highway, park or public place.
(4) Secure any rope, wire, sign or other device on or about such tree or shrub.
(5) Remove or injure any guard or device on or about the base of a tree or shrub to permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
(6) Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or shrub to permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
(Ord. No. 141, § 2.01, 10-18-1973)
Sec. 24-3. Public nuisance.
Any tree or shrub or part of a tree or shrub in the city which interferes with the use of any public highway, park or public place or which is unsafe and constitutes a hazard to the life, health, safety or property of the public or constitutes a center of infection for disease or insects which may endanger the health and life of other trees or shrubs shall be declared a public nuisance; and the owner shall be required to correct or remove it. The owner shall be notified in writing of the existence of such a public nuisance and given reasonable time for its correction or removal. If not corrected or removed within the time allotted, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed at once and initiate such action as necessary to defray all resulting cost.
(Ord. No. 141, § 3.01, 10-18-1973)
Sec. 24-4. Chemicals, fire, gas, smoke.
(a) No person shall place salt, oil or any other substance injurious to plant growth upon any public highway, park or public place in such manner as to injure any growing tree or shrub.
(b) No person shall build any fire or station any engine in any public place in such a manner that its heat, vapors or fumes may injure any growing trees or shrubs.
(c) No person shall permit any leak to exist in any gas pipe or main within the root zone of any tree or shrub.
(d) No person shall allow or continue to pollute the air surrounding any tree or shrub with toxic smoke, gases or other injurious chemicals which may be harmful to the health or life of such tree or shrub.
(Ord. No. 141, § 4.01, 10-18-1973)
Cross References: Fire prevention and protection, ch. 11.
Sec. 24-5. Construction, electricity, house moving.
(a) The city manager shall certify all city permits for construction, installation, altering, moving or razing of all buildings, utilities, sidewalks, sewers or other operations where trees or shrubs or parts of trees or shrubs are involved.
(b) Prior to the erection, altering, repairing or razing of any building, sidewalk or other structure, the
owner or contractor shall place such guards around all public trees and shrubs as will effectually prevent injury to such trees and shrubs.
(c) No person shall permit any wire designed to carry electric current to come in contact with any tree or shrub unless protected by approved methods; further, any person having or maintaining such electric service shall maintain them in such a manner as will safeguard the trees and shrubs and shall make periodical adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to a tree or shrub.
(d) When the moving of any building or object along a public highway will necessitate the removal or injury or threaten the safety of any tree or shrub on public property, the owner or contractor shall assume full responsibility for such removal, replacement, repair or alteration of such trees or shrubs.
(e) It shall be the duty of the person maintaining services or structures on a public highway, park or public place to assume responsibility for the protection of such facilities during the progress of tree operations deemed necessary by the city manager providing prior notice has been given such person of the existence of such tree operations.
(Ord. No. 141, § 5.01, 10-18-1973)
Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5.
Sec. 24-6. Enforcement.
(a) It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that all the provisions of this chapter are obeyed, and all complaints as to the violation of this chapter shall be presented in writing to the city manager, and prosecution for all violations of this chapter shall be instituted by the city manager and shall be prosecuted in the name of the city.
(b) The city manager reserves the right to supervise the provisions of all permits involved in this chapter, and the cost of such service shall be charged to the person involved.
(Ord. No. 141, § 6.01, 10-18-1973)
Sec. 24-7. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall assume full responsibility for the removal, replacement, repair or alteration of such trees and shrubs according to such specifications deemed necessary by the city manager; further such person shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties of section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 141, § 7.01, 10-18-1973)
Sec. 24-8. Interference.
No person shall hinder, prevent or interfere with the agents or employees of the city manager while engaged in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 141, § 8.01, 10-18-1973)
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
1
Chapter 25
WATERWAYS*
__________
* Charter References: General municipal powers, control and regulation of streams, waters and watercourses, § 2.3(i).
Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 12; land development, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; zoning, ch. 26.
State Law References: Watercraft and marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq., MSA 13A.80101 et seq.
__________
Article I. In General
Sec. 25-1. Placing foreign substance in Dollar Lake; penalty.
Secs. 25-2--25-35. Reserved.
Article II. Watercraft and Marine Safety
Sec. 25-36. Definitions.
Sec. 25-37. Compliance with state law required.
Sec. 25-38. Operation generally.
Sec. 25-39. Operation under the influence.
Sec. 25-40. Operation of water skis, similar contrivances.
Sec. 25-41. Accidents.
Sec. 25-42. Hours of operation limited.
Sec. 25-43. Liability for negligent operation.
Sec. 25-44. Damage from wake or swell.
Sec. 25-45. Muffler required.
Sec. 25-46. Lights required.
Sec. 25-47. Littering prohibited.
Sec. 25-48. Right-of-way of non-motor-driven craft.
Sec. 25-49. Racing limited.
Sec. 25-50. Life preservers required.
Sec. 25-51. Violation; penalty.
Sec. 25-52. Watercraft control for Dollar Lake.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 25-1. Placing foreign substance in Dollar Lake; penalty.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to dump, spread, lay out or otherwise place upon or in frozen water or the surface of Dollar Lake any foreign substance, such as but not limited to sand, ashes, straw, salt, branches and limbs of trees.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be subject to section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 123, §§ 1.01, 2.01, 1-31-1972)
Secs. 25-2--25-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
2
WATERCRAFT AND MARINE SAFETY
Sec. 25-36. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Watercraft means any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water, including but not limited to any vessel, ship, boat, motor vessel, steam vessel, vessel operated by machinery either permanently or temporarily affixed, scow, tugboat and rowboat.
(Ord. No. 34, § 2, 6-17-1958)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 25-37. Compliance with state law required.
No person shall operate any watercraft upon the waters within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city which has not complied with the registration requirements and which do not display the registration numbers provided for by any applicable state law.
(Ord. No. 34, § 1, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-38. Operation generally.
(a) Any person operating or propelling a watercraft upon the waters in the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city shall operate the watercraft in a careful and prudent manner, and at such speed so as not to endanger the life or property of any person.
(b) No person shall operate any watercraft at a rate of speed greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the watercraft to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(c) No person shall operate a watercraft in a manner so as to unreasonably interfere with the lawful use by others upon the waters within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 34, § 4, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-39. Operation under the influence.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, barbital or any derivation of barbital, or person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs, barbital or any derivative of barbital, to operate, propel or be in actual physical control of any watercraft upon the waters within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any watercraft or any person having such in charge or in control to authorize or knowingly permit the watercraft to be propelled or operated by any person who is under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, barbital or any derivative of barbital, or any person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs, barbital or a derivative of barbital.
(Ord. No. 34, § 3, 6-17-1958)
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
3
Sec. 25-40. Operation of water skis, similar contrivances.
Any person who operates any watercraft or who navigates, steers or controls himself while being towed on water skis, water sled, surfboard or similar contrivance upon the waters within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city carelessly and heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger any person or property, shall be guilty of reckless operation of a watercraft and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 25-51.
(Ord. No. 34, § 5, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-41. Accidents.
The operator of any watercraft involved in any accident resulting in injury or death to any person or damage to property shall stop his watercraft and give his name, address and the registration number of his watercraft to the person struck or the operator or occupants of any watercraft collided with and render to any person injured in the accident reasonable assistance, including the transporting of the persons to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that treatment is necessary or requested by the injured person.
(Ord. No. 34, § 6, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-42. Hours of operation limited.
No operator of any watercraft shall have in tow or shall otherwise be assisting in the propulsion of a person on water skis, water sled, surfboard or other similar contrivance during the period one hour after sunset or one hour prior to sunrise. Any person permitting himself to be towed on water skis, water sled, surfboards or similar contrivances in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 34, § 7, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-43. Liability for negligent operation.
The owner of a watercraft shall be liable for any injury occasioned by the negligent operation of such watercraft, whether the negligence consists of violation of the provisions of this chapter, the statutes of the state or in the failure to observe such ordinary care in such operation as the rules of the common law require. The owner shall not be liable unless the watercraft is used with his express or implied consent. It shall be presumed that the craft is being operated with the knowledge and consent of the owner if it is driven at the time of the injury by his son or daughter.
(Ord. No. 34, § 8, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-44. Damage from wake or swell.
The owner of any watercraft operated upon the waters within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city shall be personally responsible for any damage to life or property resulting from a wake or swell created by the negligent operation or propulsion of such watercraft where the watercraft is being operated with his consent.
(Ord. No. 34, § 9, 6-17-1958)
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
4
Sec. 25-45. Muffler required.
Every watercraft being operated upon the waters within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city being propelled by a permanently or temporarily attached motor shall be provided and equipped with a stock factory muffler, underwater exhaust or other modern device capable of adequately muffling the sound of the exhaust of the engine of such motor.
The mufflers shall be kept closed and the exhaust or device kept in proper working order by any person operating or in charge of the watercraft at all times when the engine is in operation. The term "capable of adequately muffling the sound of exhaust of the engine" means the motor's exhaust at all times shall be so muffled or suppressed as not to create excessive or unusual noise.
(Ord. No. 34, § 10, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-46. Lights required.
Every watercraft operated upon the waters within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city during the hours from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise shall be equipped with a light on the bow which can be plainly distinguished at a distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. No. 34, § 11, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-47. Littering prohibited.
No person as an operator of or as a passenger in any watercraft on the water within the territorial limits or bordering upon the territorial limits of the city shall throw or deposit any glass bottles, tin cans, cardboard containers, or any other type of debris upon or into the waters or on the shore.
(Ord. No. 34, § 12, 6-17-1958)
Cross References: Solid waste, ch. 18.
Sec. 25-48. Right-of-way of non-motor-driven craft.
It shall be the duty of every person operating a motor-driven boat to give watercraft propelled by other than by mechanical means every advantage and stay out of their way.
(Ord. No. 34, § 13, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-49. Racing limited.
No person shall engage in any motorboat race or speed without first obtaining permission from the city council and then only on such terms and conditions and under such police supervision as the council may prescribe.
(Ord. No. 34, § 14, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-50. Life preservers required.
Every motorboat, launch or other watercraft carrying passengers for hire shall carry life preservers of the
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
5
sort and number prescribed by any applicable law.
(Ord. No. 34, § 15, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-51. Violation; penalty.
Any person who shall by his own act or omission or by those of agent or employee violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7.
(Ord. No. 34, § 16, 6-17-1958)
Sec. 25-52. Watercraft control for Dollar Lake.
On the waters of Dollar Lake all within the City of Keego Harbor, Town 3 North, Range 9 East, Oakland County, State of Michigan, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow--no wake speed.
The boundaries of the area described immediately above shall be marked with signs and with buoys. All buoys must be placed as provided in a permit issued by the department of natural resources and be in conformance with the state uniform waterway marking system.
(Ord. No. 352, § 1, 8-19-1999)
Sec. 25-53. Lake Access and Docking Regulations
In its deliberations leading to the adoption of this Ordinance, the City Council has recognized and concluded that the use of water resources, including the inland lakes situated in the City of Keego Harbor, should be considered within a framework of long-term costs and benefits to the City, and that it is desirable to retain and maintain the physical, cultural and aesthetic characteristics of the City lakes. Moreover, it has been recognized that the shore lines of each respective property must be regulated in order to preserve and protect the rights of riparian owners, as well as the City as a whole. It has farther been recognized that the lack of regulation would result in a nuisance condition and an impairment of these important and irreplaceable natural resources of the City, and would further result in the destruction of property values and threaten the public health, safety and welfare of all persons making use of the lakes in the City. Accordingly, it is the intent and purpose of the City Council to adopt reasonable regulations for lake access and docking within the City.
(1) DEFINITIONS. a. Boat
Any watercraft having a motor, engine or other machinery of more than five (5) horse power or the equivalent, and any "personal watercraft" as defined in the Marine Safety Act, Act 303 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967, as amended;
b. Lake Access.
Shall mean a property, parcel, or lot abutting a lake or pond used or intended to be used for the purpose of providing access to a lake or pond by pedestrians or vehicular traffic to and from offshore land.
c. Dock or Docking.
The attaching of a boat directly to a pier, which is a platform or other permanent or seasonal fixture
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
6
extending from the shore and which is directly accessible to a lake frontage lot.
d. Lake Frontage
That portion of a lot or parcel of land, existing on documentation recorded within the Oakland County Register of Deeds, which abuts or intersects with the ordinary high water mark of a lake, whether such lot or parcel is owned by one or more persons, or any legal entity.
e. Boat Launch Prohibition
No person shall launch a boat in Keego Harbor unless the boat is launched at Dollar Bay or other city, county or state launch site.
e. Riparian.
Refers to owners of property abutting a water body, whether a lake or a stream.
1 REGULATIONS.
a. Unless otherwise provided herein, or unless otherwise allowed through special land use or planned unit development, no more than four (4) boats, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances or any combination thereof shall be docked adjacent to each lake frontage. All such Boats, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances shall be registered to the property owner. In the event that the property owner has rented or leased their property, including all members of Neighborhood Associations, the property owner must notify the City in writing of any watercraft owned by the renters or lessee, The written notice must contain a detailed description of the watercraft along with the Michigan registration numbers.
No Boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances shall dock, moor anchor or impede navigation, in or within 100ft. of any canal or other water tributary including but not limited to Dollar Lake, Dollar Lake canal, Brock St. canal, any designated swim areas public or private, beaches, parks or the canal or water control, flood control device station into Sylvan Lake or dock, lift or mooring device. Property owners with water access on a canal may have only one dock which runs parallel with the canal. The neighborhood association with riparian rights are authorized to moor no more than four boats belonging to members of the association without being required to obtain a marina permit from the DEQ.
b. If a boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or any similar contrivances which is registered with the State of Michigan or any other jurisdiction within the United States to someone other than the property owner where the boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivance, is found to be docked on the property for a period of twelve (12) consecutive hours, the police agency shall do all of the following:
(1) Determine if the boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances has been reported stolen.
(2) Affix a written notice of “Notice of Abandoned Vehicle” (48 hrs. notice) to the boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances indicating the date, time, officer, badge #, proposed removal date and time, year, make, MC numbers, Hull Number and
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
7
complaint number.
(3) If a boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances is not remove within forty-eight (48) hours after the date that the notice was affixed, the Police Department may take the Boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances into custody.
(4) Within seven (7) days after taking the boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances into custody, the Police Department shall send to the registered owner and any secured party of record, by first class mail or personal service, notice that the Boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances has been taken into custody.
(5) Within twenty (20) days after the notice of custody has been sent to the registered owner or secured party of record, fail to respond to the notice or fail to retrieve the Boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances, the owner, will forfeit ownership of the Boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances.
(6) If the registered owner or secured party of record fails to pay the fees incurred by the Police Department or Storage Facility in the taking custody of the Boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances the Boat, Watercraft, Personal Watercraft or similar contrivances shall not be released.
c. Not more than one (1) dock shall be permitted or used for each lot which has lake frontage and which meets all lot area and frontage requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. All docks, lifts and mooring devices or swim platform shall be located within the property line. No dock or swim platform shall exceed One Hundred and Fifty (150) feet from the waters edge providing it does not encroach on the riparian rights of the adjacent property owners. In the event the property owner’s watercraft should require mooring in deeper water the mooring distance shall not exceed the minimal amount of water necessary to navigate into open water. No dock, lift or mooring device or swim platform will be placed in the water before April 1st and shall be removed no later than November 1st. All docks, lifts and mooring devices will be maintained in good repair and safe working condition.
d. No multi-unit residential development that is located upon a lot or parcel of land with lake frontage shall permit boat access by more than one (1) single-family home, dwelling unit, cottage, condominium unit, site condominium unit or apartment unit for each Forty (40) feet of lake frontage on such lot or parcel of land, as measured along the ordinary high water mark line of the lake in such common lake front area. Such access is limited to one (1) boat per each ten (10) feet of lake frontage. Neighborhood associations will be limited to no more than four (4) watercraft per parcel.
e. No lake frontage shall be used for boat access to the owners or occupants of newly developed adjacent or neighboring subdivisions, multiple-residential developments, cluster housing developments or mobile home parks, unless the parcel is designated as a special land use multi-boat access site. Such designation may be approved by the City Council, following a recommendation by the City Planning Commission after submittal by the developer of a Lake Study Plan, if the proposed special land use meets all of the following standards:
(1) The resulting conditions will be consistent with the intent of this ordinance
G:\Code of Ordinances\MUNI CODE ORDINANCES\CH025 - Chapter 25 WATERWAYS revised 72312.docx
8
(2) The resulting conditions will not create or substantially add to traffic or safety hazards in the area, either on roadways or waterways.
(3) The available public services and facilities will adequately serve the proposed use.
(4) The proposed use will be sufficiently designed to protect the lakes, natural systems, natural resources, and the health, safety and social and economic welfare of those who will use the proposed use, residents and landowners adjacent to the proposed use, and the community as a whole.
Page 4 of 5
(5) The minimum lake frontage requirements shall not be less than Forty (40) feet per single family home, dwelling unit, cottage, condominium unit, site condominium unit or apartment unit proposed to have access to or utilize such lake frontage except for the following: Sec. 18-02-426-017, Sec. 18-02-428-004 and Sec. 18-02^28-005
Section 201 Penalty
Any person(s) who violates this ordinance shall be responsible for a Municipal Civil Infraction as defined in Section 1-7 of the City of Keego Harbor Code. A first violation shall be a $100.00 dollar penalty. A Second violation shall be a $300.00 dollar penalty. A third or subsequent violation(s) shall be a $500.00 dollar penalty per occurrence.
Section 301. Repealer.
This Ordinance hereby repeals any ordinances in conflict herewith.
Sections 401. Savings Clause.
That nothing in this Ordinance hereby adopted be construed to affect any just or legal right or remedy of any character nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, unpaired or affected by this Ordinance.
Section 501. Severability.
"The various parts, sections and clauses of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected.
Section 601. Adoption.
This Ordinance is hereby declared to have been adopted by the City of Keego Harbor City Council, at a meeting thereof duly called and held on the 1st day of June 2005, and ordered to be given effect upon publication as mandated by Charter and statute.
(Ord. No. 436, § 07/19/2012)
Chapter 26
ZONING*
__________
* Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 12; land development, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 19; traffic and vehicles, ch. 22; utilities, ch. 23; waterways, ch. 25.
State Law References: Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.
__________
Sec. 26-1. City zoning ordinance not affected by Code.
Sec. 26-1. City zoning ordinance not affected by Code.
The validity of the city's zoning ordinance, Ordinance No. 243, adopted January 15, 1987, as amended by Ordinance No. 246, adopted February 19, 1987; Ordinance No. 254, adopted June 18, 1987; Ordinance No. 255, adopted June 18, 1987; Ordinance No. 259, adopted June 16, 1988; Ordinance No. 263, adopted December 15, 1988; Ordinance No. 264, adopted May 18, 1989; Ordinance No. 271, adopted June 21, 1990; Ordinance No. 272, adopted June 21, 1990; Ordinance No. 274, adopted October 18, 1990; Ordinance No. 275, adopted November 15, 1990; Ordinance No. 276, adopted February 21, 1991; Ordinance No. 278, adopted July 18, 1991; Ordinance No. 286, adopted November 19, 1992; Ordinance No. 288, adopted September 16, 1993; Ordinance No. 291, adopted May 19, 1994; Ordinance No. 293, adopted November 17, 1994; Ordinance No. 302, adopted July 20, 1995; Ordinance No. 307, adopted March 21, 1996; Ordinance No. 314, adopted October 17, 1996; Ordinance No. 315, adopted September 19, 1996; Ordinance No. 320, adopted May 15, 1997; Ordinance No. 321, adopted May 15, 1997; Ordinance No. 328, adopted August 21, 1997; Ordinance No. 330, adopted August 26, 1997; Ordinance No. 331, adopted September 18, 1997; Ordinance No. 336, adopted November 20, 1997; Ordinance No. 337, adopted December 18, 1997; Ordinance No. 338, adopted February 19, 1998; Ordinance No. 340, adopted September 16, 1998; Ordinance No. 341, adopted April 16, 1998; Ordinance No. 342, adopted May 21, 1998; Ordinance No. 344, adopted June 18, 1998; Ordinance No. 347, adopted November 19, 1998, is not affected by anything in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code. A copy of the zoning ordinance is available for inspection at the office of the city clerk during the normal business hours of the office of the city clerk.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE TOC - 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article and
Section Number Title Page Number
INTENT 0 - 1
PREAMBLE 0 - 1
ENACTING CLAUSE 0 - 1
ARTICLE I SHORT TITLE 1 - 1
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS 2 - 1
ARTICLE III ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP:
CONFORMITY TO ORDINANCE REGULATIONS 3 - 1
Sec. 3.00 Zoning Districts Established 3 - 1
Sec. 3.01 Zoning District Boundaries 3 - 1
Sec. 3.02 Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries 3 - 2
Sec. 3.03 Zoning of Vacated Areas 3 - 2
Sec. 3.04 Zoning of Annexed Areas 3 - 2
Sec. 3.05 Conformity to Ordinance Regulations 3 - 3
Sec. 3.06 Conflicting Regulations 3 - 3
Sec. 3.07 Permissive Zoning Concept 3 - 3
ARTICLE IV NR NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 4 - 1
Sec. 4.00 Intent 4 - 1
Sec. 4.01 Principal Uses Permitted 4 - 1
Sec. 4.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 4 - 1
Sec. 4.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 4 - 3
Sec. 4.04 Recreational Vehicle Parking in Residential Districts 4 - 3
Sec. 4.05 Parking and Storage of Recreational Vehicles on Vacant
Residentially Zoned Lots 4 - 4
Sec. 4.06 Front Yard Parking in Residential Districts 4 - 6
Sec. 4.07 Architectural Design Standards 4 - 6
Sec. 4.08 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements 4 - 8
ARTICLE IV(A) R-T TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 4A - 1
Sec. 4A.00 Intent 4A - 1
Sec. 4A.01 Principal Uses Permitted 4A - 1
Sec. 4A.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 4A - 2
Sec. 4A.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 4A - 4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE TOC - 2
Sec. 4A.04 Recreational Vehicle Parking in Townhouse Residential
Districts 4A - 4
Sec. 4A.05 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements 4A - 5
ARTICLE V R-M MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 5 - 1
Sec. 5.00 Intent 5 - 1
Sec. 5.01 Principal Uses Permitted 5 - 1
Sec. 5.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 5 - 2
Sec. 5.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 5 - 3
Sec. 5.04 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements 5 - 4
Sec. 5.05 Required Greenbelt 5 - 4
ARTICLE V(A) R-ME ELDERLY HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 5A - 1
Sec. 5A.00 Intent 5A - 1
Sec. 5A.01 Principal Uses Permitted 5A - 1
Sec 5A.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 5A - 2
Sec. 5A.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 5A - 2
Sec. 5A.04 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements 5A - 2
ARTICLE VI R-MH RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT 6 - 1
Sec. 6.00 Intent 6 - 1
Sec. 6.01 Principal Uses Permitted 6 - 1
Sec. 6.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 6 - 4
Sec. 6.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 6 - 5
Sec. 6.04 Area and Bulk Requirements 6 - 5
ARTICLE VII P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT 7 - 1
Sec. 7.00 Intent 7 - 1
Sec. 7.01 Principal Uses Permitted 7 - 1
Sec. 7.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 7 - 2
Sec. 7.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 7 - 2
Sec. 7.04 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements 7 - 2
ARTICLE VIII C-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 8 - 1
Sec. 8.00 Intent 8 - 1
Sec. 8.01 Principal Uses Permitted 8 - 1
Sec. 8.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 8 - 2
Sec. 8.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 8 - 6
Sec. 8.04 Development Standards 8 - 6
ARTICLE IX C-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 9 - 1
Sec. 9.00 Intent 9 - 1
Sec. 9.01 Principal Uses Permitted 9 - 1
Sec. 9.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 9 - 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE TOC - 3
Sec. 9.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 9 - 10
Sec. 9.04 Development Standards 9 - 10
ARTICLE X O-1 OFFICE BUILDING DISTRICTS 10 - 1
Sec. 10.00 Intent 10 - 1
Sec. 10.01 Principal Uses Permitted 10 - 1
Sec. 10.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject To Special Conditions 10 - 2
Sec. 10.03 Required Conditions 10 - 3
Sec. 10.04 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements 10 - 3
Sec. 10.05 Required Greenbelt 10 - 3
ARTICLE XI M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 11 - 1
Sec. 11.00 Intent 11 - 1
Sec. 11.01 Principal Uses Permitted 11 - 1
Sec. 11.02 Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 11 - 2
Sec. 11.03 Accessory Uses Permitted 11 - 3
Sec. 11.04 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements 11 - 3
Sec. 11.05 Required Greenbelt 11 - 3
ARTICLE XII NONCONFORMITY 12 - 1
Sec. 12.00 Intent 12 - 1
Sec. 12.01 Nonconforming Uses of Land 12 - 1
Sec. 12.02 Nonconforming Structures 12 - 2
Sec. 12.03 Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land 12 - 3
Sec. 12.04 Repairs and Maintenance 12 - 4
Sec. 12.05 Uses Under Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses 12 - 4
Sec. 12.06 Change of Tenancy or Ownership 12 - 4
Sec. 12.07 City Removal of Nonconforming Uses and/or Structures 12 - 5
Sec. 12.08 Nonconforming Lots of Record 12 - 5
ARTICLE XIII OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 13 - 1
Sec. 13.00 Parking Requirements 13 - 1
Sec. 13.01 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements 13 - 3
Sec. 13.02 Off-Street Parking Space Layout, Standards, Construction
and Maintenance 13 - 7
Sec. 13.03 Off-Street Loading and Unloading 13 - 9
ARTICLE XIV SIGNS 14 - 1
Sec. 14.00 Purpose and Intent 14 - 1
Sec. 14.01 Definitions 14 - 1
Sec. 14.02 Measurement of Sign Area 14 - 4
Sec. 14.03 Permits and Applications 14 - 4
Sec. 14.04 Exempt Signs 14 - 5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE TOC - 4
Sec. 14.05 Construction and Maintenance Requirements 14 - 7
Sec. 14.06 General Provisions 14 - 9
Sec. 14.07 District Regulations 14 - 11
Sec. 14.08 Schedule of Sign Regulations 14 - 14
Sec. 14.09 Non-Conforming Signs 14 - 15
Sec. 14.10 Appeals 14 - 16
Sec. 14.11 Enforcement 14 - 16
ARTICLE XV GENERAL PROVISIONS 15 - 1
Sec. 15.00 One Single-Family Dwelling Per Lot 15 - 1
Sec. 15.01 Exterior Lighting 15 - 1
Sec. 15.02 Residential Entranceway 15 - 1
Sec. 15.03 Corner Clearance 15 - 1
Sec. 15.04 Walls 15 - 2
Sec. 15.05 Commercial Architectural Standards 15 - 3
Sec. 15.06 Encumbering of Land Required to Satisfy Regulations 15 - 16
Sec. 15.07 Essential Services 15 - 16
Sec. 15.08 Voting Place 15 - 16
Sec. 15.09 Permitted Height 15 - 16
Sec. 15.10 Exception to Height Limits 15 - 17
Sec. 15.11 Permitted Projections into Required Open Space 15 - 17
Sec. 15.12 Fences and Privacy Screen Regulations 15 - 18
Sec. 15.13 Accessory Buildings 15 - 21
Sec. 15.14 Noise 15 - 22
Sec. 15.15 Waterfront Yards 15 - 22
Sec. 15.16 Keeping of Farm Animals and Other Non-Domestic Animals 15 - 27
Sec. 15.17 Reserved 15 - 27
Sec. 15.18 Moving of Buildings 15 - 27
Sec. 15.19 Performance Guarantees 15 - 28
Sec. 15.20 Temporary and Portable Buildings, Uses and Structures 15 - 30
Sec. 15.21 Satellite Dish Antennas 15 - 30
Sec. 15.22 Development Within Flood Hazard Areas 15 - 31
Sec. 15.23 Landscape Requirements 15 - 31
Sec. 15.24 Screening of Roof Top Equipment 15 - 36
Sec. 15.25 Sidewalks and Bikeways 15 - 36
Sec. 15.26 Site Grading 15 - 37
Sec. 15.27 Screening of Trash Storage Areas (Dumpsters) 15 - 38
Sec. 15.28 Wireless Communications Facilities and Services 15 - 39
Sec. 15.29 Home Occupations 15 – 46
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE TOC - 5
ARTICLE XVI ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 16 - 1
Sec. 16.00 Enforcement 16 - 1
Sec. 16.01 Duties of Building Inspector 16 - 1
Sec. 16.02 Plot Plan 16 - 1
Sec. 16.03 Reserved 16 - 2
Sec. 16.04 Permits 16 - 2
Sec. 16.05 Certificates of Occupancy 16 - 2
Sec. 16.06 Final Inspection 16 - 4
Sec. 16.07 Fees 16 - 4
Sec. 16.08 Site Plan Review and Approval Procedures 16 - 4
Sec. 16.09 Procedures and Standards for Principal Uses Permitted
Subject to Special Conditions 16 - 19
Sec. 16.10 Planned Unit Development 16 - 21
Sec. 16.11 Planning Commission 16 - 30
ARTICLE XVII ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 17 - 1
Sec. 17.00 Creation 17 - 1
Sec. 17.01 Meetings of Zoning Board of Appeals 17 - 1
Sec. 17.02 Powers of Zoning Board of Appeals 17 - 1
Sec. 17.03 Limitations on the Powers of the of Zoning Board of Appeals 17 - 4
Sec. 17.04 Procedure for Appeals to the Board 17 - 5
ARTICLE XVIII CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 18 - 1
Sec. 18.00 Statement of Intent 18 - 1
Sec. 18.01 Amendment Procedure 18 - 1
Sec. 18.02 Comprehensive Review of Ordinance 18 - 3
ARTICLE XIX REPEAL 19 - 1
Sec. 19.00 Repeal 19 - 1
ARTICLE XX INTERPRETATION AND VESTED RIGHT 20 - 1
Sec. 20.00 Interpretation and Conflict 20 - 1
Sec. 20.01 Vested Right 20 - 1
ARTICLE XXI ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 21 - 1
Sec. 21.00 Violations and Penalties 21 - 1
Sec. 21.01 Public Nuisance 21 - 1
ARTICLE XXII SEVERANCE CLAUSE 22 - 1
Sec. 22.00 Severance Clause 22 - 1
Sec. 22.01 Rule of Construction 22 - 1
ARTICLE XXIII EFFECTIVE DATE 23 - 1
Sec. 23.00 Effective Date 23 - 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE TOC - 6
ARTICLE XXIV SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 24 - 1
Sec. 24.00 Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements in
All Zoning Districts 24 - 1
Sec. 24.01 Notes to Schedule of Regulations 24 - 2
INTENT, PREAMBLE, AND ENACTING CLAUSE
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 0-1
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR
ORDINANCE NUMBER 243
An Ordinance to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures, and
land for trade, industry, residence, and for public and semi-public or other specified
uses; and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings and other structures; to
regulate and determine the size of yards, courts, and open spaces; to regulate and limit
the density of population and for said purposes to divide the City into districts and
establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the regulations,
restrictions, and boundaries of such districts; define certain terms used herein; providing
for the enforcement; establishment of the Board of Appeals; and imposing penalties for
the violation of this Ordinance.
INTENT
All land zones are hereby declared to be exclusive and restricted to the designated
areas.
PREAMBLE
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Public Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of 2006 of
the State of Michigan, and act amendatory thereto, in such case, made and provided
and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, moral
comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Keego
Harbor by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of
the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most
appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding of land and the undue congestion of
population; providing adequate light, air, and reasonable access; and facilitating
adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewer, schools, recreation,
and other public requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a
comprehensive plan, now therefore:
(Ordinance 440, 11/13/12)
ENACTING CLAUSE
THE CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ORDAINS:
SHORT TITLE
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 1-1
ARTICLE I
SHORT TITLE
SECTION 1.00
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Keego Harbor Zoning
Ordinance." Within the following text it may be referred to as the "Ordinance."
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-1
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 2.00
For the purpose of this Ordinance certain terms, words and phrases shall, whenever
used in this Ordinance, have the meaning herewith defined as follows:
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, or corporation, public or private, as well as the individual; the present tense
includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural and plural number
includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive;
the words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged
to be used or occupied"; the word "building" includes the word "structure" and the word
"dwelling" includes the word "residence"; the word "lot" includes the words "plot" and
"parcel".
Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
ACT: The term "act" or "doing of an act" includes "omission to act".
ADULT FOSTER CARE CONGREGATE FACILITY: means an adult foster care facility
with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster
care. Facilities are subject to conditional use approval. See “State Licensed Residential
Facilities” defined in this section.
ADULT REGULATED USES: Definitions: As used in this Ordinance, the following
definition shall apply to adult regulated uses:
(a) Halfway House: A facility established by the Michigan Department of Corrections in
connection with a jail, prison, or other correctional institution or facility as a
residence for three or more persons committed to the jail, prison, or correctional
institution prior to full release from supervision including any period of parole.
ALLEY: A public or legally established private thoroughfare, other than a street,
affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended
for general traffic circulation.
AGRICULTURAL LAND: means substantially undeveloped land devoted to the
production of plants and animals useful to humans, including, but not limited to, forage
and sod crops, grains, feed crops, field crops, dairy products, poultry and poultry
products, livestock, herbs, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, fruits, vegetables,
Christmas trees, and other similar uses and activities.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-2
AIRPORT: means an airport licensed by the Michigan department of transportation,
bureau of aeronautics under section 86 of the aeronautics code of the state of Michigan,
1945 PA 327, MCL 259.86.
ALLEY: A public or legally established private thoroughfare, other than a street,
affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended
for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS: Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of
occupancy; and change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders; or any change which may be referred to herein as
"altered" or "reconstructed".
APARTMENTS: The dwelling units in a multiple dwelling as defined herein:
(a) Efficiency Apartment: Is a dwelling unit of OR less than 350 square feet of floor
area consisting of not more than one (1) room in addition to kitchen and necessary
sanitary facilities.
(b) One Bedroom Unit: Is a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least six
hundred (600) square feet consisting of not more than three (3) rooms, including
one bedroom in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
(c) Two Bedroom Unit: Is a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least
eight hundred (800) square feet, consisting of not more than four (4) rooms,
including two bedrooms, in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
(d) Three or More Bedroom Units: Is a dwelling unit wherein for each room in addition
or the four rooms permitted in a two (2) bedroom unit, there shall be provided an
additional area of two hundred (200) square feet to the minimum floor area of eight
hundred (800) square feet in addition to the kitchen and necessary sanitary
facilities.
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A wireless communications
facility affixed to an existing structure, such as an existing building, tower, water tank,
utility pole, etc. utilized to receive and transmit federally or state licensed
communications services via duly licensed segments of the radio frequency spectrum.
This definition shall not include support structures.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE: A Building or premises where the following
services may be carried out in a completely enclosed building: general repairs, engine
rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service such as body,
frame, or fender straightening and repair; painting and under-coating of automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE CENTER: A building or premises used primarily for the sale
and installation of major automobile accessories, such as tires, batteries, radios, air
conditioners and mufflers, plus such services as brake adjustment, and wheel alignment
and balancing; but excluding any major mechanical repairs, collision work,
under-coating or painting. Sale of gasoline (stored only in underground tanks) shall be
incidental to the above enumerated activities.
BALCONY: An elevated platform, covered or uncovered by a roof, screened or
unscreened, projecting from the wall of a building or structure (see Section
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-3
15.11(c) - Permitted Projections into Required Open Space).
BANQUET HALL: A building or part of a building used or available for use for the
gathering of people for specific functions or for entertaining a large group of people,
where food and beverages are generally provided.
BAR/LOUNGE: A bar/lounge is any establishment that serves alcohol to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state past 11 p.m.1 such an establishment may stay open until
2:00 a.m. and may also provide entertainment for patrons.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so
located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the
vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be
counted as a story, and shall not be used for dwelling units, offices, retail sales or
manufacturing, but may be used for storage, heating and utility facilities, etc. (See
basement and story illustration)
BEDROOM: A room designed or used in whole or in part for sleeping purposes.
BED-N-BREAKFAST INN: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are
1 In a decision issued by Oakland County Circuit Court Judge Richard D. Kuhn on July 20, 1999, the
definition of bar/lounge as amended by Ordinance 328 was declared invalid. Judge Kuhn found that
the 11 p.m. restriction in the definition was pre-empted by Michigan Liquor Control Law. The definition
prior to the amendment reads as follows: A bar or lounge is a type of restaurant which is operated
primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snack may
also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of
the structure so designated or operated.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-4
provided or offered for transient guests for compensation, including provision for a
morning meal only and for overnight guests only.
BILLBOARD: Any non-accessory sign, device, design, words, letters, numbers or
trademark which makes anything known to the general public and is the principal use of
the lot or parcel on which it is located.
BLOCK: A block shall be that property abutting on one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting streets or alleys and extending back to another
street or alley or to the City Boundary.
BOARDING HOUSE: (The terms boarding house, rooming house and lodging house
are used synonymously in this Ordinance. A building, other than a hotel, where for
compensation and/or prearrangement for periods exceeding ten days, lodging and
meals are provided for three or more persons or together with one dwelling unit for
occupancy by management.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Keego Harbor.
BOAT: See Recreation Vehicle. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
BOAT DOCK/WELL: The water area in which a boat lies when it is made fast to shore
installations. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
BOAT LIFT: A device referred to as a hoist, davits, etc., that may be used to raise
boats or cargo. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
BOAT PIER: See Pier. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
BOAT PORT: Any covered structure open on all sides designed for the storage of
boats and marine equipment. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a lot after compliance with the minimum
required setbacks of this Ordinance.
BUILDING: Any structure including a mobile home or mobile structure, or a
pre-manufactured or pre-cut structure above or below ground, temporary or permanent,
having one or more floors or any structure, temporary or permanent, with a roof and
designed or intended primarily for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals
and property of any kind.
BUILDING ACCESSORY: A subordinate building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the
highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to
the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, studio hip and gambrel roofs;
and 75 percent of the height of an "A" frame.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-5
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-6
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: A building or, where the context so indicates, a
group of buildings in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which
building or group of buildings is located.
BUILDING LINE: A line formed by the building foundation where any portion of a
building exceeds eight (8) feet in width and projects more than two (2) feet beyond the
foundation, the face of the building shall form said building line. For the purposes of the
ordinance, a building line is the same as a front setback line.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD): The area along Orchard Lake Road between
the centerline of Beechmont and the centerline of Willow Beach Avenue and the area
along Cass Lake Road between the intersection of Orchard Lake Road and the
centerline of Kenrick (Ord. 386, 3/21/2002).
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT FRINGE (CBD-Fringe): The area along Orchard
Lake Road east of the centerline of Beechmont and the area along Orchard Lake Road
between the centerline or Beechmont Willow Beach and the centerline of Pridham Road
(Ord. 386, 3/21/2002).
CENTRAL BUSINESS OVERLAY DISTRICT: The area along Orchard Lake Road
between the centerline of Beechmont and the centerline of Willow Beach Avenue and
the area along Cass Lake Road between the intersection of Orchard Lake Road and the
centerline of Beland, and as defined in Section 15.05.
CHILD CARE CENTER OR DAY CARE CENTER: A facility, other than a private
residence, receiving one or more preschool or school age children for care for periods
of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents are not immediately available to the
child, as defined in Public Act 116 of 1973.
CLINIC: A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick or injured persons, and
those in need of medical or minor surgical attention. A clinic may incorporate customary
laboratories and pharmacies incidental or necessary to its operation or to the service of
its patients, but may not include facilities for in-patient care or major surgery.
CLUB: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of
sports, arts, science, literature, politics or similar activities. but in no way operated for
profit.
COMMON USE LOT: Any private site, platted lot or other parcel held in common by a
subdivision, association, similar agency or group of individuals, or held in common by
virtue of the terms of a plat of record; which provides common use riparian access to
non-riparian lots or land owners or is utilized for the on-land storage of recreational
vehicles. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
CONDOMINIUM: A plan or project as established and approved in conformance with
the Michigan Condominium Act, Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: means that term as defined in section 2140 of the
natural resources and environmental protection act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.2140.
COURT: A yard, other than a required open space, on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, and which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or
buildings.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-7
DECK: A platform, commonly constructed of wood, which is typically attached to a
house, and which is typically used for outdoor leisure activities (see Section
15.11(c) - Permitted Projections into Required Open Space).
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS: means the rights to develop land to the maximum intensity
of development authorized by law.
DISTRICT: This term is synonymous with the term "Zone" or "zoning district"; a portion
of the City within which, on a uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are
permitted and within which certain regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
DOCK (BOAT WELL): See Boat Dock/Well. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment so developed that its principal
retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking
spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve motor vehicles or serve patrons while in the
motor vehicle (e.g., car wash, gasoline service stations, restaurants, cleaners, banks,
theaters, etc.).
DUMPSTER: A container used for the temporary storage of rubbish, pending
collection, having a capacity of at least two (2) cubic yards.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms with bathroom and principal kitchen facilities
designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy by one family for living, cooking and
sleeping purposes.
(a) Dwelling Unit, Manufactured: A dwelling unit which is substantially built,
constructed, assembled, and finished off the premises upon which it is intended to
be located.
(b) Dwelling Unit, Site Built: A dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed,
assembled, and finished on the premises which are intended to serve as its final
location. Site built dwelling units shall include dwelling units constructed of pre-cut
materials and panelized wall, roof and floor section when such sections require
substantial assembly and finishing on the premises which are intended to serve as
its final location.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units. This definition includes three family houses, four family houses,
and apartment houses, but does not include trailer camps or mobile home parks.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (One-Family): A detached building containing not more
than one dwelling unit designed for residential use of one (1) family only, provided:
(a) It complies with the minimum square footage requirements of this Ordinance for the
zone in which it is located.
(b) It has a minimum width across front, side and rear elevations of twenty (20) feet and
complies in all respects with the City building code, including minimum heights for
habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or
state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or
regulations for construction are different than those imposed by the City building
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-8
code, then and in that event, such federal or state standard or regulation shall
apply; further provided that the provisions of this section shall not have the effect of
making one family dwellings, which exist as of the effective date of this Ordinance,
non-conforming.
(c) It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance
with the City building code. Said foundation shall have a wall of the same perimeter
dimensions as the dwelling and shall be constructed of such materials and type as
required in the applicable building code for one-family dwellings. In the event that
the dwelling is a mobile home, as defined herein such dwelling shall be installed
pursuant to the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the
premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and
regulations of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission and shall have a perimeter
wall as required.
(d) In the event that a dwelling is a mobile home as defined herein, each mobile home
shall be installed with the wheels and towing mechanism removed. Additionally, no
dwelling shall have any exposed undercarriage or chassis.
(e) The dwelling contains a storage capability area in a basement located under the
dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard
construction equal to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage
area shall be equal to 10 percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100
square feet, whichever shall be less.
(f) The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other
residences in the vicinity, with either a roof over-hang of not less than six inches on
all sides, or alternatively with window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating
roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling; has not less than
two exterior doors with the second one being in either the rear or side of the
dwelling; and contains steps connected to said exterior door areas or to porches
connected to said door areas where a difference in elevation requires the same.
The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance
by the Building Official upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling,
subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the Zoning Board of Appeals within a
period of thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice of said Building Official's
decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set
forth in this definition of single family "dwelling" as well as the character, design and
appearance of one or more residential dwellings to the extent of less than twenty
(20) percent of the lots situated within said area; or, where said area is not so
developed, by the character, design and appearance of one or more single family
dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the City.
(g) The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or other areas which are not
constructed with a quality of workmanship equal to the original structure, including
permanent attachments to the principal structure and construction of foundations as
required herein.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-9
(h) The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a
mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation
within and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming
to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280,
amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow
load and strength requirements.
(i) The foregoing standard shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed
mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law.
(j) All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a building permit has
been obtained in accordance with the applicable building code provisions and
requirements.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING, ROW OR TOWN HOUSE: A row of three or more attached one family
dwellings, not more than two and one-half (2 1/2) stories in height, in which each
dwelling has its own front entrance and rear entrance.
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT: A dwelling unit with a bathroom and principal kitchen
facilities designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy for living, cooking and sleeping
purposes and having no separate designated bedroom.
ELDERLY HOUSING - DEPENDENT: A multiple-family housing form with central
dining facilities provided as a basic daily service to each dwelling unit. Each elderly
dwelling unit may or may not contain cooking facilities.
ELDERLY HOUSING - INDEPENDENT: A multiple-family housing form with full
facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual elderly dwelling unit and no central dining
facility.
ELDERLY PERSON: Individuals at least sixty-two (62) years of age, or households in
which head of the household is at least sixty-two (62) years of age. If only one member
of the household meets the age requirements, the death or hospitalization of that
person shall not cause the household to lose the elderly status.
ENCLOSED: A structure that is surrounded on three (3) or more sides by glass,
masonry, brick, screening wall or other similar material, greater than four (4) feet in
height is considered to be enclosed. (Ord. 364, 12/21/2000)
ERECTED: Build, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical
operations on the premises which are required for construction. Excavation, fill,
drainage, painting, plastering, sewers and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Those services as outlined below, which are designed and
constructed to directly, serve local users within the geographic boundaries of the City.
Such essential services include the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas,
electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communications, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals,
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-10
hydrants, and similar equipment, but not including storage yards, sales offices,
commercial buildings, or wireless communications facilities that are solely used for
private, commercial purposes.
EXCAVATION: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.
EXCEPTION (SPECIAL EXCEPTION): A use specified in this Ordinance as permissible
in a use district only if special conditions are met.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and
cooking together as a single non-profit housekeeping unit, inclusive of household
servants. A number of persons living and cooking together as a single non-profit
housekeeping unit having a continuing non-transient domestic character though not
related by blood, adoption or marriage, shall be deemed to constitute a family. This
definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, group of students,
association, lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie, or organization which is not a
recognized religious order, nor include a group of individuals whose association is
temporary and resort/seasonal or similar to a boarding house, motel or hotel, or for an
anticipated limited duration of a school term or terms on a similar determinable period.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME: A family day care home is a private home in which 1 but
less than 7 minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than
24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an
adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home
includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than 4 weeks
during a calendar year.
FENCE: An unroofed man-made structure designed as a barrier. It may be made of
wood, metal or other material, such as vinyl. It may be ornamental or intended for or
capable of enclosing a piece of land, preventing ingress and egress, dividing, bounding
or simply marking a line. A fence, for the purposes of this ordinance, is any such
structure, exceeding twelve (12) inches above grade, and the vertical surface area of
which is a minimum of 50 percent open to the free passage of air and light. (see "Point
of Observation") (Ordinance 428 12/15/11)
FILLING: The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground, except
common household gardening and ground care.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The flood hazard area shall coincide with the boundaries of
the areas indicated within the limits of the 100-year flood in the report titled "The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Keego Harbor", dated June 1982, with accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps.
FLOOR AREA: Area measured to the exterior face of exterior walls and to the center
line of interior partitions.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-11
FLOOR AREA, USEABLE RESIDENTIAL: The sum of the horizontal area of the first
story measured to the exterior walls; plus similarly measured, that area of all other
stories having more than eight-four (84) inches of head room which may be made
useable for human habitation; but excluding the floor area of basements, attics,
attached or unattached garages, breezeways, unenclosed porches, and accessory
buildings. (See "Floor area terminology" illustration)
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-12
FLOOR AREA, USEABLE NON-RESIDENTIAL: The sum of the horizontal area of the
first story measured to the exterior face of exterior walls, plus the similarly measured
area of all other stories, including mezzanines which may be made fit for occupancy,
including the floor area of basements used for activities related to the principal use,
such as storage, but excluding public hallways and corridors, restroom facilities and
furnace and utility rooms.2 Parking space located within a building shall not be
considered useable floor area. In those cases where useable floor area cannot be
determined (such as in an unoccupied retail building), useable floor area shall be equal
to eighty percent (80%) of the total floor area of the building. (See "Floor area
terminology" illustration)
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The combined gross floor area of all buildings on a lot,
including accessory buildings but excluding the floor area of basements (including walkouts
that conform with the definition of “basement”), attics, breezeways, and unenclosed
porches, divided by the lot area. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
FLOOR, GROUND: That portion of a building which is partly below grade but so located
that the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling is greater than the
vertical, distance from the average grade to the floor. A ground floor shall be counted as
a story.
FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME: Means a private residence with the approved capacity
to receive not more than six (6) adults who shall be provided foster care for five (5) or
more days per week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. The Adult Foster Care
Home licensee shall be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence.
Halfway houses sponsored by the Michigan Department of Correcting are not
considered licensed foster care facilities. (Section 3, subsection 5, Act 218, Public Acts
of 1979.) See “State Licensed Residential Facilities” defined in this section.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: See Automobile Service Center.
GARAGE, REPAIR: See Automobile Repair Garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building having not more than seven hundred
twenty (720) square feet in area to be used for the storage of non-commercial vehicles,
provided that not more than one commercial vehicle of less than one ton capacity may
be stored in said private garage and there shall be no services or commodities offered
to the public in connection therewith. (See Section 15.13 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS).
GARAGE COMMUNITY: An accessory building for the storage of non-commercial
vehicles, with no public shop or service facilities in connection therewith.
GARAGE, PUBLIC PARKING: A structure available to the public for the parking and
storage of motor vehicles, including such accessory uses as the sale at retail of
gasoline (stored only in underground tanks) or motor oil and the washing, polishing and
lubrication of motor vehicles, all within the structure.
GRADE: The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of
2 The Zoning Board of Appeals has ruled that all storage areas are to be included in the definition of
Useable Non-Residential Floor Area. (January 1997)
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-13
stories and the height of the building. The building grade shall be the level of the ground
adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not
entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for
each face of the building.
GREENWAY: means a contiguous or linear open space, including habitats, wildlife
corridors, and trails, that links parks, nature reserves, cultural features, or historic sites
with each other, for recreation and conservation purposes.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a
dwelling or accessory structure by the inhabitants thereof, where such use is clearly
incidental to the principal residential use of the dwelling. (Ord. 377, 11/15/2001)
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, plus
medical and surgical care for the sick or injured including such related facilities as
laboratories, out-patient departments, central service facilities and staff offices.
HOTEL: (Including Motel) A building or buildings containing primarily rooming units with
the number of dwelling units being not greater than ten percent (10%) of the total
number of rooming units, and, with the exception of the units occupied by the
management staff, used only for the accommodation of transients.
IMPROVEMENTS: means those features and actions associated with a project that are
considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to protect natural
resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of a local unit of
government and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area,
including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and drainage. Improvements
do not include the entire project that is the subject of zoning approval.
INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT: means the height, bulk, area, density, setback, use,
and other similar characteristics of development.
JUNK: For the purpose of this Ordinance, "junk" in addition to including garbage and
rubbish shall mean unlicensed motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, product,
merchandise with parts missing, or scrap metals, or other scrap materials that are
damaged, deteriorated or are in a condition which renders them incapable of performing
the function for which they were intended.
JUNK YARD: An open area of more than two hundred (200) square feet, including an
automobile wrecking yard, used for the purchase, sale, exchange, disassembly, storage
processing, baling or packaging of junk, including but not limited to scrap metals,
unusable machinery or motor vehicles, tires, bottles, and paper, and not including uses
established entirely within enclosed buildings.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs or cats, four (4) months
or more old, are permanently or temporarily boarded, or are kept for the purpose of
breeding or selling.
LABORATORY: An establishment devoted to scientific, industrial or business research
and experimental studies including testing and analyzing, but not including
manufacturing of any nature.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-14
LANDSCAPING: The treatment of the ground surface with live materials such as, but
not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs, vines and other growing horticultural
material. In addition, the combination or design may include other decorative surfacing
such as wood chips, crushed stone, or mulch materials not to exceed twenty (20%)
percent of the total for any landscape area. Structural features such as fountains,
pools, statues, and benches shall also be considered a part of landscaping but such
objects alone shall not meet the requirements of landscaping. In addition, artificial plant
materials shall not be permitted in required landscape areas.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street facility or space on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and
unloading merchandise or materials.
LODGING HOUSE: See Boarding House.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-15
LOT, CORNER: A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection
of two streets is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a
curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this
Ordinance if the arc is of less radius than one hundred fifty (150) feet and the tangents
to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street
line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
(See "lot" illustration)
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot or through lot. (See "lot" illustration)
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-16
LOT, THROUGH OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: A double frontage lot, not a corner
lot, having a street for both front and rear lot lines. (See "lot" illustration)
LOT, WATERFRONT: A waterfront lot is a lot adjoining Cass Lake, Dollar Lake or
Sylvan Lake or any of their canals. (See Section 15.15 Waterfront Yards) (Ord. 338,
2/19/1998)
LOT, ZONING: A tract or parcel of land which is designated by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed or built on as a unit, under single ownership or control.
A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a Lot of Record.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. For lots fronting or
adjacent to private streets, lot area shall mean that area within lot lines and not
including any portion of said private street. For waterfront lots, lot area shall mean that
area within lot lines and not including any submerged area of any lake, canal, river or
pond (below the shoreline or ordinary high water mark). (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
LOT COVERAGE: That part or percent of the lot covered by the area of all buildings
including accessory buildings. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured
along the median between the side lot lines.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:
(a) Front Lot Line: In the case of an interior lot, that line separating the lot from the
street. In the case of a through lot, the line separating the lot from that street which
is designated in an application for a Building Permit, or in any manner as the front
street. In the case of a corner lot, the lines, separating the lot both from that street
which is designated as the front street in an application for Building Permit and from
the side street are front lot lines.
(b) Rear Lot Line: That line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the
rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less
than ten (10) feet long lying farthest from the front lot line, and wholly within the lot.
(c) Side Lot Lines: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line
separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. A lot line
separating a lot from a side street is a front lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a recorded
plat on file with the County Register of Deeds, or any parcel recorded with the Oakland
County Register of Deeds, which has been separated, which exists as described. A lot
of record must front a public street which is dedicated for access as a public street.
LOT WIDTH: The length of a straight line measured between the two points where the
building line or setback line intersects the side lot lines. (See "yard terms" illustration)
MAJOR THOROUGHFARES: An arterial street which is designed as a major
thoroughfare on the Master Plan for the City.
MANUFACTURED BUILDING: Is defined by the following features or characteristics:
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-17
(a) Mass-produced in a factory;
(b) Designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use when
connected to required utilities;
(c) Either an independent, individual building or a module for combination with other
elements to form a building on the site.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A manufactured building or portion of a building
designed for long-term residential use.
MARGINAL ACCESS ROAD: A service roadway parallel to a feeder road; which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
MARINA: A facility which extends into or over waterways in the City and provides
docking for four (4) or more boats, or offers service to the public or members of the
marina for docking, storing and loading of boats. A marina shall include a common lot
within a subdivision, a common area within a condominium or any other parcel of land
held in common by a subdivision, association, similar agency or group of individuals
which provides docking, storing and loading for four (4) or more recreational watercraft.
A marina may include boat docking or mooring facilities which are made available for
rent or lease, including clubhouses, parking lots, boat service facilities, and other
facilities or uses customarily incidental to a marina. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
MASTER PLAN (COMPREHENSIVE PLAN): The official comprehensive plan, as
amended, for the development of Keego Harbor including but not limited graphic and
written proposals for thoroughfares, parks, schools, public buildings, land use and the
general physical development of the City.
MARQUEE: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature projecting from the wall of a
building.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of a
main story occupying not more than one-third (1/3) of the floor area of such main story.
MOBILE HOME: A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections, which is built on a
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation,
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. Mobile home does
not include a recreational vehicle.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon
which 3 or more mobile homes are located on a continual nonrecreational basis and
which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made
therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility
used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a mobile home and which is not
intended for use as temporary trailer park.
MOORING: To secure by cable and anchors, as a vessel. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
MOTEL: See Hotel.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: (Nonconforming structure) A building or structure (or
portion thereof) lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or a
subsequent amendment thereto, that does not conform to the provisions of this
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-18
Ordinance relative to height, bulk, area, placement or yards for the zoning district in
which it is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD: A platted or unplatted parcel of land, lawfully
existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, that does not
conform to the ordinance provisions for the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of a building or structure or of a parcel or tract of
land, lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or a subsequent
amendment thereto, that does not conform to the regulations of this Ordinance for the
zoning district in which it is situated.
NONCONFORMING USE AND BUILDING: A use and a building lawfully existing at
the time of adoption of this Ordinance or a subsequent amendment thereto which do not
conform to the use and height, bulk, placement or yard provisions for the zoning district
in which situated.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-19
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL: A space, building or structure, or combination thereof,
for the storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered for retail sale on the premises
including products used for gardening or landscaping. 'Me definition of nursery within
the meaning of this Ordinance does not include any space, building or structure used for
the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.
A home for the care of children, the aged, the infirmed, or a place of rest for persons
suffering serious bodily disorders, wherein two (2) or more persons are cared for. A
convalescent or nursing home is subject to the licensing requirements of applicable
State laws (Public Act 139 of 1956, as amended).
OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF: The term "change of occupancy" shall mean a
discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution therefore of a use of a different
kind or class, or the expansion of a use.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-20
OCCUPIED: Used in any way at the time in question.
OFF-STREET PARKING LOT: A facility other than for single or two-family dwellings
providing parking vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for
maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than
three (3) vehicles.
OPEN-FRONT STORE: A business establishment so developed that service to the
patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to
enter the structure. The term "open front store" shall not include automobile service
stations or used car lots.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE: A facility or space which permits the standing,
loading or unloading of trucks and other vehicles other than on or directly from a public
right-of-way.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently paved area of land adequate to carry out the
off-street parking regulations of this Ordinance, and an area for each motor vehicle of
not less than nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long exclusive of drives, aisles and
entrances giving access thereto, and fully accessible for the parking of permitted
vehicles.
PATIO/TERRACE: A paved open space of land located at grade adjacent to a
residential dwelling unit, no part of which is roofed, which is used for private
entertainment or leisure activities (see Section 15.11(c) - Permitted Projections into
Required Open Space).
PET: A domesticated dog, cat, canary, parakeet, parrot, gerbil, hamster, guinea pig,
turtle, fish, rabbit, or similar animal.
PIER: A structure extending outward from the shore line for use as a promenade or to
secure and provide access to boats. (Also see Wharf.) (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
PILE, SPRING OR MOORING: A column of timber steel or concrete driven into the
ground below the water to tie off or otherwise moor a boat. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
PLANNING COMMISSION: The City Planning Commission of Keego Harbor created
by Ordinance, being the agency designated to prepare a Zoning Ordinance and to
recommend amendments to same Ordinance, in accordance with authority of Section 5,
Act 207, Public Act 1921, as amended, shall throughout this Ordinance be known as the
Planning Commission.
POINT OF OBSERVATION: The determination of the percentage of openness to the
free passage of air and light in fences, privacy screens and walls shall be made from a
specific point of observation. The point of observation shall be a point ten (10) feet away
from the structure; perpendicular to the vertical surface plane of the structure and as
viewed from a height above grade which is equal to 50 percent of the structure's height.
PORCH: A covered entrance to a building or structure which may be enclosed with
screen material which projects out from the main wall of such building or structure, and
has an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached (see
Section 15.11(c) - Permitted Projections into Required Open Space).
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-21
PRIVACY SCREEN: Any unroofed man-made vertical structure intended and used as a
visual barrier designed to inhibit or prevent observation of an area, from a point or
points off the lot, and the vertical surface of which is less than 50 percent open to the
free passage of air and light. (see "Point of Observation")
PROPERTY LINES: The lines bounding a lot, the lot lines.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department or board, duly
authorized to furnish and furnishing under Federal, State or Municipal regulations to the
public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, water, transportation and
communications such as telephone, cable television, mobile phone towers, etc.
RECREATION LAND: Any public or private owned lot or land that is utilized for
recreation activities such as, but not limited to camping, swimming, picnicking, hiking,
nature trails, hunting, boating, and fishing.
RECREATION VEHICLE: "Recreation Vehicles" shall include the following:
a) Travel Trailer: A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling during travel, recreational and vacation uses and which may be
identified as a "travel trailer" by the manufacturer. Travel trailers generally contain
sanitary, water and electrical facilities.
(b) Camper Trailer (pop-up): A canvas folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use.
(c) Pick-Up Camper: A structure designed to be mounted on a pick-up or truck chassis
with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling during
the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
(d) Boat: A watercraft (including, but not limited to any vessel, ship, motorboat,
sailboat, barge, scow, tugboat or rowboat) which is any one of the following:
• greater than 12 feet in length,
• having a motor or engine of more than five (5) horsepower,
• used for rental or other commercial purposes, or
• registered or required to be registered with the Michigan Department of State.
(e) Boat/Personal Watercraft: A vessel that meets all of the following requirements:
• uses a motor driven propeller or an internal combustion engine powering a water
jet pump as its primary source of propulsion,
• is designed without an open load carrying area that would retain water, and
• is designed to be operated by one (1) or more persons positioned on, rather
than within, the confines of the hull.
• registered or required to be registered with the Michigan Department of State.
(f) Motor Home: A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human habitation,
sleeping, and/or eating, mounted on a chassis with wheels and capable of being
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-22
moved place to place under its own power. Motor homes generally contain sanitary,
water, and electrical facilities.
(g) Other Recreational Equipment: Other recreational equipment includes
snowmobiles, all-terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus the normal
equipment to transport them on the highway. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A facility used for regular organized religious worship and
related activities, including living quarters for church ministry or other members of the
religious order who carry out their duties primarily on the site, religious education
classes, and limited recreation facilities.
RESTAURANT: A restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale
of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method
of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, standard
restaurant, or combination thereof, as defined below:
(a) Restaurant, Carry-Out: A carry-out restaurant is a restaurant whose method of
operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable or
edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to- consume state for consumption off the
premises.
(b) Restaurant, Drive-In: A drive-in restaurant is a restaurant whose principal method of
operation involves the delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a
motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed building.
(c) Restaurant, Drive-Through: A drive-through restaurant is a restaurant whose
method of operation involves the delivery of prepared food to the customer in a
motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off the
premises.
(d) Restaurant, Fast-Food: A fast-food restaurant is a restaurant whose method of
operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the
customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is
served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside or outside of the structure, or for
consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site.
(e) Restaurant, Standard: A standard restaurant is a restaurant whose method of
operation does not include the sale of alcohol and involves either:
1. The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at
tables within a completely enclosed building, or
2. The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is
subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely
enclosed building.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-23
(f) Restaurant, Serving Alcohol: A restaurant whose method of operation includes the
sale of alcohol for consumption on-site and whose method of operation includes a
closing time of no later than 11:00 p.m.3 and either:
1. The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at
tables within a completely enclosed building, or
2. The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is
subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely
enclosed building.
ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary or existing permanent structure containing not more
than two hundred (200) square feet of enclosed floor area and operated for the purpose
of selling agricultural, dairy, or poultry products raised or produced only by the proprietor
of the stand by his family.
ROOMING HOUSE: See Boarding House.
ROOMING UNIT: A room or group of rooms, forming a single habitable unit used for
living and sleeping, but not containing kitchen or eating facilities.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: An accessory use which incorporates a solid, open
mesh, or bar configured surface, which is typically in the shape of a shallow dish or
cone, and which is in excess of 36 inches but not greater than ten (10) feet in diameter
at its widest dimension. Such devices are designed to receive radio or electromagnetic
signals from orbitally based satellites. Because of their weight, mass, and restriction to
the free passage of light and air, such uses require specific regulatory guidelines.
SETBACK LINE, REQUIRED: A line, marking the setback distance from the street or
lot lines, which establishes minimum required front, side, rear or waterfront open space
of area. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Sexually Oriented Businesses and their
operational characteristics are further defined as follows:
1. Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, internet or mechanically controlled still
or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained
to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized
by the depicting or describing of "sexually explicit activities" or "specific anatomical
areas".
2. Adult Bookstore of Adult Video Store means an establishment which offers for sale
or rental for any form of consideration, as one of its principal business purposes, any
one or more of the following:
a. Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video matter or photographs,
cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representation which depict or
3 In a decision issued by Oakland County Circuit Court Judge Richard D. Kuhn on July 20, 1999, the 11
p.m. restriction in the definition was declared to be pre-empted by Michigan Liquor Control Law.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-24
describe "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
b. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection
with "sexually explicit activities"; or
c. Items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia depicting, displaying, advertising or
packaged as "sexually explicit activities" or depict or describe "specified anatomical
areas".
d. For purposes of this Section, "principal business purpose" means:
e. The devotion of a significant or substantial portion, meaning at least twenty-five
(25%) percent of its in-store inventory (either measured by display area or retail value)
in the items listed above; or
f. The receipt of twenty-five (25%) percent of more of its revenues from the sale of the
items listed above; or
g. The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to
the promotion of the sale, rental or viewing, of books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter, or photographs, film, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs,
slides or other visual representations, items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia
which are characterized by the depiction, description display, advertising or packaging
of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
h. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing "sexually
explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and still be characterized as an adult
book store, adult novelty or retail store or adult video store. Such other business
purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an
adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store, so long as the establishment
falls within the definition of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store as
set forth above.
3. Adult Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial
establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are sold, which features:
a. persons who appear in a state of restricted nudity; or
b. live performances, exhibitions, shows, dances, revues, floorshows, songs or other
similar presentation which are characterized by the partial exposure of "specified
anatomical areas"; or
c. films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually
explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
d. This definition does not include a theater which features occasional live nude
performances with serious literary, artistic or political value and that have no adverse
secondary effects.
4. Adult Massage Parlor means any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-25
connection with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such
treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes his or her specified
anatomical areas. An Adult Massage Parlor, in contrast to a Myotherapy Establishment,
is considered a sexually oriented business for purposes of these regulations.
5. Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
a. offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provide
patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
regularly characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or
"specified anatomical areas"; or which advertises the availability of this adult type of
material by means of a sign, visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any offpremises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets
or leaflets, radio, internet or television; or
b. permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit
activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for electric transmission over the
World Wide Web; or
c. offer a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
d. allow a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of
time that is less than ten (10) hours.
6. Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
7. Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas"
or by the performance of "sexually explicit activities". This definition does not include a
theater which features occasional live nude performances with serious literary, artistic or
political value and that have no adverse secondary effects.
8. Adult Use Business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty or retail
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude modeling studio and/or a sexual encounter establishment
or any business determined by the City to be an adult use, due to the activities of the
business which involve characteristic of adult uses, such as nudity, semi-nudity,
exposure of "sexually explicit activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas". The
definition of "adult use business" shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrists or similar professional person licensed by the
State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
9. Employee means a person who works or performs in and/or for an adult use
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business.
10. Entertainer means a person who performs some type of activity or poses with the
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-26
intent of allowing others to witness that activity or pose.
11. Escort means a person, who for consideration in any form, agrees or offers to act
as a companion guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
perform as an entertainer, including, but not limited to, the modeling of lingerie, the
removal of clothing, the performance of a dance or skit, or the providing of specified
sexual activities for another person. Under this definition, "privately" shall mean a
performance for an individual, or that individual’s guests.
12. Escort Agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a
fee, tip or other consideration.
13. Establishment means and includes any of the following:
a. the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
b. the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business,
to any sexually oriented business;
c. the location or relocation of any sexually oriented business.
14. Licensee means the individual listed as an applicant on the application of a
sexually oriented business license, or a person whose name a license to operate an
adult use business has been issued.
15. Licensing Officer means the Clerk of the City of Pontiac or his/her designee.
16. Manager means an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a
sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees, or is
otherwise responsible for the operation of the sexually oriented business.
17. Massage means the treating of external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic
purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or
stimulating with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or
appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations
commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is
reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided shall pay any
consideration whatsoever therefore. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term
"bodywork" shall mean massage.
18. Myotherapy Establishment means any individual, group of individuals, person or
business which engages in the practice of massage as defined herein, and which has a
fixed place of business where any person, firm, association, partnership, limited liability
company or corporation carries on any of the activities as defined herein. Myotherapy
establishment shall also include, but not be limited to, a Turkish bath parlor, steam bath,
sauna, magnetic healing institute, health club, health spa, or physical fitness club or
business that offers massages on occasion or incidental to its principal operation, as
well as an individual’s home where a person is engaged in the practice of massage for
consideration. The definition of sexually oriented business shall not include the practice
of massage in a licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, medical clinic or the
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-27
offices of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, psychologist, clinical social
worker and family counselor, who are licensed to practice their respective professions in
the State of Michigan, or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices
of an associate or an establishment duly licensed in the State of Michigan, clergymen,
certified members of the American Massage and Therapy Association and certified
members of the International Myomassethics Federation.
19. Nude Model Studio means any place where a person appears in a state of nudity
or displays "specific anatomical areas", and is provided money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons. This includes modeling studios that provide for
nude modeling on an occasional basis, but it does not include modeling studio whose
primary function is to provide art classes as part of a college, university or educational
institution and which is certified by the State of Michigan.
20. Operator means the owner, licensee, manager or person in charge of any
premises.
21. Peep Booth means an adult motion picture theater with a viewing room or cubical
of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space.
22. Premises or Licensed Premises means any premises that requires a sexually
oriented business license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
23. Principal Owner means any person owning, directly or beneficially: a) ten percent
(10%) or more of a corporation’s equity securities; b) ten percent (10%) or more of the
membership interests in a limited liability company; or c) in the case of any other legal
entity, ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership interests in the entity.
24. Private Room means a room in a hotel/motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed
and a bath in the room or adjacent room, and is used primarily for lodging.
25. Semi-Nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body
covered by supporting straps or devices.
26. Sexual Encounter Center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one
(1) of its primary business purposes, offers a place where two (2) or more persons may
congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of "sexually explicit activities" or the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" for any form of consideration, including, but
not limited to:
a. physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the same
or opposite sex; or
b. activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or
c. permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed performing "sexually
explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for recording or
transmission over the World Wide Web or any other media.
27. Sexually Explicit Activities means and includes any of the following:
a. the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-28
or female breasts; or
b. sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to,
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or
c. masturbation, actual or simulated; or
d. any activity intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person’s lust, passions or
sexual desires; or
e. human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
f. excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the activity set forth in (a)
through (e) above.
28. Sexually Oriented Business means an establishment that provides adult
entertainment appealing to the sexual interests of its customers, including adult arcade,
adult bookstore or adult video store, adult novelty or retail store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio,
sexual encounter center or similar establishment or any place that permits patrons to be
filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified
anatomical areas" for electronic transmission over the internet, film, motion picture,
videocassette, DVD, Blue-Ray or other similar photographic reproduction.
"Sexually oriented" when used to describe film, motion picture, videocassette, DVD,
slides, or other photographic reproductions shall mean film, movies, motion picture,
videocassette, DVD, slides or other photographic reproductions that regularly depict
material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or
describing "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas" offered for
observation by the patron(s) on the premises of a sexually oriented business. The
definition of "sexually oriented business" shall not include an establishment where a
medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by
the State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy or a
myotherapy establishment.
29. Specified Anatomical Areas means and includes any of the following:
a. less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic
hair, buttock, or female breast or breasts of any portion thereof that is situated below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or
b. human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, even if opaquely and completely
covered.
30. Specified Criminal Acts means sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse,
criminal sexual conduct, rape, crimes classified as sexual crimes by the State of
Michigan or any other state, or crimes connected with another adult use business,
including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity, prostitution and/or pandering.
31. Significant or Substantial Portion means twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the
term modified by such phrase.
32. Substantial Enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in
floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the floor
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-29
area exists on the date of adoption of this ordinance.
33. Tenant Space means a securable area separated from other area by walls and
doors that are available for lease or rent within a multi-tenant building, such as tenant
spaces typically found within a shopping mall or strip.
34. Transfer of Ownership or Control of a sexually oriented business means and
includes any of the following:
a. the sale, lease or sublease of the business;
b. the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
c. the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation
of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
SHOPPING CENTER: Any multi-tenant building with two (2) or more tenants having
individual entrances, or, any commercial development with two (2) or more buildings
sharing a common parking lot.
SHORELINE, ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: The line between upland and
bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the
presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the
land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil, the configuration of
the soil surface and the vegetation. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
SIGN: The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by
which anything is made known to the general public and is visible off the lot.
SITE PLAN: A plan showing all salient features of a proposed development, so that it
may be evaluated in order to determine whether it meets the provisions of this
ordinance.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION: (See Exception).
STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: State Licensed Residential Facility. Any
structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the State of Michigan
pursuant to Michigan Public Act 116 of 1973 (the Child Care Licensing Act) or Michigan
Public Act 218 of 1979 (the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act). This definition
includes adult foster care facilities, foster family homes, foster family group homes,
family day care homes, and group day care homes.
Note: that wherever the term “private home” is used in the state licensed residential
facilities definitions, it shall mean a private residence in which the licensee or
registrant permanently resides as a member of the household, which residency is not
contingent upon caring for children or employment by a licensed or approved child
placing agency.
1. Foster care means the provision of supervision, personal care, and protection in
addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two
or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-30
2. Adult foster care facility means a residential structure that is licensed to provide
foster care, but not continuous nursing care, for unrelated adults over the age of 17.
Adult foster care facilities are subject to all applicable provisions, definitions, and
regulations of Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended (MCL 400.701 et seq.).
a. The following types of adult foster care facilities are provided for by this
Ordinance:
b. Adult foster care family home means a private home with the approved capacity
to receive not more than six adults to be provided with foster care. The adult foster
care family home licensee shall be a member of the household and an occupant of
the residence.
c. Adult foster care small group home means an adult foster care facility with the
approved capacity to receive not more than 12 adults to be provided with foster care.
Facilities with the approved capacity for seven or more adults are subject to
conditional use approval.
d. Adult foster care large group home means an adult foster care facility with the
approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided
with foster care. Facilities are subject to conditional use approval.
e. Adult foster care facility does not include any of the following:
f. A licensed child caring institution, children’s camp, foster family home, or foster
family group home, subject to the limitations contained in section 3(4f) of Michigan
Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended (MCL 400.703).
g. A licensed foster family home that has a person who is 18 years of age or older
placed in the foster family home under section 5(7) of Michigan Public Act 116 of
1973, as amended (MCL 722.115).
h. An establishment commonly described as an alcohol or a substance abuse
rehabilitation center; a residential facility for persons released from or assigned to
adult correctional institutions; a maternity home; or a hotel or rooming house that
does not provide or offer to provide foster care.
i. A veterans’ facility created by 1885 PA 152, MCL 36.1 to 36.12.
3. Adult foster care congregate facility means an adult foster care facility with the
approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care.
Facilities are subject to conditional use approval.
4. Family day care home means a private home in which one but fewer than seven
minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours
a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes
a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks
during a calendar year.
5. Foster family home means a private home in which one but not more than four
minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or
marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan adoption code,
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-31
are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for
two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
6. Foster family group home means a private home in which more than four but
fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the
household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the
Michigan adoption code, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four
or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or
legal guardian.
7. Group child day care home means a private home in which more than 6 but not
more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than
24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to
an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group child day care
home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more
than 4 weeks during a calendar year.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor, and
the upper surface of any floor above; or any portion of a building between the topmost
floor and the roof having a usable floor area to at least 50 percent of the usable floor
area of the floor immediately below it. A top floor area under a sloping roof with less
than 50 percent of the usable floor area is a half story. The first story shall be
considered the lowest story of which the ceiling is more than 4 feet above the average
contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building. (See basic structural terms
illustration.)
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-32
STREET: A public thoroughfare which affords the primary means of access to abutting
property.
STREET LINE: (Right-of-Way Line) A dividing line between the street and a lot.
STRUCTURE: Any constructed or erected material, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including, but
not limited to, buildings, towers, sheds, decks, fences, and signs, but excepting walks,
drives, pavements, and similar access or circulation facilities.
TEMPORARY USE, TEMPORARY BUILDING: A use or building permitted to exist for
a limited period, including during periods of construction of a main building or use, or for
special events.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-33
offered for transient guests for compensation, without provision for meals.
TOWNHOUSE: One in a row of at least three units in which each unit has its own front
and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more common and fire-resistant walls. (Ord.
340, 4/16/1998)
TOXIC/HAZARDOUS WASTE: Waste or a combination of waste and other discarded
material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material which because
of its quality; concentration; or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or increase in serious
irreversible illness or serious incapacitating, but reversible illness, or pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
TRAILER COACH: A vehicle, self-propelled or non-self propelled, so designed and
constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance on the public streets and
licensable as such, and of a nature that will permit permanent occupancy as a dwelling
unit or rooming unit for one or more persons.
TRASH STORAGE AREA: Any exterior space, which is not a principal use, used for the
location of containers, structures, or other receptacles intended for the temporary
storage of garbage, rubbish, or other solid waste material.
TRUCK STORAGE: An area used for the temporary storage of private trucks or trucks
for hire.
TRUCK TERMINAL: A structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed
agricultural products, natural minerals, or other resources, are delivered for immediate
distribution or to be amalgamated for delivery in larger units to other points in the
metropolitan area; or for distribution or amalgamation involving transfer to other modes
of transportation.
UNDEVELOPED STATE: means a natural state preserving natural resources, natural
features, scenic or wooded conditions, agricultural use, open space, or a similar use or
condition. Land in an undeveloped state does not include a golf course but may include
a recreational trail, picnic area, children's play area, greenway, or linear park. Land in an
undeveloped state may be, but is not required to be, dedicated to the use of the public.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the principal
use on the same lot or parcel.
USE, CHANGE OF: A change from, conversion to, or replacement of the principal use
of land and/or building. The addition of another principal use to a lot or building shall
also constitute a change of use. A change in the specific primary function of a lot or
building shall constitute a change of use.
VARIANCE: A modification of the literal provisions of this Ordinance granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in situations or under circumstances where permitted by law.
WALL: Any unroofed man-made structure which has a foundation and also has an
exterior vertical surface of brick or stone, and no more than 25 percent of the vertical
surface of which is open to the free passage of air and light.
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-34
WATERCRAFT: See Recreational Vehicle. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
WHARF: A structure parallel to the shore line. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: All facilities, structural, attached,
accessory or otherwise, related to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the
purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals and may include, but is not limited to
radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay
towers, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service
facilities. Citizen band radio facilities, short wave facilities, ham and amateur radio
facilities, television reception antennae, satellite dishes, and government facilities which
are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory
authority are not included in this definition. A wireless communications facility shall not
be included under the existing definition of “essential services”.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, COLOCATION: The location by two (2) or
more wireless communications providers, public authority or other duly authorized party
of wireless communications facilities on an existing structure, tower or building, in a
manner that reduces the overall need for additional or multiple freestanding single use
communications facilities within the City of Keego Harbor.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, EQUIPMENT: The set of equipment and
network components used in the provisions of wireless communications services,
including but not limited to, antennas, receivers, transmitters, base stations, equipment
shelters, cabinets, emergency generators, power supply cables, and coaxial and fiber
optic cables, but excluding wireless communications support structures.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, EQUIPMENT COMPOUND: An area
surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless communications support structure and
within with wireless communications facility equipment is located.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURE (Tower): Any wireless
communications facility erected or modified to support attached wireless
communications facilities, or other antennae or facilities, including supporting lines,
cables, wires, braces, and masts intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an
attached wireless communications facility or similar apparatus above grade. This
includes, but are not limited to, any ground or roof-mounted pole, monopoles, lattice
towers, light poles, utility support structures, wood pole, guy wired tower, spire, other
similar structure, or combination thereof, or other structures which appear to be
something other than a mere support structure.
YARD: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except an otherwise provided in this Ordinance,
and as defined herein: (See "yard lot" illustration)
(a) Front Yard: An open space extending the full width of the narrowest side of the lot
which faces the street, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance
between the front lot line and the front setback line.
(b) Front Yard, Double: An open space on corner lots (as defined in this Ordinance)
extending the full width of the lot on both sides facing the intersecting streets.
Unless specifically noted otherwise in this Ordinance, both open spaces facing each
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-35
street shall be considered front yards with setbacks as required in each particular
zoning district.
(c) Side Yard: An open space, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width
of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to the
side setback line.
(d) Rear (Back) Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line or established
zoning district line and nearest line of the principal buildings.
(e) Waterfront Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the shoreline and nearest line of
the principal building. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-36
DEFINITIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 2-37
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 3-1
ARTICLE III
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP: CONFORMITY TO
ORDINANCE REGULATIONS
SECTION 3.00 - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the City of Keego Harbor is here-divided into the
following Zoning Districts:
R-1 and R-2 One Family Residential Districts
R-T Townhouse Residential District (Ord. 340, 4/16/1998)
R-M Multiple Family District
R-MH Mobile Home District
P-1 Vehicular Parking District
C-1 Local Business District
C-2 General Business District
O-1 Office District
M-1 Light Industrial District
In addition, sections of the above Zoning Districts may be located in floodplain and other
water areas.
SECTION 3.01 - ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The boundaries of the Zoning Districts enumerated in Section 3.00 are hereby
established as shown on the Zoning Map, City of Keego Harbor, and this text, and
which map with all notations, references, and such information shown thereon shall be
as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein.
In accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and Act 207, of the Public Acts of
the State of Michigan, 1921, as amended, changes made in district boundaries or other
matter portrayed on the Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Zoning Map
promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council and has been
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The changes in the exact
boundaries or other matters affecting the Zoning Map shall be legibly portrayed on the
Zoning Map.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Zoning Map or matters shown thereon
except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 3-2
change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of
this ordinance punishable as provided for in this ordinance.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Zoning Map which may, from
time to time, be made or published, the Zoning Map shall be located in the office of the
City Clerk and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of all land and
water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City.
SECTION 3.02 - INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT
BOUNDARIES
Where, due to the scale, lack of details, or illegibility of the Zoning Map, there is any
uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any zoning district
boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district
boundary lines shall be determined upon written application, to Zoning Board of
Appeals. The Board in arriving at a decision on such matters shall apply the following
standards:
(a) The boundaries of zoning districts are intended to follow centerlines of alleys,
streets, or other rights-of-way, water courses, or lot lines, or be parallel or
perpendicular there unless such district boundary lines are otherwise clearly
indicated on the Zoning Map.
(b) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot of
record lines such lines shall be constructed to be boundaries.
(c) In unsubdivided property, or where a district boundary divides a lot of record, the
location of such boundary, unless shown by dimensions of the zoning map, shall be
determined by use of the map scale shown thereon.
SECTION 3.03 - ZONING OF VACATED AREAS
Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the City of Keego Harbor shall be
vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof shall automatically be
classified in the same Zone District as the property to which it attaches.
SECTION 3.04 - ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS
Any area annexed to the City of Keego Harbor shall immediately upon such annexation,
be automatically classified as an R-1 District if a zoning map for said area has been
adopted by the Council. The Planning Commission shall recommend appropriate zoning
for such areas within three (3) months after the matter is referred to the Planning
Commission by the Council.
SECTION 3.05 - CONFORMITY TO ORDINANCE REGULATIONS
(a) No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and structure or part
thereof shall be erected; constructed, moved, altered, except in conformity with the
regulations, specified in this ordinance.
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 3-3
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein regulations governing land and building use,
minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit building height, building placement,
required yards, and other pertinent factors are hereby established as stated in the
detailed provisions for each of the Zoning Districts. In each Zoning District a
permitted use of land or buildings is subject only to the minimum requirements
specified for such use in the Zoning District in which such use is located plus
applicable requirements found elsewhere in this Ordinance. A use permitted subject
to special conditions shall be a use of land or building requiring some measure of
individual consideration, and therefore subject not only to the minimum
requirements specified for such use in the Zoning District in which such use is
located, and applicable requirements found elsewhere in this Ordinance, but also to
any special conditions imposed in this Ordinance.
(c) No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space
required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with
this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking
or loading space similarly required for any other building.
(d) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth therein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by this Ordinance.
(e) Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and the
ordinances of the City of Keego Harbor.
SECTION 3.06 - CONFLICTING REGULATIONS
Whenever any provision of the Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements,
regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of
any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Any use
that would constitute a violation of federal, state or local law and/or regulations shall be
prohibited. (Ordinance 430 12/15/11)
SECTION 3.07 - PERMISSIVE ZONING CONCEPT
Land uses are permitted specifically in the various zoning districts of this Ordinance.
Where not specifically permitted, uses are thereby specifically prohibited unless
construed to be similar to a use expressly permitted. No land contained within any
zoning district within the City of Keego Harbor shall be used for any purpose other than
those uses specifically set forth in the following sections, except as permitted by Article
XII.
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-1
ARTICLE IV
NR NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT
SECTION 4.00 - INTENT
Neighborhood Residential districts are defined by their collective character. In order to
maintain this character, standards that ensure compatibility of size and style are critical.
The existing character of Keego’s residential neighborhoods is largely defined by the
existing platted lots of record ranging in size from 30 feet to 50 feet. This greatly
defines the character of the community as a pedestrian friendly, walkable community
and the provisions of this Article are intended to preserve and enhance this character.
SECTION 4.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to any limitations described herein:
(a) Single-family dwelling (detached).
(b) Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways and recreational facilities.
(c) Family Day Care Homes.
(d) Signs, as provided in Article XIV - Signs.
(e) Adult Foster Care Family Home with 6 or fewer clients.
(f) Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, subject to the following condition: No building
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line when said property line abuts
or is adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes.
(g) Religious Institutions, subject to the following:
1. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in this district may be
permitted provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum
required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
2. At least one boundary of the lot upon which the church is to be constructed
shall border a street designated as a collector thoroughfare having an existing
and/or planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width.
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-2
SECTION 4.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to review and recommendation by the City
Planning Commission and approval by City Council.
(a) State Licensed Residential Facilities with 7 or more clients.
(b) Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
including transformer stations, lift stations and switchboards but excluding storage
yards.
(c) Municipal buildings, libraries, museums, fire stations, and similar facilities when
constructed so as to be compatible with the uses existing in the immediate area.
(d) Bed-n-Breakfast Inns and/or Tourist Homes not to exceed a height of three stories,
subject to the following requirements:
1. Bed-n-Breakfast inns and tourist homes shall remain as single family homes in
appearance, and shall have no internal or external structural alterations. An
example would be enlarging the kitchen for volume food service.
2. Off-street parking shall be provided for the households and guests as follows:
Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space per room to be rented.
3. There shall be ample open space other than that required to accommodate the
required off-street parking. Natural screening by use of plant materials or other
screening may be required to screen parking areas from adjoining residential
properties. Off-street parking in front yard areas shall not be permitted.
4. Food may only be served in an inn to those persons renting an inn room only
during their stay at the inn.
5. A residential structure shall not have or be converted to more rental rooms than
the number of bedrooms which exist at the time of enactment of this Ordinance.
6. One (1) wall sign not to exceed a total area of eight (8) square feet shall be
permitted for identification purposes only.
(e) Attached wireless communications facilities, subject to the following requirements
and the requirements specified in Section 15.28:
1. No attached wireless communications facilities, with the exception of television
antennas, may be erected on a residential structure or associated accessory
structure.
2. Where an attached wireless communications facility is proposed on the roof of a
building, the switching equipment module must be adequately screened or
architecturally compatible with the design of the building. The switching
equipment module may be located within the principal building or may be an
accessory building, provided that an accessory building conforms with all district
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-3
requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks and building
height.
3. The attached wireless communications facility shall be erected on a building in
a manner that is not prominently visible from the ground, injurious to the
character of the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and
welfare. The attached wireless communications facility shall be located and
designed to be harmonious with the surrounding area, and to be aesthetically
and architecturally compatible with the natural environment, as well as the
environment as altered by development.
(f) Wireless communications support structures on public or quasi-public/institutional
sites subject to the requirements specified in Section 15.28.
(g) Common use lots utilized for the docking or mooring of boats or the storage of
recreational vehicles, subject to the following conditions:
1. All recreational vehicles docked, moored, or stored on the lot shall be the
property of, and currently registered and licensed to a member of the
subdivision, association, similar agency or group of individuals who hold the lot
in common.
2. Docking space shall be limited to the maximum number of boats allowed by the
Department of Environmental Quality marina operating permit.
3. All waterfront structures and appurtenances shall comply with the requirements
of Section 15.15, Waterfront Yards.
4. There shall be no repair or dismantling of recreational vehicles on the site.
5. On-land storage of recreational vehicles shall comply with the standards of
Section 4.05, Parking and Storage of Recreational Vehicles on Vacant
Residentially Zoned Lots. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
SECTION 4.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses, including private garages, garden houses,
non-commercial gardening, tool houses, non-commercial greenhouses, non-commercial
swimming pools, and home occupations as provided in Section 15.29. (See section
15.13 Accessory Buildings). Off-street parking; storage of not more than two (2)
recreational vehicles, as defined in Section 2.00 Definitions, “Recreation Vehicles”. The
storage or parking of recreational vehicles shall be subject to Section 4.04 and 4.05. In
addition, any other use customarily incidental to the principal uses enumerated in
Section 4.01 and 4.02 are permitted. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
SECTION 4.04 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Not more than two (2) recreational vehicles, as defined in Section 2.00, may be parked
or stored by the owner and/or occupant on residentially-used property subject to the
following conditions:
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-4
(a) The recreational vehicle(s) must be currently registered and licensed in the name of
a current owner and/or occupant of the dwelling unit.
(b) Boats stored out of water shall not exceed 22 feet in length, provided pontoon boats
may be allowed up to 35 feet in length and 12 feet in height.
(c) A recreational vehicle parked or stored shall not be connected to electricity, water,
gas, or sanitary sewer facilities.
(d) A recreational vehicle shall not be used for living, lodging or housekeeping
purposes.
(e) A recreational vehicle must be stored in the rear or side yard of the lot, but not
closer than three (3) feet to a side or rear property line. Where side yards do not
provide sufficient space for a recreational vehicle, a recreational vehicle may be
stored in the front open space, provided that a side open space of not less than five
(5) feet must be maintained between the vehicle and the property line, and the
length of the recreation vehicle shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. No
recreational vehicle shall be stored on a public street right-of-way. Recreational
vehicles may be stored within the clear vision triangle of a waterfront lot between
September 15 and May 15.
(f) A recreational vehicle designed for use on the streets and highways may be parked
in a driveway of a residence if it is the sole means of transportation to and from
work for one or more of the residents.
(g) Notwithstanding the above provisions concerning "Location", a recreational vehicle
may be parked elsewhere on the premises prior to or after a trip for loading or
unloading purposes for a period of not more than 48 hours prior to and 48 hours
after use of the vehicle within a seven (7) day period.
(h) The parked or stored recreational vehicle must be kept in good repair. The vehicle
must be capable of being moved from place to place.
(i) The provisions concerning connection to utilities, use as living quarters, and location
may be waived for a period of up to two weeks to permit repair or lodging purposes
of the occupant's or owner's recreational vehicle or to permit the parking of a
recreational vehicle of a guest. Permits for any such waiver shall be obtained from
the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer. No more than two (2) permits
shall be issued for each activity (repair, lodging, storage of guest vehicle) per
calendar year.
(j) For the purposes of this Section, two (2) personal watercraft, snowmobiles, allterrain
vehicles, or motorcycles stored on a single trailer shall be counted as one (1)
recreational vehicle. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-5
SECTION 4.05 - PARKING AND STORAGE OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON VACANT RESIDENTIALLY
ZONED LOTS
Not more than two (2) recreational vehicles, as defined in Section 2.00 Definitions, may
be parked or stored on a vacant, separate lot of record than the principal structure
subject to the following conditions.
(a) All recreational vehicles shall be currently registered and licensed to a current
resident of Keego Harbor.
(b) The following recreational vehicles parked or stored outdoors may not exceed:
1. Travel trailer, thirty-five (35) feet or less in length.
2. Camper trailer (pop-up), shall be stored in a collapsed position to a height not
more than six (6) feet.
3. Pick-up camper, thirty-two (32) feet or less in length.
4. Watercraft, thirty-five (35) feet or less in length, but not to exceed twelve (12)
feet in height, either mounted on a boat trailer or unmounted; also boat trailer
without boat mounted.
5. Motor home, forty (40) feet or less in length.
(c) Storage of recreational vehicles shall be in the rear one-third of the lot, but, not
closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear property line. Recreational vehicles may be
stored within the clear vision triangle of a waterfront lot between September 15 and
May 15. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
(d) Recreational vehicles which are parked or stored shall be in good repair. Open
storage of partially or disassembled component parts is prohibited. The vehicles
must be capable of being moved from place to place.
(e) Recreational vehicles shall not be used for living, lodging or housekeeping
purposes.
(f) Recreational vehicles parked or stored shall not be connected to electricity, water,
gas, or sanitary sewer facilities.
(g) The owner of a recreational vehicle shall not park or store such a recreational
vehicle in such a manner as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition on the lot
where parked or stored. Parking or storage in such a fashion that the recreational
vehicle, whether loaded or not, may readily tip or roll, shall be considered a
dangerous and unsafe condition.
(h) The ground underneath the stored recreational vehicles must be surfaced and
maintained to avoid muddy conditions and an unkempt appearance. It can be
surfaced with natural ground cover, gravel, or crushed stone.
(i) Landscaping located at the rear and sides of the storage area shall comply with
requirements in Section 15.23 (d)(6) so as to create an evergreen or landscaped
screen.
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-6
(j) For the purposes of this Section, two (2) personal watercraft, snowmobiles, allterrain
vehicles, or motorcycles stored on a single trailer shall be counted as one (1)
recreational vehicle. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
SECTION 4.06 - FRONT YARD PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
(a) The following standards, subsections (b) through (f), shall apply to residential
construction that consists of one or more of the following:
1. Construction of single-family house
2. Construction of a garage
3. Alterations to an existing house of a value equal to or greater than 40% of the
current taxable value.
(b) Driveways may be no wider than 12 feet with the exception of that portion of a
driveway within 30 feet of the front of a garage and directly in front of the garage
doors. The maximum driveway width in front of the garage shall not exceed 24 feet.
(c) The entire parking area shall consist of an improved surface of concrete, asphalt, or
brick.
(d) No vehicle parked in a front yard parking space shall encroach into the public rightof-
way or extend over a side lot line.
(e) The parking area shall be more or less perpendicular (60-120 degrees) to the street
right-of-way. A circular driveway is permitted where the interior greenspace is a
minimum of three hundred (300) square feet, and a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in
every dimension.
(f) The front yard area that is not improved as parking area shall be landscaped with
either grass or other living ground cover.
(Ordinance 441, 11/13/12)
SECTION 4.07 - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS
All proposed residential development shall utilize quality architecture to ensure that
buildings are compatible with surrounding uses, protect the investment of adjacent
landowners and blend harmoniously into the streetscape. Single family detached
structures shall comply with the following standards:
The following standards shall apply to all new residential development, substantial
redevelopment (equal to or greater than 25% of the taxable value of the property),
or any facade modification.
1. Purpose
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-7
Architectural design is a key element in establishing a sense of place for a
community. Buildings of high quality contribute to the attractiveness and
economic well-being of a community, making it a better place to live and work.
Keego Harbor recognizes the importance of good architecture and its lasting
impact.
The objective of these design standards is to direct builders toward creating
buildings of timeless character that are in harmony with the natural and built
environment. This is a function of good architectural principles such as
selecting durable materials, composing elevations using good proportions,
selecting harmonious colors, and combining all the architectural elements in a
balanced composition.
2. Architectural Design Elements
a. Building Materials - Select materials possessing durability and aesthetic
appeal.
b. Windows - Windows are the main element contributing to an inviting facade.
They give visual interest to a facade. Provide a large quantity of attractive
windows on a facade that fronts a street.
c. Architectural Features - Include architectural features on the building facade
that provide texture, rhythm, and ornament to a wall.
d. Colors - Select natural and neutral colors that are harmonious with both the
natural and man-made environment. Stronger colors can be used as
accents to provide visual interest to the facade.
e. Garage Location – The need for storage on residential lots must be
balanced with the visual impact garages have, especially on small lots.
Most of the lots in Keego Harbor either have no garage or have a detached
garage.
f. Porches – Keego Harbor’s desire to be a walkable community is enhanced
by the provision of front porches throughout the residential neighborhoods of
the City. Front porches are encouraged over front loaded garages and side
entrance houses.
g. Roof Elements – Traditional roof shapes and materials are typically found in
the neighborhoods of Keego Harbor and are encouraged. Dormers and
other elements are encouraged to break-up large expanses of roofs.
h. Composition - It is not sufficient to include the desired architectural
elements on a facade, but to arrange them in a harmonious and balanced
manner. The following category provides weight to the architectural
composition of the building.
3. Method of Evaluation
An architectural design checklist will be accompanied with all applicable
building permit applications. The design standards are not intended to promote
buildings that appear uniform and similar. Variety and creativity in design are
encouraged. The standards are structured in a point rating system, with
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-8
desirable architectural elements given positive points and undesirable elements
given negative points.
The points assigned for each category are weighted according to its
importance. The standards apply to all residential building facades with the
facade facing a public road, private road, or water body being more heavily
weighted.
The minimum acceptable score is: 90 points.
Any modification to the facade shall not result in a reduction in the score of the
building at the time of the requested modification.
SECTION 4.08 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
1. Lot Area:
(a) Any existing lot created prior to January 1, 2003 shall be considered a
buildable lot in the NR District provided the lot area is greater than 3,000
square feet;
(b) Any lot created after January 1, 2003 must conform to the average lot size
of the lots on the same side of the street between two closest intersecting
streets or 6,000 square feet, whichever is less.
2. Lot Width:
(a) Any existing lot created prior to January 1, 2003 shall be considered a
buildable lot in the NR District provided the lot width is greater than 30
feet;
(b) Any lot created after January 1, 2003 must conform to the average lot
width of the lots on the same side of the street between the two closest
intersecting streets or 50 feet, whichever is less.
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-9
10'-0" 24' ROAD
CL
13'-0"
50' ROW
35' 35'
10'-0" 13'-0"
3. Front Yard Setback:
(a) The front yard
setback shall be
determined by the
average front yard
setbacks of the 2
nearest
conforming lots on
each side of the
subject lot. The
applicant for a
building permit
shall provide an
engineered
drawing
supporting the setback calculation. In no case shall the front yard
setback be less than thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the
road.
4. Side Yard Setback:
(a) 30% of the lot width with one side no less than 10%.
5. Side Yard Facing a Street:
(a) The side yard setback shall be determined by the average setbacks of the
lots on the same street side between two intersecting streets. In no case
shall the setback be less than 20’ from the edge of the road pavement.
6. Rear Yard Setback:
(a) 25’ from rear property line.
7. Through Lots:
(a) The front and rear setbacks on a through lot shall be consistent with the
front yard setback requirements of this Section.
NR DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4-10
8. Waterfront Setback:
(a) The waterfront setback shall be determined by the average setbacks of
the 2 nearest conforming houses on each side of the subject lot. In the
event any of the lots required to determine the average are vacant, a
minimum setback of fifty (50) feet shall be used.
9. Building Height:
(a) Building height shall not
exceed thirty-five (35) feet
and may contain no more
than two and one half
stories. The building shall
not encroach into the day
light plane created by a line
forming a 45 degree angle
from a point eighteen (18)
feet above the grade at the
side property line. Eaves
and other decorative
elements may encroach
into the day light plane.
10. Lot Coverage:
(a) Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
11. Access Standards:
(a) Any primary structure shall have full frontage on a public ROW or
approved private road easement.
12. Minimum Usable Floor Area:
(a) Usable floor area shall be at least 800 square feet.
20 FEET
MAX.
X FEET
10% of X
30"
MAX
20% of X
35 FEET
MAX.
12
12
R-T TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT
KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4A-1
ARTICLE IV(A)
R-T TOWNHOUSE
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4A.00 - INTENT
The R-T Townhouse Residential District is intended to provide sites for single family
attached or townhouse residential structures, along with other residentially-related uses.
R-T districts are generally located to serve as a buffer or zone of transition between
major thoroughfares, multiple family, or nonresidential uses and single family residential
neighborhoods. Townhouse residential development is differentiated from other types
of multiple family residential development because it is designed to be compatible with
single family residential neighborhoods in building design, materials and site layout.
SECTION 4A.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to any limitations described herein:
(a) Two-family townhouse residential dwellings, subject to the following:
1. Townhouses shall be designed with individual entrances which face onto the
public right-of-way. Corner units shall be designed with an entrance facing at
least one (1) public right-of-way.
2. Buildings shall front towards the street. Blank walls may not face a street and
buildings must have windows and architectural features on all walls facing a
public or private street. The front facade shall contain a minimum of twenty
percent (20%) windows. In addition, buildings shall consist of a pitched roof or
other similar styled roof which is compatible with existing single family buildings
in the surrounding neighborhood.
3. No more than four (4) units may be located in any single building. (Ord. 400,
3/20/2003)
4. Townhouses shall be constructed of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) brick,
stone, or decorative masonry building materials. The Planning Commission
shall have the discretion to waive this requirement if there is a determination
that the proposed materials will result in attractive design that is compatible with
adjacent single family neighborhoods.
5. For sites which are corner lots or have frontage on more than one (1) street, a
minimum front yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be maintained along
the frontage of all streets.
6. The distance between townhouse buildings shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
feet.
R-T TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT
KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4A-2
7. Balconies, open porches, stoops, covered walkways, bay windows, and raised
dooryards shall be permitted to encroach a maximum of ten (10') feet into the
required front yard setback.
8. Parking shall be located at the rear of the site, with access provided on a side
street, if possible.
9. Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. The spaces
shall be supplied in an attached or detached garage. Additional surface parking
may be provided in the rear yard, provided it is screened from the public rightof-
way and adjacent residential areas. Parking shall not be permitted in the
front yard. The Planning Commission may require additional on-site visitor
parking.
10. A six foot (6') high decorative masonry screen wall constructed of materials
which match the buildings shall be required between townhouse residential and
single family residential districts. The wall shall be reduced to a maximum
height of three (3) feet above grade within twenty-five (25) feet of any street.
The Planning Commission shall have the discretion to waive the screen wall
requirement when it is determined that a landscape buffer will provide adequate
screening.
11. A paved pedestrian connection shall be provided between the public sidewalk
and the entrance of individual units. With the exception of these paved
sidewalks, the remainder of the front yard shall be landscaped.
12. The vehicular maneuvering aisle located at the rear of the site shall be a
minimum of eighteen (18) feet wide.
13. All unpaved areas shall be landscaped. Foundation plantings consisting of a
minimum of one (1) canopy tree or eight (8) shrubs per townhouse unit are
required to be planted on the site.
14. For sites developed as condominiums, a master deed, by-laws, and open
space/maintenance agreement must be provided for review by the City. The
condominium documents shall be agreed upon by the City and the applicant
and filed with the Oakland County Register of Deeds prior to issuance of a
building permit for any construction in accordance with site plans.
15. As a condition of approval of the site plan by the City Council, the applicant may
be required to provide a performance guarantee for improvements to the site.
(b) Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways and recreational facilities.
(c) Family Day Care Homes.
(d) Signs, as provided in Article XIV - Signs.
(e) Adult Foster Care Family Home with 6 or fewer clients.
(f) Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, subject to the following condition: No building
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line when said property line abuts
or is adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes.
(g) Religious Institutions, subject to the following:
1. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in this district may be
permitted provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum
required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
R-T TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT
KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4A-3
2. At least one boundary of the lot upon which the church is to be constructed shall
border a street designated as a collector thoroughfare having an existing and/or
planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width.
SECTION 4A.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT
TO SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to review and recommendation by the City
Planning Commission and approval by City Council.
(a) State Licensed Residential Facilities with 7 or more clients.
(b) Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
including transformer stations, lift stations and switchboards but excluding storage
yards.
(c) Municipal buildings, libraries, museums, fire stations, and similar facilities when
constructed so as to be compatible with the uses existing in the immediate area.
(d) Bed-n-Breakfast Inns and/or Tourist Homes not to exceed a height of three stories,
subject to the following requirements:
1. Bed-n-Breakfast inns and tourist homes shall remain as single family homes in
appearance, and shall have no internal or external structural alterations. An
example would be enlarging the kitchen for volume food service.
2. Off-street parking shall be provided for the households and guests as follows:
Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space per room to be rented.
3. There shall be ample open space other than that required to accommodate the
required off-street parking. Natural screening by use of plant materials or other
screening may be required to screen parking areas from adjoining residential
properties. Off-street parking in front yard areas shall not be permitted.
4. Food may only be served in an inn to those persons renting an inn room only
during their stay at the inn.
5. A residential structure shall not have or be converted to more rental rooms than
the number of bedrooms which exist at the time of enactment of this Ordinance.
6. One (1) wall sign not to exceed a total area of eight (8) square feet shall be
permitted for identification purposes only.
(e) Attached wireless communications facilities, subject to the following requirements
and the requirements specified in Section 15.28:
1. No attached wireless communications facilities, with the exception of television
antennas, may be erected on a residential structure or associated accessory
structure.
2. Where an attached wireless communications facility is proposed on the roof of a
building, the switching equipment module must be adequately screened or
architecturally compatible with the design of the building. The switching
equipment module may be located within the principal building or may be an
accessory building, provided that an accessory building conforms with all district
requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks and building
height.
R-T TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT
KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4A-4
3. The attached wireless communications facility shall be erected on a building in
a manner that is not prominently visible from the ground, injurious to the
character of the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and
welfare. The attached wireless communications facility shall be located and
designed to be harmonious with the surrounding area, and to be aesthetically
and architecturally compatible with the natural environment, as well as the
environment as altered by development.
(f) Wireless communications support structures on public or quasi-public/institutional
sites subject to the requirements specified in Section 15.28.
SECTION 4A.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses, including attached or detached garages (not carports),
tool houses, home occupations (See section 15.13 Accessory Buildings) subject to the
provisions of section 15.29 home Occupations, and off-street parking shall be permitted.
The storage or parking of recreational vehicles shall be subject to Section 4A.04. In
addition, any other use customarily incidental to the principal uses enumerated in
Section 4A.01 and 4A.02 are permitted. (Ord. 377, 11/15/2001)
SECTION 4A.04 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING IN
TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Not more than one (1) recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 2.00, may be parked
or stored by the owner and/or occupant per unit in townhouse residential districts
subject to the following conditions:
(a) The site must be able to accommodate the storage of recreational vehicles without
encroachment into vehicle maneuvering aisles or without creating a shortage of
required and/or additional visitor parking on the site, as determined by the Planning
Commission. All areas for storage of recreational vehicles must be paved and
screened from adjacent residential districts and the public right-of-way with a
masonry screen wall or landscape screen.
(b) The recreational vehicle(s) must be currently registered and licensed in the name of
a current owner and/or occupant of the dwelling unit.
(c) Boats stored out of water shall not exceed 22 feet in length, provided pontoon boats
may be allowed up to 35 feet in length and 12 feet in height.
(d) A recreational vehicle parked or stored shall not be connected to electricity, water,
gas, or sanitary sewer facilities.
(e) A recreational vehicle shall not be used for living, lodging or housekeeping
purposes.
(f) A recreational vehicle must be stored in the rear yard of the lot, provided the vehicle
does not encroach into the vehicle maneuvering lane. No recreational vehicle shall
be stored on a public street right-of-way.
(g) Notwithstanding the above provisions concerning "Location", a recreational vehicle
may be parked elsewhere on the premises prior to or after a trip for loading or
unloading purposes for a period of not more than 48 hours prior to and 48 hours
after use of the vehicle within a seven (7) day period.
R-T TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT
KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4A-5
(h) The parked or stored recreational vehicle must be kept in good repair. The vehicle
must be capable of being moved from place to place.
(i) For the purposes of this Section, two (2) personal watercraft, snowmobiles, allterrain
vehicles, or motorcycles stored on a single trailer shall be counted as one (1)
recreational vehicle.
SECTION 4A.05 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Development Standards
Lot Minimums
Area (sq/ft) ----
Width (feet) ----
Maximum Building
Stories 2
Height (feet) 25
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings (%) ----
Minimum Setback (Measured from Lot Line in feet)1
Front Open Space(2) 25
Least One 10
Total of Two 20
Rear Open Space 25
Minimum Useable Floor Area
Per Unit (sq/ft) 1,200(3)
Notes to Development Standards
(1) Properties abutting water shall also comply with Section 15.15, Waterfront Land Setbacks.
(2) Front yard setbacks are measured from the edge of the existing and/or planned right-of-way, said
planned right-of-way as shown on the officially adopted Master Plan. Where a parcel or lot is at
an intersection, the setback shall be measured from the maximum requirement for the district
considering each side as a front yard area.
(3) Townhouses must have a minimum floor area of 1,200 square feet per unit. (Ord. 340, 4/16/1998)
Type SF RES
(NR)
RES
(R-T)
MFR
(R-M)
(RME)
MOB HOME
(R-MH) COM
Adult Foster Care, Family Home
(6 or less adults) P P P P P
Adult Foster Care, Small Group Home
(7-12 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU P
Adult Foster Care, Large Group Home
(13-20 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU SLU
Adult Foster Care, Congregate Facility
(20 or more adults) SLU
Day Care, Family Home
(6 or less children) P P P P
R-T TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT
KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 4A-6
Day Care, Group Home
(7-12 children) SLU SLU SLU SLU
Day Care Center P
Key: P = Permitted; SLU = Special Land Use
R-M DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 5-1
ARTICLE V
R-M MULTIPLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 5.00 - INTENT
The R-M Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide a proper
environment for families who live in low-rise multiple family dwellings. Such families
normally are smaller in size than those living in single-family dwellings. The RM District,
in addition to being designed to furnish sites for various types of multiple-family dwelling
structures, (including town houses, row houses, and apartments), also generally serves
as a zone of transition between non-residential districts and lower density one-family
residential districts.
SECTION 5.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
All uses permitted in the NR Neighborhood Residential District and the following uses:
subject to any limitations described herein:
(a) Multiple-family dwellings of a low-rise type, including but not limited to: row houses,
terraces, town houses, apartments.
(b) Rooming houses.
(c) Publicly owned and operated libraries, museums, parks, parkways and recreational
facilities.
(d) Family Day Care Homes.
(e) Adult Foster Care Family Home with 6 or fewer clients.
(f) Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, subject to the following condition: No building
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line when said property line abuts
or is adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes. (e) Signs, as provided in
Article XIV - Signs.
(g) Religious Institutions, subject to the following:
1. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in this district may be
permitted provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum
required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
R-M DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 5-2
2. At least one boundary of the lot upon which the church is to be constructed shall
border a street designated as a collector thoroughfare having an existing and/or
planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width.
(h) Attached wireless communications facilities, collocation of an attached wireless
communications facility, and attached wireless communications facilities consisting
of a utility pole, all subject to the standards in Section 15.28.
SECTION 5.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to permission of the Council following review
and recommendation by the City Planning Commission.
(a) Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
including transformer stations, lift stations and switchboards but excluding storage
yards.
(b) Day Care, Group Home (7-12 children) subject to the following conditions:
1. The lot upon which the nursery school is located contains at least three hundred
(300) square feet of land area per pupil, and is at least fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet in area.
2. Play space for children shall have a minimum area of five thousand (5,000)
square feet, and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining residential
area with planting.
3. No dormitory accommodations shall be provided.
(c) Colleges, universities, and other such institutions of higher learning, public and
private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education, provided no
building other than a structure for residential purposes shall be closer than fifty (50)
feet to any property line which abuts or is adjacent to land zoned for residential
purposes.
(d) Private noncommercial recreational centers; and non-profit swimming pools.
(e) Docking and mooring of boats or the storage of boats out of water, subject to the
following conditions:
1. Docking space shall be limited to the maximum number of boats allowed by the
Department of Environmental Quality marina operating permit, subject to site
plan and special land use review and approval by the City Council.
2. All boats and personal watercraft must be currently registered in the name of a
current owner and/or occupant residing on the property.
3. All waterfront structures, appurtenances, and recreational vehicles shall comply
with the requirements of Section 15.15, Waterfront Yards.
4. There shall be no repair or dismantling of boats on the site.
R-M DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 5-3
5. Boats stored out of water shall not exceed 22 feet in length, provided pontoon
boats may be allowed up to 35 feet in length and 12 feet in height.
6. All watercraft shall be stored a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from abutting
residential zoned property lines, and be screened from adjacent residential
properties and the public right-of-way by a greenbelt or screen fence, seven (7)
feet in height. Where possible, watercraft shall be setback from the road at
least twenty (20) feet, and shall be stored a minimum of twenty (20) feet from
the shoreline. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
(f) General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for the treatment of
persons who are mentally ill or have contagious diseases, not to exceed a height of
three (3) stories or forty (40) feet subject to the following conditions:
1. All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly onto a major
thoroughfare, having and existing or planned right-of-way width of at least one
hundred and twenty (120) feet as indicated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
2. Ambulance delivery and service areas when visible from adjacent land zoned
for residential purposes shall be obscured from view by a wall at least six (6)
feet in height.
3. The minimum distance between any structure and a property line shall be
seventy-five (75) feet.
(g) Nursing homes, subject to the following conditions:
1. All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly onto a major or
secondary thoroughfare, having an existing or planned right-of-way width of at
least eighty-six (86) feet as indicated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
2. The minimum distance between any structure and a property line shall be forty
(40) feet.
(h) Bed-n-Breakfast Inns and/or Tourist Homes subject to the requirements outlined in
Section 4.02(f) of this ordinance.
(i) State Licensed Residential Facilities with 7 or more clients.
(j) Wireless communications support structures subject to the requirements specified
in Section 15.28.
SECTION 5.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses, including:
(a) Community garages; tool houses; swimming pools not exceeding 60 feet in
length which are part of a multiple-family project.
(b) Off-street parking.
(c) Any other uses customarily incidental to the principal uses in Section 5.01 and
5.02 are permitted.
R-M DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 5-4
(d) Home occupations subject to the provisions of section 15.29 Home Occupations.
(Ord. 377, 11/15/2001)
SECTION 5.04 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Development Standards
Lot Minimums
Area (sq/ft) (1)
Width (feet) 100
Maximum Building
Stories 2 ½
Height (feet) 30
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings (%) 30
Minimum Setback (Measured from Lot Line in feet)2
Front Open Space(3) 30(4)
Least One 20(4)
Total of Two 40(4)
Rear Open Space 30(4)
Minimum Useable Floor Area
Per Unit (sq/ft) (1)
Notes to Development Standards
(1) Minimum land area per dwelling unit for R-M District as follows:
R-M DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 5-5
Number of
Bedrooms
Minimum Land
Area per Unit
(square feet)
Minimum Floor
Area per Unit
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling
units/acre)
Minimum Lot
Width
Efficiency Unit 4,200 600 10.4 Dependent upon
site arrangement.
1-Bedroom Unit 4,200 600 10.4 However, development
of one lot
2-Bedroom Unit 5,445 800 8.0 shall meet requirements
set forth
3-Bedroom Unit 6,800 1,000 6.4 above
(2) Properties abutting water shall also comply with Section 15.15, Waterfront Land Setbacks.
(3) Front yard setbacks are measured from the edge of the existing and/or planned right-of-way, said
planned right-of-way as shown on the officially adopted Master Plan. Where a parcel or lot is at
an intersection, the setback shall be measured from the maximum requirement for the district
considering each side as a front yard area.
(4) Spacing of multiple dwellings shall be controlled by the following schedule:
Building Relationship Overall Distance Between Buildings
Front to Front 50 Feet
Front to Rear 60 Feet
Rear to Rear 60 Feet
Rear to Side 45 Feet
Side to Side 20 Feet
Corner to Corner 15 Feet
Parking may be permitted in up to fifty (50) percent of the required yard provided that there shall
be at least 20 feet of yard space between said parking area and the multiple family building.
Type SF RES
(NR)
RES
(R-T)
MFR
(R-M)
(R-ME)
MOB HOME
(R-MH) COM
Adult Foster Care, Family Home
(6 or less adults) P P P P P
Adult Foster Care, Small Group Home
(7-12 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU P
Adult Foster Care, Large Group Home
(13-20 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU SLU
R-M DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 5-6
Adult Foster Care, Congregate Facility
(20 or more adults) SLU
Day Care, Family Home
(6 or less children) P P P P
Day Care, Group Home
(7-12 children) SLU SLU SLU SLU
Day Care Center P
Key: P = Permitted; SLU = Special Land Use
SECTION 5.05 - REQUIRED GREENWAY
Where the RM District directly abuts a single family district, the RM uses constructed
therein shall provide a ten (10) foot wide Greenway in those areas where the required
screen wall is not required. The Greenway shall be constructed in accordance with
Section 15.23 of this Ordinance.
R-MH DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 6-1
ARTICLE VI
R-MH RESIDENTIAL
MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
SECTION 6.00 - INTENT
The R-MH residential Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide a suitable
environment with adequate space and proper supporting facilities for families and
persons living in mobile home parks. All mobile home parks shall comply with Act 419 of
1976, as amended and also meet all of the requirements contained in this Ordinance.
SECTION 6.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to any limitations described herein:
(a) Mobile Home Parks
Each park to be located on a parcel of land of not less than ten (10) acres with the
entire parcel under the control or ownership of a natural person, individual,
partnership, association, trust corporation or any other legal entity or combination
thereof-, together with any buildings, structures, enclosures, street, drives,
equipment or facilities used or intended for use incidental to the development and
occupancy of such mobile homes; subject to the requirements as established and
regulated by the state laws of Michigan and, in addition, shall satisfy the following
minimum requirements:
1. Site
All mobile home parks shall be located on a site which is adequately graded so
as to insure proper drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
2. Access of Public Roads
All mobile home parks shall have access to a public thoroughfare or shall be
connected to a public thoroughfare.
3. Roadway Standards
All roadways in the mobile home park shall be hard surfaced, and shall meet all
road construction standards of the Mobile Home Commission Rules. Internal
road widths shall conform to the following standards: Two-way streets within a
mobile home park shall have a minimum width of 21 feet where no parallel
parking is permitted, 31 feet where parallel parking is permitted along one side
of the street, and 41 feet where parallel parking is permitted along both sides of
the street. The minimum width of a one-way street shall be 13 feet where no
R-MH DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 6-2
parallel parking is permitted, 23 feet where parallel parking is permitted along
one side, and 33 feet where parallel parking is permitted along both sides.
4. Pedestrian Circulation System
A pedestrian circulation system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained
for safe and convenient movement from all mobile home sites to principal
destinations within the park and connection to the public pedestrian circulation
system outside the park, if such a system exists. A pedestrian circulation
system shall satisfy the following requirements:
a. Internal roads may be used as pedestrian ways except where
concentrations of either pedestrian or vehicular traffic are likely to lead to
congestion of hazards.
b. Separate pedestrian ways shall be provided in locations where pedestrian
traffic is concentrated, if use of the roads creates a hazard because of
concentrations of either pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
c. Separate pedestrian ways shall be provided at points where use of roads
would lead to unduly circuitous pedestrian routes to principal destinations. If
possible, walks shall be through interior areas away from heavy or
fast-moving traffic.
d. Where steps are installed, they shall rise no steeper than 5 feet vertically
and 10 feet horizontally. Handrails shall be installed in compliance with R
408.30446 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
e. Where steps are installed along common pedestrian walkways, ramps shall
be installed in compliance with R 408.30445 of the Michigan Administrative
Code.
f. A common pedestrian walkway shall have a minimum width of 3 feet.
g. An individual pedestrian walkway shall connect to a common pedestrian
walkway, or to a road where common walkways do not exist to individual
driveways or parking spaces and the mobile home foundation. An individual
pedestrian walkway shall be not less than 3 feet in width.
5. Utilities
Each mobile home park and individual mobile home site shall be serviced by
and connected to the city water and city sanitary sewer system. All telephone,
electric and other utility lines of any nature within the mobile home park shall be
underground. Each mobile home, caretaker's office and all service or
recreational buildings shall be equipped with at least one (1) fire extinguisher
with a minimum 2A-10-B-C rating and at least one (l) smoke detector approved
by a nationally recognized independent testing laboratory. Each fire
extinguisher shall be examined periodically and shall be kept at all times in
useable condition. If central television antenna systems, cable television, or
other such services are provided, the distribution systems shall be underground
and shall be constructed and installed pursuant to State and Local codes and
ordinances.
R-MH DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 6-3
6. Lighting
Service roadway, parking and service area lights shall be installed so as to
permit the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. All vehicular
and pedestrian circulation system within a mobile home park shall be
illuminated as follows:
a. Access to points to public thoroughfares shall be lighted. If the public
thoroughfare is lighted, the illuminated level shall not exceed the average
illumination level of an adjacent illuminated thoroughfare.
b. Outdoor recreational facilities shall be adequately lighted, when in use.
c. All lighting shall be so located and shielded as to direct the light away from
individual mobile homes.
7. Screening
Where a mobile home park abuts property planned, zoned, and/or used for
residential purposes, a completely obscuring seven (7) foot high fence and/or a
ten (10) foot wide landscaped greenbelt of plant materials, spacing and heights
in accordance with Section 13.04 shall be provided on the park side of the
boundary. Proper maintenance shall be the responsibility of the mobile home
park.
8. Recreation/Open Space
a. A mobile home park that contains fifty (50) or more mobile home sites shall
have at least one (1) easily accessible open space area containing not less
than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. The total of the land
dedicated for open space shall not be less than two (2) percent of the park's
gross acreage that is approved for construction pursuant to a permit to
construct, but no less than twenty- five thousand (25,000) square feet.
b. Optional improvements such as swimming pools, recreational buildings,
children’s playgrounds, picnic areas, game fields and courts or similar areas
or facilities shall be considered as fulfilling part or all of the total open space
requirement. If optional improvements are provided, they may be
consolidated into a single facility.
9. Garbage and Refuse Disposal
There shall be provided in all mobile home parks a system of garbage and
refuse disposal. Such system shall be reviewed and approved and shall meet
the requirements of the Michigan Department of Public Health's Standards for
Mobile Home Parks.
10. Business
No business of any kind shall be conducted at any location in a mobile home
park except that of the management office. New or used mobile homes located
on lots within the mobile me development to be used and occupied on that site
may be sold by a licensed dealer and/or broker. This section shall not prohibit
the sale of a used mobile home by a resident of the mobile home development
provided the development permits the sale.
R-MH DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 6-4
11. Parking
There shall be provided a minimum of two (2) parking spaces per mobile home
site and a minimum of one (1) parking space for every three (3) mobile home
sites shall be provided for visitor parking located convenient to the area served.
All parking spaces maneuvering lanes shall be dimensioned in accordance with
Section 13.02 of this code. All parking spaces and parking compounds shall be
hard surfaced and constructed in accordance with the Mobile Home
Commission Rules.
12. Signs
One (1) free standing sign identifying the mobile home park, not more than fifty
(50) square feet in area may be maintained at or adjacent to the principal
entrance to the park. It shall have no flashing illumination.
13. Completion of Improvements
No mobile home shall be permitted to occupy space in a mobile home park until
all building permits are secured, applicable fees paid and inspections have
been performed in accordance with the s and ordinances of the City. The
required boundary screening and/or fence shall also be in place or a bond or
certified check in amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of such fact shall
be deposited with the Treasurer to guarantee composition of greenbelt planting
and fence installation. No individual mobile home site shall be occupied or
re-occupied by a new home until properly placed on its stand, skirted, and
connected to utilities through the proper issuance of the required permits and
certificate of occupancy.
14. Site Plan
Each application for a permit for development of a mobile home park shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing all details of development and site plan
approval as outlined in this Ordinance shall be complied with.
(b) Attached wireless communications facilities, collocation of an attached wireless
communications facility, and attached wireless communications facilities consisting
of a utility pole, all subject to the standards in Section 15.28.
(c) Adult Foster Care Family Home with 6 or fewer clients.
(d) Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, subject to the following condition: No building
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line when said property line abuts
or is adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes.
(e) Religious Institutions, subject to the following:
1. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in this district may be
permitted provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum
required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
R-MH DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 6-5
2. At least one boundary of the lot upon which the church is to be constructed
shall border a street designated as a collector thoroughfare having an existing
and/or planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width.
(f) Family Day Care Homes.
(g) State Licensed Residential Facilities with 7 or more clients.
SECTION 6.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to permission of the Council following review
and recommendation by the City Planning Commission:
(a) Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
including transformer stations and switchboards but excluding storage yards.
(b) Wireless communications support structures subject to the requirements specified
in Section 15.28.
SECTION 6.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the principal permitted uses
enumerated in Section 6.01 and 6.02 are permitted.
(a) Utility buildings.
(b) Carport (unenclosed).
(c) Community building that may provide services for the residents of the mobile home
park such as a laundromat.
(d) Home occupations subject to the provisions of section 15.29 Home Occupations.
(Ord. 377, 11/15/2001)
SECTION 6.04 - AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS
(a) Minimum Lot Area: The minimum total site area shall be ten (10) acres.
(b) Minimum Lot Width: three hundred (300) feet.
(c) Minimum Yards (Setbacks):
Front: fifty (50) feet from any public right-of-way.
Side, Least One: ten (10) feet.
Side, Total Two: twenty (20) feet.
Rear: ten (10) feet.
A mobile home shall be a minimum of:
1. twenty (20) feet from any part of another mobile home,
2. ten (10) feet from any detached structure and seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet
from an on-site parking of an adjacent mobile home site,
R-MH DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 6-6
3. fifty (50) feet from a permanent building,
4. ten (10) feet from a natural or man-made lake, waterway,
5. seven (7) feet from pedestrian walkways and sidewalks,
(d) Maximum Height: two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.
(e) Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit: 600 square feet.
P-1DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 7-1
ARTICLE VII
P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT
SECTION 7.00 - INTENT
The P-1 Vehicular Parking District is intended to provide locations for publicly or
privately owned off-street parking for passenger vehicles in areas where the public
interest justifies the sitting of such parking. Usually this parking is designed to serve a
district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. It also may
serve as a transitional use buffer between residential and nonresidential uses.
SECTION 7.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to any limitations described herein:
(a) Public off-street parking lots and garages, subject to regulations imposed by the
City.
(b) Private off-street parking facilities, including parking lots and community garages,
subject to the following:
1. The parking areas shall be accessory to and for use in connection with one (1)
or more business, research or industrial establishments located in adjoining
business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing
professional or institutional office buildings or institutions.
2. Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of motor vehicles, for periods of
less than one (1) day.
3. No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display, shall be
conducted in such parking areas.
4. No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking areas.
5. No buildings other than community garages shall be erected upon such
premises and they shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
6. Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an RM, C-1, C-2, 0-1, or M-1 District,
or separated only by a public street or private driveway from the
aforementioned districts.
(c) Attached wireless communications facilities, collocation of an attached wireless
communications facility, and attached wireless communications facilities consisting
of a utility pole, all subject to the standards in Section 15.28.
P-1DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 7-2
SECTION 7.02 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to permission of the Council following review
and recommendation by the City Planning Commission.
(a) Parking garages subject to the following:
1. Entrances and exits to the garage shall be from surface off-street parking to
drive areas and shall not be entered or exited directly onto a public
thoroughfare.
2. Parking decks shall be properly screened so as to obscure the view of
automobiles and provide safety barriers and outside walls.
3. No maintenance, service or repairs shall be permitted or conducted in the
building.
4. Parking garages shall be further subject to Article XXII, Schedule of Regulations
for area and bulk requirements.
(b) Wireless communications support structures on public or quasi-public/institutional
sites subject to the requirements specified in Section 15.28.
SECTION 7.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses shall be limited to shelter built for attendants (including
fare collection booths in public parking facilities) not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
SECTION 7.04 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as
provided in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations.
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-1
ARTICLE VIII
C-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION 8.00 - INTENT
The C-1 Local Business District is designated to meet the day-to-day convenience
shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. Protection
of nearby residential districts is considered of importance, thus businesses which might
tend to be a nuisance to immediately surrounding residential areas are excluded, even
though the goods sold or services offered might fall within the convenience
classification.
SECTION 8.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all business servicing or processing
(except for off-street parking or loading) shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building; that all businesses shall be of a retail or service nature dealing
directly with consumers; and that all goods produced on the premises be sold at retail
on the same premises:
(a) Retail businesses, including but not limited to such uses as markets selling
groceries, meats, fruit, produce, dairy products and baked goods; stores selling
drugs, dry goods, notions, shoes, clothing, hardware, books, jewelry, radios,
televisions, and related items; variety stores; florist shops; antique shops.
(b) Personal service shops, provided that each such shop occupies a total usable floor
area of not more than 4,000 square feet, including but not limited to such uses as:
frame shops, repair shops (watch, television, shoe repair, etc.), tailor and
dressmaking shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, photographic studios,
self-service Laundromats, and dry cleaning pick-up stations.
(c) Offices, including executive, administrative, and professional offices, establishments
which perform financial or personal or business services, including banks, savings
and loan companies, insurance and real estate offices, small loan companies, and
similar agencies, provided that accessory drive-through facilities shall be subject to
Conditional Use Approval (see Section 8.02).
(d) Medical and dental offices and clinics, and offices of other professionals offering
services.
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-2
(e) Publicly-owned and operated libraries and museums.
(f) Community centers.
(g) Adult Foster Care Family Home with 6 or fewer clients.
(h) Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, subject to the following condition: No building
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line when said property line abuts or is
adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes.
(i) Religious Institutions, subject to the following:
1. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in this district may be
permitted provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum
required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
2. At least one boundary of the lot upon which the church is to be constructed
shall border a street designated as a collector thoroughfare having an existing
and/or planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width.
(j) Signs, as provided in Article XIV.
(k) Art Galleries.
(l) Attached wireless communications facilities, collocation of an attached wireless
communications facility, and attached wireless communications facilities consisting
of a utility pole, all subject to the standards in Section 15.28.
(n) Uses similar to the above provided it is demonstrated that such uses are necessary
to provide normal day-to-day needs for the population of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(o) State Licensed Residential Facilities, Adult Foster Care, Small Group Home with
7-12 clients.
SECTION 8.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to permission of the City Council following
review and recommendation by the Planning Commission:
(a) Automobile service centers and quick oil change shops, subject to the following:
1. Any such facility shall have a minimum of one hundred sixty (160) feet of
frontage on the principal street serving the station.
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-3
2. All buildings shall be set back not less than fifty (50) feet from all street
right-of-way lines.
3. Curbs, curb cuts, driveway widths, and acceleration and deceleration lanes
shall meet the requirements of the agencies having jurisdiction thereof
4. No structure shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
residentially-zoned land.
5. Gasoline storage tanks shall be located underground and no closer than 100
feet to any property line.
6. Pump islands shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any
property line.
7. All trash, waste, and discarded material shall be screened from view and
confined so as to be completely contained within an enclosure with a gate.
(b) Veterinary offices and clinics providing medical, surgical, and grooming facilities for
small non-farm animals, subject to the following:
1. No such use shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
residentially-zoned or used property.
2. All such facilities shall be completely enclosed in a building in such a manner as
to produce no offensive odor or audible sound beyond the lot line.
3. An adequate, enclosed method of refuse storage and disposal shall be
maintained so that no public nuisance shall be created at any time.
(c) Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
including transformer stations and switchboards, but excluding storage yards.
(d) Bed-n-breakfast inns and tourist homes, subject to the requirements outlined in
Section 4.02(e).
(e) Carry-out restaurants, but not including drive-in, drive-through, or fast-food
restaurants.
(f) Private Service clubs, fraternal organizations, banquet halls, and meeting halls.
Those establishments with hours of operation between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. shall
meet standards set forth in subsection (h) below.
(g) Commercial establishments with hours of operation between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m.
(excluding bars and lounges), subject to the following:
1. Parking areas shall be configured as to prevent vehicular headlights from
shining into adjacent residentially zoned and used property, whenever possible.
If this is not possible, parking areas configured such that vehicular headlights
are directed toward public rights-of-way shall provide continuous screening at a
minimum height of three (3) feet. The Planning Commission shall have the
discretion to require an obscuring wall, fence, berm, landscape plantings, or a
combination thereof.
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-4
2. Ingress and egress drives and primary circulation lanes shall be located away
from residential areas to minimize vehicular traffic and noise which may
become a nuisance to adjacent residential areas, wherever practical.
3. All building entrances to be utilized by patrons shall be located on the side(s) of
the building which does not abut residentially zoned or used property, wherever
possible, to minimize the potential for patrons to congregate outside of building
entrances and create noise which may become a nuisance to adjacent
residential areas.
4. Screening not less than six (6) feet in height shall be provided along all property
lines abutting residentially zoned or used areas. The Planning Commission
shall have the discretion to require an obscuring wall, fence, berm, landscape
plantings, or a combination thereof.
5. All parking lot lighting shall be screened with shoebox-type metal halide light
fixtures which are directed downward at all times.
6. Neon, fluorescent, or similar decorative lighting located on the building, signs,
or in other areas on the site shall not be visible from adjacent residential
properties between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m.
7. Deliveries or garbage pick-up shall not be permitted between the hours of 11
p.m. and 6 a.m.
(h) Wireless communications support structures subject to the requirements specified
in Section 15.28.
(i) Standard restaurants
(j) Restaurants serving alcohol.
(k) Outdoor cafes and outdoor eating areas associated with an approved standard
restaurant or approved restaurant serving alcohol.
1. Planters, posts with ropes, or other removable barriers must be used to
contain the outdoor seating area.
2. An outdoor eating area shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet from
the edge of pavement of a public or private road that is constructed without
curb and gutter and no closer than ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement of
a public or private road that is constructed with curb and gutter.
3. Such eating areas shall be separated from all vehicular parking and
maneuvering areas by means of a landscaped buffer, wall, or architectural
feature.
4. A portion of the outdoor seating capacity, as determined by the Planning
Commission, shall be considered along with the indoor seating for the
purposes of determining compliance with required parking.
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-5
5. An outdoor eating area shall be separated from all vehicular parking and
maneuvering areas by means of a landscaped buffer, wall, or architectural
feature.
6. The outdoor seating shall in no way impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent
or nearby properties.
7. The nearest edge of the outdoor eating area shall not be located within fifty
(50) feet of any properties zoned or used for residential purposes. The area
shall be completely screened from view from all residential properties by an
obscuring wall or landscaped buffer, unless the outdoor seating area is
separated by a public road, in compliance with this Ordinance.
8. Outdoor seating shall be subject to applicable County and State
requirements.
9. The site plan shall specify the plans for storage of tables, chairs, and
equipment during the months when the outdoor seating is not in use.
10. The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and void of litter at all times.
11. All vending machines and arcades shall be located within a completely
enclosed building.
12. Outdoor eating areas shall not be operated between the hours of 11 p.m. and
6 a.m.
13. The capacity of the outdoor seating area shall be provided by the applicant
and verified by the Building Official.
14. If the eating area is elevated above a parking area or pedestrian walkway,
objects shall not be placed on a ledge or railing which may dislodge and
endanger vehicles or pedestrians below.
15. Additional signs should not be permitted, beyond what is permitted for the
existing restaurant.
16. Entertainment, music, speakers, or similar devices shall be prohibited in
outdoor eating areas within 100 feet of any residential use.
17. Preparation of food and beverages shall be prohibited in this outdoor area.
The sale and consumption of alcohol are governed by the Michigan Liquor
Control Act and local ordinance.
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-6
18. In addition to the standards listed above, outdoor sidewalk cafes shall also be
subject to the following standards:
a) To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of five (5) feet of
sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the
establishment must be maintained free of tables and other
encumbrances. If the sidewalk is not wide enough to allow for a
five (5) foot wide clearance for circulation, the café should not be
permitted.
b) Pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances should not be
impaired. Thus, a boundary (maximum encroachment width and
length) into the public sidewalk should be established, with an
accessible aisle being maintained between this line and the curb, in
accordance with the provisions of the national Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) and Michigan barrier-free requirements.
c) The operators of the outdoor café should be responsible for a
clean, litter-free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately
adjacent to the area of the tables and chairs. Additional outdoor
trash receptacles should be required. Written procedures for
cleaning and trash containment and removal responsibilities of the
café must be noted on the revised plan to the satisfaction of the
City.
d) Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and other elements of
street furniture should be compatible with the architectural
character of the adjacent buildings. If table umbrellas will be used,
they should complement building colors.
e) Liability issues for use of the public sidewalk should be addressed
and reviewed by the City Attorney. (Ord. 376, 10/18/2001)
(l) State Licensed Residential Facilities, Adult Foster Care, Large Group Home with
13-20 clients.
(m) State Licensed Residential Facilities, Adult Foster Care, Congregate Facility with 20
or more clients.
SECTION 8.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal permitted uses
enumerated in 8.01 and 8.02 are permitted including home occupations accessory to
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-7
nonconforming residential uses subject to the provisions of section 15.29 Home
Occupations. (Ord. 377, 11/15/2001)
SECTION 8.04 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
(a) Required Conditions
Except as otherwise noted for specific uses, buildings and uses in the Local
Business District shall comply with the following required conditions:
1. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing
directly with customers. All goods produced and services performed on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises produced.
2. All business, servicing, or processing, except off-street parking and loading,
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
3. There shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or equipment.
4. All uses permitted subject to special conditions shall be required to submit a
Traffic Impact Analysis which shall, at minimum, include: trip generation
estimates, the volume of existing traffic on roads adjacent to the site, the peak
hour volume of traffic on roads adjacent to the site, the peak hour volume of
traffic expected to be generated by the proposed development, estimates of the
directional distribution of trips generated by the development, projected
assignment of vehicle trip volumes to the roadway network, analysis of
anticipated turning movements and required left-or right-turn controls, and
recommendations to mitigate the impact of the development on the
transportation system. If deemed necessary by the City Planner following
review of the site plan a Traffic Impact Analysis may also be required in
conjunction with development of a Principal Permitted Use.
5. The site and building layout for all business establishments shall be designed to
accommodate safe pedestrian access for passersby and for patrons of the
business. Accordingly, sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages, as
specified in Section 16.08(f).
(b) Site Plan Review
Site plan review shall be required for all uses in the Local Business District in
accordance with Section 16.08.
(c) Area, Height, Bulk, and Placement Requirements
Buildings and uses in the Local Business District are subject to the area, height,
bulk, and placement requirements in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations.
(d) General Development Standards
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-8
Buildings and uses in the Local Business District shall be subject to all applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this Ordinance, including off-street parking
and loading requirements in Article XIII, and Landscaping and Screening
requirements in Section 15.23.
SECTION 8.04 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Development Standards
Lot Minimums
Area (sq/ft)----
Width (feet)----
Maximum Building
Stories1
Height (feet)20
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings (%)----
Minimum Setback (Measured from Lot Line in feet)1
Front Open Space(2)25
Least One20(3)
Total of Two40
Rear Open Space25
Minimum Useable Floor Area
Per Unit (sq/ft)----
Notes to Development Standards
C-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 8-9
(1) Properties abutting water shall also comply with Section 15.15, Waterfront Land Setbacks.
(2) Front yard setbacks are measured from the edge of the existing and/or planned right-of-way, said
planned right-of-way as shown on the officially adopted Master Plan. Where a parcel or lot is at
an intersection, the setback shall be measured from the maximum requirement for the district
considering each side as a front yard area.
(3) No side yards are required along interior lot lines, except as required by the Building Code,
provided that walls so located shall be solid and shall not contain any windows, doors, or any
other openings. On exterior lot lines the minimum setbacks shall be maintained.
Type SF RES
(NR)
RES
(R-T)
MFR
(R-M)
(R-ME)
MOB HOME
(R-MH) COM
Adult Foster Care, Family Home
(6 or less adults) P P P P P
Adult Foster Care, Small Group Home
(7-12 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU P
Adult Foster Care, Large Group Home
(13-20 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU SLU
Adult Foster Care, Congregate Facility
(20 or more adults) SLU
Day Care, Family Home
(6 or less children) P P P P
Day Care, Group Home
(7-12 children) SLU SLU SLU SLU
Day Care Center P
Key: P = Permitted; SLU = Special Land Use
C-2 DISTRICT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 9-1
ARTICLE IX
C-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION 9.00 - INTENT
The C-2 General Business District is designed to provide for a wide diversity of
business activities. In addition to retail uses a number of other activities, usually
requiring considerable land area and access to major thoroughfares, are permitted.
Uses in this district normally must have good automobile accessibility, but shall not
cause congestion on adjacent thoroughfares.
SECTION 9.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all business storage, servicing, or
processing (except for off-street parking, loading and other specified activities) shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building, subject to the requirements described
herein:
(a) All uses permitted in the C-1 Local Business zone district and the following uses:
(b) Signs, as provided in Article XIV with the exception that no ground signs shall be
permitted in the areas defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe. Wall signs that project
perpendicularly no more than two feet from a principal building façade may be
permitted on buildings in these same areas provided the signs do not exceed five
(5) square feet in area.
(c) Multiple family residential units may be permitted in the areas defined as the
CBD and CBD-Fringe, provided they are located above a ground floor that
contains a use permitted in the C-2 district.
(d) Mortuaries, including an accessory caretaker's apartment, subject to the
following:
1. In addition to the off-street parking required in Section 13.01(c) 3, one space
shall be provided for all official vehicles of the mortuary or funeral home plus one
space shall be provided for the caretaker.
2. Ingress and egress shall be provided so as not to conflict with the traffic on
adjacent residential streets.
3. Sufficient space shall be provided so the funeral procession can be formed on
the site or within off-street parking areas serving the mortuary or funeral home,
rather than on residential streets.
C-2 DISTRICT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 9-2
4. All outdoor activity associated with the mortuary shall be screened from view
of adjacent residential districts.
(e) Adult Foster Care Family Home with 6 or fewer clients.
(f) Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, subject to the following condition: No building
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line when said property line abuts
or is adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes.
(g) Religious Institutions, subject to the following:
1. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in this district may be
permitted provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum
required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
2. At least one boundary of the lot upon which the church is to be constructed shall
border a street designated as a collector thoroughfare having an existing and/or
planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width.
(h) Hotels and motels.
(i) Standard restaurants.
(j) Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to serve the immediate
vicinity, including transformer stations and switchboards, but excluding storage
yards.
(k) Signs, as provided in Article XIV with the exception that no ground sings shall be
permitted in the areas defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe. Wall signs that project
perpendicularly no more than two feet from a principal building façade may be
permitted on buildings in these same areas provided the signs do not exceed five
(5) square feet in area (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002)
(l) Other uses similar to the above uses.
(m) Business establishments providing body art and permanent cosmetics (tattoo),
subject to State of Michigan licensing and applicable Health Department
requirements. Such establishments shall not operate between the hours of
11:00pm and 7:00am
(n) Multiple family residential units may be permitted in the areas defined as the
CBD and CBD-Fringe, provided they are located above a ground floor that
contains a use permitted in the C-2 district (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002)
(o) State Licensed Residential Facilities, Adult Foster Care, Small Group Home with
7-12 clients.
C-2 DISTRICT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 9-3
SECTION 9.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to permission of the City Council following
review and recommendation by the Planning Commission:
(a) Automobile service centers and quick oil change shops, subject to the conditions in
Section 8.02(a). Automobile service centers and quick oil change shops may not be
located in the areas defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002).
(b) Veterinary offices and clinics providing medical, surgical, and grooming facilities for
small non-farm animals, subject to the conditions in Section 8.02(b).
(c) Automobile wash or car wash establishments, subject to the following conditions:
1. The minimum lot size required for such facilities shall be 20,000 square feet.
2. All washing activities shall be carried on within a completely enclosed building.
Vacuuming activities shall be permitted in the rear yard only, provided that such
activities are located at least fifty (50) feet from adjacent residentially-zoned or
used property.
3. Sufficient space shall be provided on the lot so that vehicles do not enter or exit
the wash building directly from an adjacent street or alley. All maneuvering
areas, stacking lanes, and exit aprons shall be located on the car wash parcel it
sell Streets and alleys shall not be used for maneuvering or parking by vehicles
to be serviced by the car wash.
4. Sufficient space shall be provided on the lot for drying of the vehicle
undercarriage during sub-freezing weather prior to exiting on the public
thoroughfare.
5. Automobile wash or car wash establishments may not be located in the areas
defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002).
(d) Bus passenger stations.
(e) New and used vehicle sales offices and showrooms, provided that any outdoor
sales area for used vehicle sales shall be permitted only as an adjunct to a new
vehicle sales establishment, subject to the following requirements:
1. The sales lot shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface
having an asphaltic or concrete binder, and shall be so graded and drained to
dispose within the site of all surface water accumulating within the area.
2. Ingress and egress driveways shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the
intersection of any two (2) streets, measured from the nearest intersection
right-of-way line.
C-2 DISTRICT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 9-4
3. No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot.
4. All abutting or adjacent property shall be zoned for business or industrial use.
5. Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voice or music shall be
prohibited outside of any building.
6. No vehicle shall be parked or displayed within forty (40) feet of a public
right-of-way.
7. All driveway approaches, road drainage, curbs and curb cuts shall meet the
requirements of the agencies which have jurisdiction thereof.
8. No new or used vehicle sales office or showroom with outdoor sales area may
be permitted in the areas defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe (Ord. 386,
03/21/2002)
(f) Private service clubs, fraternal organizations, banquet halls, and meeting halls.
Those establishments with hours of operation between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. shall
meet standards set forth in subsection (t) below.
(g) Parking garages.
(h) Carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, or fast-food restaurants, including ice cream
parlors, subject to the following requirements:
1. All such facilities shall be subject to the requirements for drive-through facilities
set forth in Section 9.02(i), following.
2. All abutting property shall be zoned for business or industrial use.
3. A masonry screen wall at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along any
portion of the site which abuts a C-1 District.
4. No drive-in or drive-through restaurants may be located in the areas defined as
the CBD or CBD-Fringe.
(i) Any use which has drive-through facilities, including banks, savings and loan
companies, other financial institutions, drive-through restaurants, car washes, dry
cleaners, and other such uses, unless such use is otherwise specifically prohibited
in this district. Drive-through facilities shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Ingress and egress drives shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width. No
more than one (1) such drive or curb opening shall be permitted for every
seventy-five (75) feet of frontage (or fraction thereof) along any street. The
nearest edge of any such drive shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet
from the nearest point of any property zoned or used for residential purposes.
2. Curb openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would create a
safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in relation to other
C-2 DISTRICT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 9-5
ingress and egress drives, its location in relation to the traffic generated by
other buildings or uses, its location near vehicular or pedestrian entrances or
crossings, or similar concerns.
3. Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the
intersection of any two (2) streets, measured from the nearest intersection
right-of-way line.
4. Devices for the transmission of voice shall be so directed or muffled as to
prevent said sounds from being audible beyond the boundaries of the site.
Devices for the broadcasting of voice or music over the entire site shall be
prohibited.
5. No use which has a drive-through facility may be located in the areas defined
as the CBD or CBD-Fringe (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002).
(j) Commercial outdoor recreation uses, such as amusement parks, golf driving
ranges, and similar uses, subject to the following requirements:
1. No such uses shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any residential
district.
2. All abutting or adjacent property shall be zoned for business or industrial use.
3. A masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along any
property line which abuts a C-1 District.
4. Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voice or music shall be
prohibited outside of any building.
5. All driveway approaches, road drainage, curbs and curb cuts shall meet the
requirements of the agencies which have jurisdiction thereof.
6. No commercial outdoor recreation use may be located in the areas defined as
the CBD or CBD-Fringe (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002).
(k) Retail sales of plant materials not grown on the site, sales of lawn furniture,
playground equipment, and home garden supplies, and similar open-air businesses,
subject to the following conditions:
1. All loading and parking areas for open-air businesses shall be confined to the
site and shall not be permitted to spill over onto adjacent roads.
2. Plant storage and display areas shall comply with the minimum setback
requirements for the district in which the nursery is located.
3. The storage of soil, fertilizer, and similar loosely packaged materials shall be
contained and covered to prevent it from blowing onto adjacent properties.
C-2 DISTRICT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 9-6
4. Open-air uses shall not be permitted to locate at the intersection of major
thoroughfares.
5. Any open-air use proposed in the areas defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe
must demonstrate that the proposed use will contribute to the intent of
establishing a viable pedestrian oriented central business district (Ord. 386,
03/21/2002)
(l) Offices, showrooms, or workshop of a plumber, electrician, building contractor,
upholsterer, caterer, exterminator, heating and cooling contractor, decorator, or
similar trade, subject to the following conditions:
1. All services performed on the premises, including fabrication, repair, cleaning,
or other processing of goods, shall be sold at retail on the premises where
produced.
2. All services performed on the premises, including fabrication, repair, cleaning,
or other processing of goods, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
3. The ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any abutting street shall
be used only for entrances, offices, sales, and display.
4. There shall be no outside storage of materials or goods of any kind.
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-7
(m) Bowling establishment, arcades, and other forms of indoor commercial recreation,
provided that no such use shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any
residential district.
(n) Facilities for the sales, servicing, and protection of small recreation, boats, along
with retail facilities that supply commodities related to boating, subject to the
following conditions:
1. Except for land area immediately adjacent to water, the portion of the lot used
for vehicular circulation and parking, boat sales, and boat storage shall be
provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface having an asphaltic
or concrete binder, which shall be graded and drained to dispose of storm water
in a manner that is approved by the City Engineer.
2. Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the
intersection of any two (2) streets, measured from the nearest intersection
right-of-way.
3. A landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along all sides of the site that are
zoned or used for residential purposes, in accordance with Section 15.23.
4. Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voice or music shall be
prohibited.
5. All driveway approaches, road drainage, curbs and curb cuts shall meet the
requirements of the agencies having jurisdiction thereof.
6. The storage of any resins, epoxies, fiberglass, etc., and any engine or hull
repair activities shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
7. Adequate room shall be provided for the maneuvering of boats and trailers
without interruption or blockage to traffic on any public road.
8. No boat hauling activities or mast cranes shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet from any side lot line.
9. Such use may not be located in the areas defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe.
(o) Outdoor cafes, eating areas, and open front restaurants
1. The outdoor seating area shall be accessory to a fully-operational restaurant
located on the same site and shall not be located in any required front, side, or
rear setback area.
2. The capacity of the outdoor seating area shall be considered along with the
indoor seating for the purposes of determining compliance with required parking.
3. An outdoor eating area shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet from the
edge of pavement of a public or private road that is constructed without curb and
gutter and no closer than ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement of a public or
private road that is constructed with curb and gutter.
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-8
4. The outdoor seating area shall be accessory to a fully-operational restaurant
located on the same site and shall not be located in any required front, side, or
rear setback area.
5. The capacity of the outdoor seating area shall be considered along with the
indoor seating for the purposes of determining compliance with required parking.
6. An outdoor eating area shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet from the
edge of pavement of a public or private road that is constructed without curb and
gutter and no closer than ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement of a public or
private road that is constructed with curb and gutter.
7. Such eating areas shall be separated from all vehicular parking and
maneuvering areas by means of an approved protective landscaped buffer, wall,
architectural feature, or some other similar means of separation.
5. The outdoor seating shall in no way impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent
or nearby properties.
6. Outdoor seating shall not face directly on a lot or parcel that is zoned or used
for residential purposes.
7. Outdoor seating shall be subject to applicable Oakland County Health
Department requirements.
8. The site plan shall specify the plans for storage of tables, chairs, and equipment
during the months when the outdoor seating is not in use.
9. The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and void of litter at all times.
10. All vending machines and arcades shall be located within a completely
enclosed building.
11. The hours of operation for outdoor eating areas shall be established on an
individual basis during the special land use review process.
12. The capacity of the outdoor seating area shall be provided by the applicant and
verified by the Building Official.
13. If the eating area is elevated above a parking area, pedestrian walkway, or
waterway objects shall not be placed on a ledge or railing which may dislodge
and endanger vehicles or pedestrians below.
14. Additional signs shall not be permitted, beyond what is permitted for the existing
restaurant.
15. Entertainment, music, speakers, or similar devices shall be prohibited in this
outdoor area within 100 feet of any residential use.
16. Outdoor storage of food and preparation of food and beverages shall be
prohibited in this outdoor area. The sale and consumption of alcohol are
governed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and local ordinance.
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-9
17. In addition to the standards listed above, outdoor sidewalk cafes shall also be
subject to the following standards:
a. To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of ten (10) feet of sidewalk
along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment must be
maintained free of tables and other encumbrances. If the sidewalk is not
wide enough to allow for a ten (10) foot wide clearance for circulation, the
café should not be permitted. Planters, posts with ropes, or other
removable enclosures should be encouraged and shall be used to define
the area occupied by the outdoor seating.
b. Pedestrian circulation and access to other building entrances should not be
impaired. Thus, a boundary (maximum encroachment width and length)
into the sidewalk should be established, with an accessible aisle being
maintained between this line and the curb, in accordance with the
provisions of the national Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and
Michigan barrier-free requirements.
c. The operators of the outdoor café should be responsible for a clean, litterfree,
and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area
of the tables and chairs. Additional outdoor trash receptacles should be
required. Written procedures for cleaning and trash containment and
removal responsibilities of the café must be noted on the site plan to the
satisfaction of the City.
d. Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and other elements of street
furniture should be compatible with the architectural character of the
adjacent buildings. If table umbrellas will be used, they should complement
building colors.
e. Liability issues for use of the public sidewalk should be addressed and
reviewed by the City Attorney. (Ord. 337, 12/18/1997) (Ord. 376,
10/18/2001)
(p) Mini-warehouses, subject to the following conditions:
1. The minimum lot size for mini-warehouses shall be three (3) acres.
2. Mini-warehouse establishments shall provide for storage only, which must be
contained within an enclosed building.
3. The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall be enclosed with a six (6) foot
high chain link fence or masonry wall, constructed in accordance with Sections
15.04 and 15.12.
4. The exterior of any mini-warehouse shall be of finished quality and design,
compatible with the design of structures on surrounding property.
5. All one-way driveways shall be designed with one ten (10) foot wide
loading/unloading lane and one fifteen (15) foot travel lane. All two-way
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-10
driveways shall be designed with one ten (10) foot wide loading/unloading lane
and two (2) twelve (12) foot travel lanes.
6. Such use may not be located in the areas defined as the CBD or CBD-Fringe.
(q) Enclosed theaters.
(r) Sexually Oriented Businesses.
a. Intent. It is the intent of this Ordinance to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses
within the City. The provisions of this Ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of this Ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate the location of, but not to
exclude, adult entertainment businesses. This is accomplished by preventing the
concentration of such uses in close proximity to each other and to minimize the
negative impacts of their operation by separating such uses from residential,
office/commercial and other areas of public congregation. This regulation is done
with the understanding that the city recognizes that there are some uses which,
because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly if several of them are concentrated under circumstances having a
deleterious effect upon adjacent residential, office and commercial areas. The city
recognizes that the regulation of such uses is necessary to ensure that adverse
effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of surrounding residential
neighborhoods, nonresidential areas or other places of public congregation.
b. Studies and Findings. Prior to adopting these regulations, the City reviewed
studies prepared on these uses, and reviewed ordinances and regulations prepared
by other municipalities, and reviewed applicable federal and state case law. Based
on evidence of the adverse effects of adult uses presented in reports and on
findings incorporated in court cases, such as Pap’s AM v City of Erie, 529 US 277
(2000), Deja Vu of Nashville v Metropolitan Government of Nashville & Davidson
County, 466 G3d 391 (6th Cir 2006), Sensations, Inc. v City of Grand Rapids, 2006
WL 2504388 (WD MI 2006), Van Buren Township v Garter Belt, 258 Mich App 594;
673 NW2d 111 (2003), Bronco’s Entertainment v Charter Township of Van Buren,
421 F3d 440 (6th Cir 2005), Thomas v Chicago Park District, 122 S Ct 775 (2002),
City of Renton v Playtime Theatres Inc, 475 US 41 (1986); and reports of secondary
effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, Phoenix, Arizona – 1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota – 1980; Houston,
Texas – 1997; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California – 1991; Los Angeles,
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-11
California – 1977; and An Insider’s View," by David Sherman, presented to the
Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan 12, 2000; the
City Council finds that sexually oriented businesses as a category of establishments
are correlated with harmful secondary effects, and that the foregoing reports are
reasonably believed to be relevant to potential problems the City of Keego Harbor is
seeking to prevent in the future. Due to the potential for harmful secondary effects,
the City Council further determines that it is in the best interests of the City that the
decision on any application for a special condition use approval for a sexually
oriented business be made by the City Council after review and recommendation by
the Planning Commission. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of
preventing a concentration of these uses in any one (1) area (i.e., not more than two
(2) such uses within a specified distance of each other which would create such
adverse effect(s).
c. Applicability. The provisions of this section regarding massage parlors shall
not apply to health care facilities licensed by the state under the Public Health
Code, MCL 333.2223 et seq., such as hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes,
medical clinics or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, dentist,
psychologist, clinical social worker, family counselor, physical therapist or other
members of the health occupations licensed or regulated by the state. In addition,
the provisions of this section regarding massage parlors shall not apply to
individuals permitted to practice with a temporary license under required supervision
as provided by the State Public Health Code, MCL 333.16101 et seq., as well as
clergy, and certified members of the American Massage and Therapy Association.
d. Specific Regulations and Requirements.
1. Separation Requirements.
a. No adult entertainment business shall be located within 500 feet of a
religious institution, public or private primary or secondary school, public park, or
noncommercial public assembly facility.
b. The site of an adult entertainment business shall not be adjacent to or within
300 feet of any residential area or residential district.
c. The site of an adult entertainment business shall not be within 500 feet of
any other adult entertainment business.
2. Window displays, signs, decorative or structural elements of buildings shall
not include or convey specific examples of the adult entertainment business activity;
are limited to a single sign; and all such displays shall be part of specific approvals
for all the uses or activities on the site. Any alteration to the above media shall be
approved by the Planning Commission.
3. The site layout, setback, structures and overall appearance and function of
the use shall be compatible with adjacent uses.
4. Miscellaneous requirements and conditions.
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-12
a. No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
b. Such uses shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local licensing
regulations.
c. Nothing contained in this Section shall relieve the operator(s) of a sexually
oriented business from complying with other requirements of this Ordinance as it
may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted Ordinances.
(s) Wireless communications support structures subject to the requirements specified
in Section 15.28.
(t) Restaurants serving alcohol.
(u) Bars/lounges. Those establishments with hours of operation between 11 p.m. and 6
a.m. shall meet standards set forth in subsection (u) below.
(v) Commercial establishments with hours of operation between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m.,
subject to the following:
1. Parking areas shall be configured as to prevent vehicular headlights from
shining into adjacent residentially zoned and used property, whenever possible.
If this is not possible, parking areas configured such that vehicular headlights
are directed toward public rights-of-way shall provide continuous screening at a
minimum height of three (3) feet. The Planning Commission shall have the
discretion to require an obscuring wall, fence, berm, landscape plantings, or a
combination thereof.
2. Ingress and egress drives and primary circulation lanes shall be located away
from residential areas to minimize vehicular traffic and noise which may
become a nuisance to adjacent residential areas, wherever practical.
3. All building entrances to be utilized by patrons shall be located on the side(s) of
the building which does not abut residentially zoned or used property, wherever
possible, to minimize the potential for patrons to congregate outside of building
entrances and create noise which may become a nuisance to adjacent
residential areas.
4. Screening not less than six (6) feet in height shall be provided along all property
lines abutting residentially zoned or used areas. The Planning Commission
shall have the discretion to require an obscuring wall, fence, berm, landscape
plantings, or a combination thereof.
5. All parking lot lighting shall be screened with shoebox-type metal halide light
fixtures which are directed downward at all times.
6. Neon, fluorescent, or similar decorative lighting located on the building, signs,
or in other areas on the site shall not be visible from adjacent residential
properties between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m.
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-13
7. Deliveries or garbage pick-up shall not be permitted between the hours of 11
p.m. and 6. a.m.
(w) State Licensed Residential Facilities, Adult Foster Care, Large Group Home with
13-20 clients.
(x) State Licensed Residential Facilities, Adult Foster Care, Congregate Facility with 20
or more clients.
(y) Buildings containing up to three stories may be permitted in the areas defined as
the CBD or CBD-Fringe provided the building height does not exceed forty (40)
feet exclusive of architectural design elements such as turrets or other
architecturally compatible roof elements (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002).
SECTION 9.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the principal permitted uses enumerated in
9.01 and 9.02 are permitted including home occupations accessory to nonconforming
residential uses subject to the provisions of section 15.29 Home Occupations. (Ord.
377, 11/15/2001)
SECTION 9.04 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
(a) Required Conditions
Except as otherwise noted for specific uses, buildings and uses in the General
Business District shall comply with the following required conditions:
1. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing
directly with customers. All goods produced and services performed on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises produced.
2. All business, servicing, or processing, except off-street parking and loading,
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
3. There shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or equipment.
4. All uses permitted subject to special conditions shall be required to submit a
Traffic Impact Analysis which shall, at minimum, include: trip generation
estimates, the volume of existing traffic on roads adjacent to the site, the peak
hour volume of traffic expected to be generated by the proposed development,
estimates of the directional distribution of trips generated by the development,
projected assignment of vehicle trip volumes to the roadway network, analysis
of anticipated turning movements and required left or right turn controls, and
recommendations to mitigate the impact of the development on the
transportation system. If deemed necessary by the City Planner following
review of the site plan, a Traffic Impact Analysis may also be required in
conjunction with development of a Principal Permitted Use.
5. The site and building layout for all business establishments shall be designed to
accommodate safe pedestrian access for passersby and for patrons of the
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-14
business. Accordingly, sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages, as
specified in Section 16.08(f).
(b) Site Plan Review
Site plan review shall be required for all uses in the General Business District in
accordance with Section 16.08.
(c) Area, Height, Bulk, and Placement Requirements
Buildings and uses in the General Business District are subject to the area, height,
bulk, and placement requirements in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations.
(d) General Development Standards
Buildings and uses in the General Business District shall be subject to all applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this Ordinance, including off-street parking
and loading requirements in Article XIII, and Landscaping and Screening
requirements in Section 15.23.
SECTION 9.04 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Development Standards
Lot Minimums
Area (sq/ft) ----
Width (feet) ----
Maximum Building
Stories 2
Height (feet) 30
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings (%) ----
Minimum Setback (Measured from Lot Line in feet)1
Front Open Space(2) 25(3)(4)
Least One 10(5)(4)
Total of Two 20
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-15
Rear Open Space 25
Minimum Useable Floor Area
Per Unit (sq/ft) ----
Notes to Development Standards
(1) Properties abutting water shall also comply with Section 15.15, Waterfront Land Setbacks.
(2) Front yard setbacks are measured from the edge of the existing and/or planned right-of-way, said
planned right-of-way as shown on the officially adopted Master Plan. Where a parcel or lot is at
an intersection, the setback shall be measured from the maximum requirement for the district
considering each side as a front yard area.
(3) In order to achieve quality site design, to maintain the continuity of the streetscape in the
downtown area of Keego Harbor, to provide adequate views of commercial uses, and to achieve
functional pedestrian and vehicular circulation, the front yard setback in the C-2 district along
Orchard Lake Road shall be as follows:
Location
Required
Setback
CBD and CBD Fringe 55 feet from Cass Lake or Orchard Lake Roads
40 feet from any intersecting side street
a. Front yard setbacks in the CBD and CBD-Fringe areas shall be measured from the
centerline of the adjacent right-of-ways.
b. The front yard setback may be increased in the CBD-Fringe areas subject to Section
16.09, Procedures and Standards for Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special
Conditions and the following specific criteria;
i. A sidewalk no less than 10 feet in width must be maintained along all sides of the
building facing a road or parking area.
ii. The sidewalk(s) adjacent to the building must be linked to the sidewalk(s) on
adjacent properties to maintain the continuity of the pedestrian environment.
iii. Decorative and coordinated pedestrian amenities including benches, planters,
waste receptacles, and bicycle racks should be provided to encourage
pedestrian activities.
iv. There may be no more than one, single loaded, aisle of perpendicular parking
and no more than one, double loaded aisle of angled or parallel parking located
in the front yard.
C-2 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 9-16
v. Any parking located in front yard must be separated from the adjacent road with
a 10-foot wide median. The median shall be planted with live ground cover and
contain either a continuous evergreen hedge a minimum of 30 inches in height at
the time of planting or a decorative wall consisting of brick columns and wroughtiron
type fencing 36 inches in height.
vi. Deciduous trees a minimum of 2.5 inches in caliper must be planted within the
median a minimum of every 40 feet of the property frontage.
vii. Decorative street lighting consistent with the streetscape elements along the
adjacent roads must also be provided within the median (Ord. 386, 03/21/2002).
(4) On corner lots in the C-2 District, the side yard facing the street shall conform with the minimum
side setback requirements as specified, and shall not be required to conform with front yard
setback requirements.
(5) No side yards are required along interior lot lines, except as required by the Building Code,
provided that walls so located shall be solid and shall not contain any windows, doors, or any
other openings. On exterior lot lines the minimum setbacks shall be maintained.
Type SF RES
(NR)
RES
(R-T)
MFR
(R-M)
(R-ME)
MOB HOME
(R-MH) COM
Adult Foster Care, Family Home
(6 or less adults) P P P P P
Adult Foster Care, Small Group Home
(7-12 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU P
Adult Foster Care, Large Group Home
(13-20 adults) SLU SLU SLU SLU SLU
Adult Foster Care, Congregate Facility
(20 or more adults) SLU
Day Care, Family Home
(6 or less children) P P P P
Day Care, Group Home
(7-12 children) SLU SLU SLU SLU
Day Care Center P
Key: P = Permitted; SLU = Special Land Use
O-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 10-1
ARTICLE X
O-1 OFFICE BUILDING DISTRICTS
SECTION 10.00 - INTENT
The 0-1 Office Building Districts are designed to accommodate office uses, offices
sales, and basic personal services.
SECTION 10.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to any limitations described herein:
(a) Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive; administrative;
professionals; accounting; writing; clerical; stenographic; drafting; and sales; subject
to the limitations contained below in Section 10.03 Required Conditions.
(b) Medical office, including outpatient clinics.
(c) Hospitals, subject to the yard and locational requirements of Article XXIV "Schedule
of Regulations" for the RM Multiple Family District and the Special Conditions
outlined in Section 5.02(f).
(d) Banks, savings and loan associations, and similar financial institutions, provided
that accessory drive-through facilities shall be subject to Conditional Use Approval
(See Section 10.02).
(e) Publicly owned buildings, exchanges and public utility offices, but not including
storage yards, transformer stations, substations, or gas regulator stations.
(f) Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, subject to the following condition: No building
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line when said property line abuts or is
adjacent to land zoned for residential purposes.
(g) Religious Institutions, subject to the following:
1. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in this district may be
permitted provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum
required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
2. At least one boundary of the lot upon which the church is to be constructed shall
border a street designated as a collector thoroughfare having an existing and/or
planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet in width.
O-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 10-2
(g) Mortuary establishments, including required caretakers apartment, subject to the
following conditions:
1. All official vehicles of mortuary or funeral homes plus one space for each
caretaker family on the premises shall be provided for as off-street parking
spaces. The off-street parking herein required shall be in excess of the
requirements of Section 13.01(c) 3. Schedule of Off-Street Parking
Requirements.
2. Ingress and egress shall be so provided as not to conflict with the traffic on
adjacent residential streets.
3. The funeral procession shall be formed so as to line up on site or within
off-street parking areas servicing the mortuary or funeral home. Adequate land
and site plan layout shall therefore be accomplished so as not to require
residential street space for the forming of the funeral procession.
4. All activity extending beyond the walls of the mortuary or funeral home shall be
screened from visible view of adjacent residential districts.
(h) Signs, as provided in Article XIV - Signs.
(i) Attached wireless communications facilities, collocation of an attached wireless
communications facility, and attached wireless communications facilities consisting
of a utility pole, all subject to the standards in Section 15.28.
(j) Other uses similar to the above uses.
SECTION 10.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to permission of the Council following a review
and recommendation by the City Planning Commission.
(a) An accessory building and customarily related to a use authorized by this section
such as a pharmacy or apothecary shop; stores limited to corrective devices,
garments or bandages, optical company, or restaurant may be permitted; provided,
it is within the building to which it is accessory and does not have a direct outside
entrance for customers.
(b) Transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations (without storage
yards) when operation requirements necessitate the location within the district in
order to serve the immediate vicinity.
(c) Commercial Art Gallery including customary accessory uses such as picture
framing, provided such accessory uses are only provided for or utilized in
conjunction with the art works sold in the gallery. Interior display of the art works
may only be permitted by the Planning Commission, notwithstanding conditions set
forth in Section 10.03(a). Conditions shall be imposed to make the gallery
compatible with the principal uses permitted in this District and the gallery shall not
be approved without specific finding that it will be compatible with the principal uses
permitted in this district.
O-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 10-3
(d) Any office use which has drive-through facilities, including banks, savings and loan
companies, other financial institutions. Drive-through facilities shall comply with the
following requirements:
1. Ingress and egress drives shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width. No
more than one (1) such drive or curb opening shall be permitted for every
seventy-five (75) feet of frontage (or fraction thereof) along any street. The
nearest edge of any such drive shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet
from the nearest point of any property zoned or used for residential purposes.
2. Curb openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would create a
safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in relation to other
ingress and egress drives, its location in relation to the traffic generated by
other buildings or uses, its location near vehicular or pedestrian entrances or
crossings, or similar concerns.
3. Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the
intersection of any two (2) streets, measured from the nearest intersection
right-of-way line.
4. Devices for the transmission of voice shall be so directed or muffled as to
prevent said sounds from being audible beyond the boundaries of the site.
Devices for the broadcasting of voice or music over the entire site shall be
prohibited.
(e) Wireless communications support structures on public or quasi-public/institutional
sites subject to the requirements specified in Section 15.28.
SECTION 10.03 - REQUIRED CONDITIONS
(a) No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building, and the total area
devoted to display, including both the objects displayed and the floor space set
aside for persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
percent of the usable floor area of either the first or second story, or in the
basement.
(b) The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
(c) Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incidental
to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited.
(d) Where the 0-1 District and uses permitted therein abuts a residential district, a ten
(10) foot wide greenbelt shall be provided where the required screen wall is not
provided.
SECTION 10.04 - REQUIRED GREENWAY
Where the 0-1 District directly abuts a single family district, the 0-1 uses constructed
therein shall provide a ten (10) foot wide greenway in those areas where the screen wall
is not required. The greenway shall be constructed in accordance with Section 15.23 of
this Ordinance.
O-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 10-4
SECTION 10.05 – ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal permitted uses
enumerated in 10.01 and 10.02 are permitted including home occupations accessory to
nonconforming residential uses subject to the provisions of section 15.29 Home
Occupations. (Ord. 377, 11/15/2001)
SECTION 10.06 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Development Standards
Lot Minimums
Area (sq/ft) ----
Width (feet) ----
Maximum Building
Stories 2
Height (feet) 30
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings (%) ----
Minimum Setback (Measured from Lot Line in feet)1
Front Open Space(2) 25
Least One 20(3)
Total of Two 40
Rear Open Space 25
Minimum Useable Floor Area
Per Unit (sq/ft) ----
Notes to Development Standards
O-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 10-5
(1) Properties abutting water shall also comply with Section 15.15, Waterfront Land Setbacks.
(2) Front yard setbacks are measured from the edge of the existing and/or planned right-of-way, said
planned right-of-way as shown on the officially adopted Master Plan. Where a parcel or lot is at
an intersection, the setback shall be measured from the maximum requirement for the district
considering each side as a front yard area.
(3) No side yards are required along interior lot lines, except as required by the Building Code,
provided that walls so located shall be solid and shall not contain any windows, doors, or any
other openings. On exterior lot lines the minimum setbacks shall be maintained.
M-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 11-1
ARTICLE XI
M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 11.00 - INTENT
The M-1 Light Industrial District is intended to accommodate certain industrial activities
whose external effects are minimal and in no way detrimental to surrounding districts
plus certain wholesale, warehousing and intensive service activities of a nature such as
not to justify their inclusion in any commercial use district, but whose external effects
also are non-detrimental. All uses in the district are intended to be compatible with one
another. Uses in this district shall emit a minimum of smoke, dust, dirt, odor or gases,
subject to the pollution standards of the State of Michigan, County of Oakland, and City
of Keego Harbor. All uses located within this district shall be so designed and operated
as to produce no sound or vibration discernible at the property lines in excess of the
normal intensity of street or traffic noises or vibration noticeable at such points, nor any
production of heat or glare noticeable at such points. Manufacturing uses in the district
normally involve the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly or
treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material.
SECTION 11.01 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
The following uses shall be permitted, each of which shall meet the performance
standards described in Section 11.00, and subject to any limitations described herein.
All manufacturing shall be enclosed within a building.
(a) The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of the
following products:
1. Baked goods, candy and other food products, but excluding slaughterhouses or
abattoirs.
2. Cosmetics, pharmaceutical, biological and chemical products and toiletries.
3. Hardware and cutlery.
4. Tools, dies, machine products, metalworking, machinery and equipment,
general industrial and services machinery and equipment.
(b) The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise
from the following previously prepared material: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth,
cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or
semi-precious metals or stones, sheet metal (excluding large Stampings such as
automobile fenders or bodies), shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding
saw and planning mills), and yarns.
M-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 11-2
(c) The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using
only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
(d) Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, sporting and athletic goods,
and metal or rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products.
(e) Industrial, scientific and business research, development and testing laboratories.
(f) The manufacture or assembly of electrical and electronic machinery, components
and supplies, radios, phonographs and television sets, electrical appliances, office,
computing and accounting machines.
(g) The manufacture or assembly of professional and scientific instruments,
photographic and optical goods.
(h) Manufacture and repair electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including
heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like.
(i) Printing, publishing, or allied industries.
(j) Warehouse and wholesale establishments and truck terminal facilities, only to the
extent necessary to serve such use.
(k) Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that such plants shall not deal
directly with consumer at retail.
(l) All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other
retailed uses.
(m) Water supply and sewage disposal plants, water and gas tank holders and railroad
transfer and storage tracks when accessory to a principal permitted use.
(n) Building and construction material wholesalers and contractors.
(o) Trade or industrial schools.
(p) Signs, as provided in Article XIV - Signs.
(q) Attached wireless communications facilities, collocation of an attached wireless
communications facility, and attached wireless communications facilities consisting
of a utility pole, all subject to the standards in Section 15.28.
(r) Other light manufacturing plants and uses similar to the above having performance
characteristics which are consistent with those described in Section 11.00.
SECTION 11.02 - PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions hereinafter
imposed for each use and subject further to permission of the Council following review
and recommendation by the City Planning Commission.
(a) Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, lumber, and construction
contractors' equipment, subject to the following:
M-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 11-3
Such site shall (except for frontage of a public street) abut only land within an M-1
District, and all such storage shall be enclosed within a building or, on those sides
abutting any public thoroughfare, shall be surrounded by an obscuring wall or fence
of at least six (6) feet in height.
(b) Automobile repair garages, painting and varnishing shops, lumber and planning
mills, subject to the following:
1. The site for any such use shall (except for frontage on a public street) abut only
land within an M-1 District.
2. Devices and controls adequate to meet the standards enumerated in Section
11.00 relative to sound, vibration, smoke, odor or gases shall be installed.
3. Adequate means of sanitary disposal of any waste material shall be provided.
(c) Wireless communications support structures subject to the requirements specified
in Section 15.28.
SECTION 11.03 - ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal permitted uses
enumerated in 11.01 and 11.02 are permitted including home occupations accessory to
nonconforming residential uses subject to the provisions of section 15.29 Home
Occupations. (Ord. 377, 11/15/2001)
SECTION 11.04 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Area, height, bulk and placement requirements, unless otherwise specified, are as
provided in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations
SECTION 11.05 - REQUIRED GREENWAY
Where the M-1 District directly abuts a single or multi-family district, the M-1 uses
constructed therein shall provide a ten (10) foot wide greenway in those areas where
the screen wall is not required. The greenway shall be constructed in accordance with
Section 15.23 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 11.04 - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
Development Standards
Lot Minimums
Area (sq/ft) ----
Width (feet) ----
Maximum Building
M-1 DISTRICT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 11-4
Stories 1
Height (feet) 30
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings (%) ----
Minimum Setback (Measured from Lot Line in feet)1
Front Open Space(2) 25
Least One 20
Total of Two 40
Rear Open Space 25
Minimum Useable Floor Area
Per Unit (sq/ft) ----
Notes to Development Standards
(1) Properties abutting water shall also comply with Section 15.15, Waterfront Land Setbacks.
(2) Front yard setbacks are measured from the edge of the existing and/or planned right-of-way, said
planned right-of-way as shown on the officially adopted Master Plan. Where a parcel or lot is at
an intersection, the setback shall be measured from the maximum requirement for the district
considering each side as a front yard area.
NONCONFORMITY
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 12-1
ARTICLE XII
NONCONFORMITY:
NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND, NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES, AND NONCONFORMING USES OF
STRUCTURES AND PREMISES
SECTION 12.00 - INTENT
It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to
continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival.
It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this Ordinance and
subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were
lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended which would be prohibited,
regulated, or restricted under the term of this Ordinance or future amendments.
Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not
be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as ground for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a
structure, a nonconforming use of land or a non-conforming use of a structure and land
shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a
building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by
the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried
on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials
in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner.
SECTION 12.01 - NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful use of
land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or
amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
(a) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance.
NONCONFORMITY
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 12-2
(b) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion
of the lot occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance.
(c) If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than
180 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations
specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
SECTION 12.02 - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure
or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(a) No such structures may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity.
(b) Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 100
percent of its current assessed value exclusive of the foundations, at the time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
(c) Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is
moved.
(d) Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall however prohibit a homeowner from
improving his homestead by an enlargement or alteration of the homestead
structure so long as the enlargement or alteration thereto is in keeping as near as
reasonably can be with the provisions contained in this Ordinance and provided
such improvement receives the prior approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals;
provided further that any homestead destroyed by any means, except voluntary
destruction, to an extent of more than 100 percent of its current assessed value
exclusive of foundations at the time of destruction, may be reconstructed by a
homeowner as his homestead provided such reconstruction meets the provisions of
this Ordinance as near as reasonably can be and such reconstruction receives the
prior approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Under this paragraph homeowner
may only have one homestead in the City of Keego Harbor and such homestead
must be his sole residence in the city and he must be residing in or have resided
therein at time application to enlarge, alter or reconstruct is applied for.
(e) Repairs or maintenance deemed necessary by the Building Official to keep a
nonconforming fence, shed and deck structurally safe and sound are permitted.
However, if a nonconforming fence, shed and deck becomes physically unsafe
and/or unlawful due to lack of maintenance and repairs and is therefore declared as
such by the Building Official, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt
except in full conformity with the regulations in the district in which it is located.
Additional repairs, improvements, or modernization of non-conforming fences,
NONCONFORMITY
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 12-3
sheds and decks beyond what is required to maintain the safety and soundness of
these structures, shall be permitted provided such repairs or improvements do not
exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the market value (as determined by the Building
Official) of a fence, shed and deck during any period of twelve consecutive months.
Any such repairs, improvements, and modernization shall not result in enlargement
of the cubic content of a nonconforming fence, shed and deck.
SECTION 12.03 - NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES
AND LAND
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that would not be allowed in
the district under the terms of this Ordinance such use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(a) No existing structure devoted in whole or in part to a use not permitted by this
Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located;
(b) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which
were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building;
(c) If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or
structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided
that the Zoning Board of Appeals, by making findings in the specific case, shall find
that the proposed use is more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the purpose and
intent of this ordinance.
(d) Any structure, or structure and land in combination in or on which a nonconforming
use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for
the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may
thereafter be resumed.
(e) When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for 6 consecutive months or for 12
months during any three-year period, or otherwise sooner abandoned, the structure,
or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures
occupied by seasonal uses shall be exempted from this provision.
(f) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
NONCONFORMITY
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 12-4
(g) Nothing contained in this ordinance shall, however, prohibit a homeowner from
improving his homestead by an enlargement or alteration of the homestead
structure so long as the enlargement or alteration therein is in keeping as near as
reasonably can be with the provisions contained in this ordinance and provided
such improvement receives the prior approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals;
Provided further that any homestead destroyed by any means, except voluntary
destruction, to an extent of more than 100 percent of its current assessed value
exclusive of foundations at the time of destruction may be reconstructed by a
homeowner as his homestead provided such reconstruction meets the provisions of
this ordinance as near as reasonably can be and such reconstruction receives the
prior approval of the zoning board of appeals. Under this paragraph a homeowner
may only have one homestead in the City of Keego Harbor and such homestead
must be his sole residence in the city and he must be residing in or have resided
therein at time application to enlarge alter or reconstruct is applied for.
SECTION 12.04 - REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be
done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding
fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the building, providing that the cubic content
of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall
not be increased. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such
official.
SECTION 12.05 - USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS
NOT NONCONFORMING USES
Any use which is listed as a Principal Use Permitted Subject to Special Conditions in
this Ordinance shall be deemed a conforming use.
SECTION 12.06 - CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing
nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises provided there is no change in the
nature or character of such nonconforming uses.
SECTION 12.07 - CITY REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING
USES AND/OR STRUCTURES
The City may acquire by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private property for the
removal of nonconforming uses and/or structures provided that said property shall not
be used for public housing. Pursuant thereto, the Council may, in its discretion, provide
that the cost and expense of acquiring such property be paid from General Funds, or
the cost and expense or any portion thereof be assessed to a special district.
NONCONFORMITY
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 12-5
SECTION 12.08 - NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
When the owner of a nonconforming lot of record does not own or cannot reasonably
acquire sufficient abutting land to enable him to conform to the requirements of this
Ordinance relating to minimum lot area, minimum lot width, or both, such lots of record
may be used by such owner as building site provided that all of the requirements of this
Ordinance are met, and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any
lot except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance for required lot area for
each dwelling unit.
If two (2) or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous
frontage in single ownership are recorded at the time of passage or amendment of this
Ordinance, and if all or part of such lots do not meet the requirements of the
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS AND FOOTNOTES for lot width and area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be a single undivided lot for building permit purposes of
this Ordinance, and no portion of said lot shall be used or sold in any manner which
diminishes compliance with lot width, yard, and area requirements established by this
Ordinance, nor shall any division of any lot be made which creates a lot width, yard, or
area less than the requirements stated in the Ordinance. These same provisions shall
apply to platted and unplatted lots or parcels.
When two or more abutting or contiguous lots (one or more of which is/are nonconforming
in width or area) are of record and in single ownership as of the effective
date of this Ordinance and each is occupied by a principal structure (as of the effective
date of this Ordinance) the two or more abutting lots shall be deemed as nonconforming
lots of record under this ordinance.
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-1
ARTICLE XIII
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 13.00 - PARKING REQUIREMENTS
There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main
building or structure, or the establishment of any use, automobile off-street parking
space with adequate access to all spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses
(including the principal use and all auxiliary uses) prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed in this Ordinance.
(a) Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be either on the same lot or
within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from
the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot,
without crossing any major thoroughfare. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or
parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant when an application for a
building permit or a certificate of occupancy is filed.
(b) Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay,
driveway, garage, parking lot, or combination thereof. Such spaces shall be located
on the premises they are intended to serve and in appropriate cases also shall be
subject to the provisions of Section 15.13, Accessory Buildings, of this Ordinance.
Single and two-family residential off-street parking is exempt from regulations of this
Article governing a parking lot.
Front lawn areas, other than designated improved parking areas (even if
nonconforming), shall not be utilized for off-street parking, except as permitted for
recreational vehicles in accordance with Section 4.04, Recreational Vehicle Parking
in Residential Areas, of this Ordinance. Parking on the front lawn areas may be
permitted for special events, not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours, subject to the
approval of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 344, 6/18/1998)
It shall be unlawful to park or store any motor vehicle on vacant private property
without expressed written consent of the owner or occupant of said private property.
Where parking is allowed on land other than on the same lot as the principal
building being served, no repair or service of any kind or sale or display shall be
conducted on land where the parking is located.
A commercial vehicle exceeding one ton load capacity and not primarily intended
for private passenger use may not be parked or stored outdoors in a residentially
zoned or used area. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply to commercial
vehicles temporarily parked (less than eight (8) hours) in a residential area in
conjunction with maintenance or service to a residential property.
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-2
(c) Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never be changed to
any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided in a location which
meets all requirements of this Ordinance.
(d) Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Ordinance in connection with
the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less
than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use.
(e) Where the owners of two buildings, or uses, whose operating hours do not overlap
desire to utilize common off-street parking facilities, application shall be made to the
Planning Commission. The Board may grant approval of such dual function
off-street parking facilities, subject to a finding that the following conditions have
been met:
1. The office hours of the two buildings, or uses, in no way overlap, except for
custodial personnel.
2. The common parking lot meets the off-street parking requirements of the larger
building or use plus fifteen (15) percent.
3. The common parking lot meets all location requirements of this Ordinance with
respect to each building or use.
(f) Required off-street parking space shall be for the use of occupants, employees,
visitors, customers, clients and patrons. Under no circumstances shall it be rented,
used for other than parking purposes, or allowed to become unusable (except for
temporary repairs). The storage of vehicles or merchandise, sale of motor vehicles,
or the repair of vehicles on any off-street parking space is prohibited.
(g) For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking
facilities shall be interpreted by the Building Inspector from requirements for uses
similar in type.
(h) For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required in commercial
and industrial uses, the definition of Floor Area, Usable, in ARTICLE II,
DEFINITIONS, shall govern.
(i) When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces
result in the requirement of fractional space, any fraction up to and fractions over
one-half require one parking space.
(j) Flexibility in Application. The City recognizes that, due to the specific requirements
of any given development, inflexible application of the parking standards set forth in
Section 13.01 may result in development with inadequate parking or parking far in
excess of that which is needed. The former situation may lead to traffic congestion
or unauthorized parking on adjacent streets or neighboring sites. The latter
situation may result in excessive paving and storm water runoff and a waste of
space, which could be left as open space.
The Planning Commission may permit deviations from the requirements of Section
13.01 and may require more or allow less parking whenever it finds that such
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-3
deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to
accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question.
The Planning Commission shall attach conditions to the approval of a deviation from
the requirement of Section 13.01 that bind such approval to the specific use in
question. Where a deviation results in a reduction of parking, the Planning
Commission may further impose conditions which ensure that adequate reserve
area is set aside for future parking, as needed.
(k) Any new structure and/or use shall provide the minimum number of off-street parking
spaces based upon the following schedule:
SECTION 13.01 — SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
REQUIREMENTS:
(a) Residential
Use Number of Minimum Parking Spaces
per Unit of Measure
1. Residential one family, two family,
and townhouse residential
(Ord. 340, 4/16/1998)
Two (2) for each dwelling unit.
2. Residential, multiple family Two (2) for each dwelling unit containing
two bedrooms or less; two and one half
(2 1/2) for each unit containing in excess
of two bedrooms.
3. Housing for the elderly One for every two (2) dwelling units;
however should units revert to general
occupancy, then two spaces per unit
shall be provided.
(b) Institutional
Use
Number of Minimum Parking Spaces
per Unit of Measure
1. Churches or temples One (1) for each three (3) seats or six (6)
feet of bench or pew space in the main
unit of worship.
2. Hospitals One and one-half (1½) for (1) bed plus one
(1) for each employee on peak
employment shift.
3. Homes for the aged and
convalescent homes
One (1) for each two (2) convalescent
homes beds plus one (1) for each
employee on peak employment shift
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-4
4. Elementary and junior high
schools
One (1) for each one (1) teacher,
employee and administrator plus one for
each classroom, plus required for
auditorium.
5. Fraternity or sorority One (1) for each five (5) permitted active
members one (1) for each bed, whichever
is greater.
6. Senior high school and/or college One (1) for each one (1) teacher,
employee, or administrator, and one (1) for
each classroom, and one (1) for each ten
students.
7. Private clubs or lodge halls One (1) for each three (3) persons allowed
within the maximum occupancy load as
established by local, county, state, fire,
building or health codes.
8. Stadium sports arena or similar
place of outdoor assembly
One (1) for each three (3) place of outdoor
assembly seats or six (6) feet of benches.
9. Theaters and auditoriums One (1) for each three (3) seats plus one
for each two (2) employees.
10. Nursery or child care center One (1) for each three hundred fifty (350)
square feet of usable floor space.
(c) Commercial
Use
Number of Minimum Parking Spaces
per Unit of Measure
1. Auto service stations Two (2) for each lubrication stall, rack, or
pit; and one (1) for each gasoline pump.
2. Laundromats and coin-operated
dry cleaners
One (1) for each two (2) dry cleaners
machines.
3. Mortuary establishments One (1) for each fifty (50) square feet of
assembly room, parlors and slumber
rooms floor space.
4. Motel or hotel One and one-half (1½) spaces for each
rental unit, plus one (1) additional space
for each employee.
5. Motor vehicle sales and service
establishments
One (1) for each two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area of sales room, one (1) for
each auto service stall in the service room
plus one (1) for each employee.
6. Retail stores except an otherwise
specified herein.
One (1) for each one hundred and fifty
(150) square feet of usable floor space.
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-5
7. Swimming pools One (1) for each thirty (30) square feet of
pool area plus one (1) for each employee.
8. Tanning salons One (1) for each one-hundred (100)
square feet of useable floor area.
9. Auto wash One (1) for each one (1) employee also
reservoir parking spaces equal in number
to five (5) times the minimum capacity of
the auto wash for autos awaiting entrance
to the auto wash shall be provided.
Maximum capacity of the auto wash for the
purpose of determining the required
reservoir parking shall mean the greatest
number possible of automobiles
undergoing some phase of washing at the
time which shall be determined by dividing
the length of feet of each wash line by
twenty (20) feet.
10. Beauty and barber shop Three (3) spaces for each of the first two
(2) beauty and barber chairs, and one and
one half (1½) spaces for each additional
chair.
11. Bowling establishments Five (5) for each one (1) bowling lane.
12. Dance halls, pool or billiard
parlors, roller or ice skating rinks,
exhibition halls and established
assembly halls without fixed
seats
One (1) for each three (3) allowed within
the maximum occupancy load as by local
county or state, fire, health or building
codes one (1) for each one hundred (100)
square feet of usable floor area whichever
is greater.
13. Restaurants:
a. Dining room, including
banquet areas
One (1) per fifty (50) square feet of
banquet areas usable floor area.
b. Lounge One (1) per fifty (50) square feet of usable
floor area. That portion of a larger dining
facility utilized for lounge shall be
computed at this rate.
c. Carry out restaurant with less
than six (6) tables and/or
booths
One (1) per thirty (30) square feet of
usable floor area.
d. Carry out restaurant One (1) per eighty (80) square feet of
usable floor area or ten (10) spaces,
whichever is greater.
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-6
e. Drive-in restaurant One (1) per thirty (30) square feet of
usable floor area plus ten (10) stacking
spaces for each drive-in or drive-through
transaction station.
14. Furniture and appliance, household
equipment, repair shops,
showroom of a plumber, decorator,
electrician or similar trade,
shoe repair and other similar
services.
One (1) for each eight hundred (800)
square feet of usable floor area (for the
floor area used in processing, one (1)
additional space shall be provided for each
two (2) persons employed therein).
15. Athletic clubs, health studios,
court recreation and similar uses
One (1) space for each five hundred fifty
(550) square feet of usable floor area plus
such spaces as are required for
restaurants, bars, assembly rooms and
affiliated facilities.
16. Planned commercial or retail
shopping centers having three (3)
or more establishments
One (1) for each one hundred and fifty
(150) square feet of usable floor area.
17. Public or private marinas or boat
clubs
One (1) for each one and one half (1½)
boat slips, and one (1) for each two (2)
employees, plus such spaces as are
required for restaurants, bars, retail, and
affiliated facilities.
(d) Offices
Use
Number of Minimum Parking Spaces
per Unit of Measure
1. Banks One (1) for each one hundred (100)
square feet of usable floor area and six (6)
stacking spaces for each drive-in
transaction station.
2. Business offices or professional
offices, except as indicated in the
following item (3)
One (1) for each two hundred (200) square
feet of usable floor area.
3. Professional offices of doctors,
dentists or similar professionals
One (1) for each one hundred (100)
square feet of usable floor area in waiting
rooms, plus one for each examining room
or dental chair, plus one for each doctor,
dentist, practitioner and employee.
(e) Industrial
Use
Number of Minimum Parking Spaces
per Unit of Measure
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-7
1. Industrial or research establishments
Five, plus one (1) space per site for every
two (2) employees in the largest working
shift, or one (1) space for every five
hundred and fifty (550) square feet of
usable floor space, or whichever is
greater. Space on site shall also be
provided for all construction workers
during periods of plant construction.
2. Wholesale or warehouse establishments
One (1) for every one (1) employee in the
largest working shift, or one (1) for every
seventeen hundred (1,700) square feet of
usable floor space, whichever is greater.
SECTION 13.02 - OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT,
STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Wherever the off-street parking requirements in Section 13.01 above require the
provision of an off-street parking facility, off-street parking lots shall be laid out,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations.
(a) No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefore is issued by
the Building Inspector. Application for a permit shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector in such form and number as he may determine.
(b) Plans for the layout of off-street parking lots shall show a parking space width of
nine (9) feet, and a total dimension acquiring two tiers of parking spaces plus a
maneuvering lane of at least one of the following for the several patterns described:
1. A 90 Degree Pattern - Total dimension of sixty (60) feet, with two tiers of
parking space plus one maneuvering lane of at least twenty (20) feet in width.
Such maneuvering lane shall permit two-way traffic.
2. A 60 Degree Pattern (without overlap) - Total dimension of fifty- eight (58) feet,
with two tiers of parking space plus one maneuvering lane of at least fifteen (15)
feet in width. Such maneuvering lane shall permit one-way traffic.
3. A 45 Degree Pattern (without overlap) - Total dimension of fifty- two (52) feet,
with two tiers of parking space plus one maneuvering lane of at least twelve
(12) feet in width. Such maneuvering lane shall permit one-way traffic.
4. A 0 Degree Pattern (parallel parking) - Total dimension of thirty-eight (38) feet,
with two tiers of parking space, plus one maneuvering lane of at least twenty
(20) feet in width. Such maneuvering lane shall permit two-way traffic. Each
stall shall be twenty-six (26) feet in length and eight (8) feet in width.
All spaces shall be provided with direct access by means of maneuvering lanes.
Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. General engineering
specifications for off-street parking lots shall be those of the Oakland County
Road Commission.
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-8
(c) Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and
defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot
lying in an area zoned for other than one-family residential use shall not under any
circumstances be across land zoned for one-family residential use.
(d) Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area
zoned for other than one-family residential use shall be at least twenty (20) feet
distant from any adjacent property located in any one-family residential district.
(e) Off-street parking areas for all uses except one-family and two-family dwelling
units, shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring wall separating it from
abutting residential development (except as otherwise provided in Section 15.04(a),
not less than six (6) feet in height measured from the surface of the parking area.
When a front yard setback is required, all land between said wall and the front
property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and
shall be adequately landscaped with shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental
trees.
(f) The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required
under this section, shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in
accordance with specifications of the Oakland County Road Commission. The
parking area shall be surfaced prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
building or buildings which it serves, or a bond or deposit in an amount of the
estimated cost of the work given to the City. Off-street parking areas shall be
drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in
such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward
buildings.
(g) All parking areas, driveways, and walkways shall be sufficiently illuminated to
ensure the security of property and safety of persons using such parking or
common areas. Lighting shall be placed and shielded so as to direct the light onto
the site and away from adjoining properties. Lighting shall be shielded so that it
does not cause glare for motorists.
(h) Off-street parking reserved for the disabled shall be provided in accordance with the
following table and identified by signs bearing the international symbol for the
disabled as being reserved for physically disabled persons. A maximum of two (2)
spaces may be designated by a single sign when the sign displays arrows
specifically delineating each space. Signs shall be installed approximately seven (7)
feet above grade. Each reserved parking space shall not be less than twelve (12)
feet in width. Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk
surface, an inclined approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one (1)
foot in twelve (12) feet and a width of not less than four (4) feet shall be provided for
wheelchair access. Parking spaces for the physically disabled shall be located as
close as possible to walkways and entrances. Signs shall be provided when
necessary indicating the direction of travel to an accessible entrance.
Total Parking in Lot Required Number of Spaces for the Disabled
Up to 25 1
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-9
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
SECTION 13.03 - OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and
occupied for commercial, office, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, retail or
wholesale sales, dry cleaning, laundry or other service purpose or as a hotel, motel,
restaurant, hospital, mortuary or any other use involving the receipt or distribution of
merchandise materials, foodstuffs or equipment, there shall be provided and maintained
on the lot adequate space for loading, unloading or standing in order to avoid
interference with public use of the streets or alleys. Such space shall be provided as
follows:
(a) Commercial Uses
Off-street loading and unloading facilities shall be provided for all commercial uses
in accordance with the following minimum requirements, except that the Planning
Commission may modify or waive the requirements upon finding that the proposed
use will require infrequent deliveries and/or deliveries will usually be made by
automobile, van, or small truck.
1. Establishments containing less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area shall
be provided with adequate loading and unloading facilities, accessible by motor
vehicle off any adjacent alley, service drive, or designated delivery area on the
premises, subject to Planning Commission review and approval.
2. Commercial uses containing 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or more
shall be provided with adequate and accessible loading and unloading facilities,
consisting of at least one (1) off-street loading/unloading space laid out with
minimum dimensions of ten by forth (10 x 40) feet or four hundred (400) square
feet, with a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet.
3. Notwithstanding the above requirements, in the event that loading and
unloading standards are specified for particular uses in each district, then such
uses shall comply fully with the specified loading and unloading requirements.
OFF-STREET PARKING
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 13-10
(b) For industrial and related uses authorized in the M-1 District, spaces shall be laid
out with minimum dimensions of ten by fifty (10 x 50) feet, or five hundred (500)
square feet in area, with a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet. Such
spaces shall be provided as specified in the following table:
(c) Table for Off-Street Loading:
Usable Floor Area (square feet) Loading and Unloading Space Required
0 - 1,400 None
1,401 - 20,000 One (1) space.
20,001 - 100,000 One (1) space plus (1) space for 20,000
square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet.
100,001 and over Five (5) spaces.
The loading, unloading and standing area in all zones shall be surfaced, drained, and
otherwise developed in accordance with the provisions applicable to off-street parking
areas, described in Section 13.02 of this Ordinance.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-1
ARTICLE XIV
SIGNS
SECTION 14.00 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is hereby determined that regulation of the location, size, placement and certain
features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and
facilities without difficulty and confusion, to promote traffic safety, safeguard public
health and welfare and prevent wasteful use of natural resources in competition among
businesses for attention.
In addition, it is the intent of this Ordinance to assure the continued attractiveness of the
total community environment through the adoption of discretionary controls designed to
preserve scenic, aesthetic and economic values within the City.
It is further determined that signs which may lawfully be erected and maintained under
the provisions of this Ordinance are consistent with customary usage.
SECTION 14.01 - DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section when
they are used in this Chapter:
(a) BUSINESS: Any legal use of a building, other than for a religious institution, day
care center, school, home occupation or residence, by a person, firm or corporation.
Although contained in the same building as another business and owned by the
same person, an activity may be treated as a separate business if it is physically
separated from, uses different personnel than, and provides different products or
services than such other related business.
(b) BUILDING FRONTAGE: The length of the portion of a building occupied by a
single-business facing a street adjacent to the premises on which the business is
located.
(c) MAXIMUM HEIGHT: Shall be measured from grade or sidewalk to the highestedge
of the sign surface or its projecting structure.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-2
(d) MINIMUM HEIGHT: Shall be measured from grade or sidewalk to the lowest edge
of the sign surface or its projecting structure.
(e) OWNER: A person, firm, partnership, association or corporation and/or its legal
successors.
(f) PREMISES: A "lot" in the same ownership or control which is not divided by a public
street.
(g) SIGN: A name, message identification, image, description, display, light, balloon,
banner or illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or otherwise located or setupon,
or in, a building, bench, structure or piece of land and which directs attention
to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business
and which is visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or public property.
The definition includes interior and exterior signs but not signs primarily directed at
persons within the premises of the sign owners. The definition does not include
goods displayed in a business window.
1. Accessory Sign: A sign which pertains to the principal or accessory use of the
premises upon which such sign is located.
2. Awning Sign: An awning which is cloth, canvas, or vinyl which is installed
Above windows or a main entrance to a building with metal frames.
3. Banner Sign: A sign on paper, cloth, fabric or other flexible or combustible
material of any kind, either with or without frames.
4. Billboard Sign: A non-accessory freestanding sign, upon which a display can
be posted, painted or otherwise affixed in a manner which is readilychanged.
5. Bulletin Board: A sign with temporary or replaceable letters or characters,
used to announce dates of functions or activities.
6. Commercial Sign: A sign displayed for the purpose of identifying a commercial
use, or advertising a service, product, business or venture that is offered for
trade or sale.
7. Directional Sign: A sign, the primary purpose of which is to expedite the flow of
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to, from and within a site.
8. Garage and Yard Sale Signs: A sign that is used for temporary use to sell
household items, garage, tools, and miscellaneous items used in a residential
area.
9. Ground Sign: Any freestanding sign supported by one or more uprights, poles,
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-3
pylons, a base, or braces located in or upon the ground or to something
requiring location on the ground and not attached to any building or other
structure.
10. Group Identification Sign: A sign or entranceway structure, listing the names
and addresses only of the establishments occupying a development or
subdivision. The erection of such identification signs is so intended to assist the
public in locating establishments within its immediate area and shall be placed
upon property within the development or subdivision.
11. Institutional Sign: A sign containing a surface area upon which is displayed the
name of a religious institution, school, library, community center, or similar
institutions, and the announcement of its services or activities
12. Marquee Sign: A sign attached to or hung from a marquee, wall, canopy or
other covered structure projecting from and supported by the building.
13. Moving Sign: A sign that has motion either constantly or at intervals or that
gives the impression of movement through intermittent, flashing, scintillating or
varying intensities of illumination.
14. Mural: A picture, photograph, painting, mosaic, or relief artwork applied to
exterior walls, facilities, or structures, intended to serve as a cosmetic
adornment for the building.
15. Non-Accessory Advertising Sign: A sign relating to a business activity, use or
service not performed on the premises or to a product not fabricated, produced,
handled or sold on the same premises upon which the sign is displayed.
16. Occupational Sign: A sign denoting only the name and profession of an
occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building.
17. On-Premises Sign: A sign which advertises only goods, services, facilities,
events or attractions available on the premises where located, or identifies the
owner or occupant or directs traffic on the premises. All other signs are offpremises
signs.
18. Outline Tubing Sign: A sign arranged of exposed gaseous tubes that outline
and call attention to certain features of an advertising device such as individual
letters, figures, shapes or words.
19. Parasite Signs: A sign that is intended to draw attention to any one or more of
various services, items for sale, contests, etc., and is attached as an
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-4
appendage to an accessory sign, sign support or any part of a principal building,
accessory building or other structure located on a development site.
20. Pole Sign: A type of ground sign that is mounted above the ground on a pole.
21. Political Sign: A sign relating to the election of a person to public office or
relating to a political party or relating to an issue or a matter to be voted upon at
an election called by a public body.
22. Portable Sign: A sign or sign board which is free standing and not permanently
anchored or secured to either a building, structure or the ground; such as, but
not limited to, so-called "A" frame, "T" shaped or inverted "T" shaped stands, or
any sign attached to a trailer or other vehicle not accessory to the vehicle or its
use, but used with the express intent of advertising.
23. Projecting Sign: A sign erected and attached at one end to a building, pole or
other structure, or any part thereof, and extending beyond the attachment
surface by more than twelve (12) inches.
24. Real Estate Sign: A sign advertising that the property said sign is located upon
is for sale, rent or lease.
25. Road Sign: A type of ground sign that is typically mounted close to the ground
on a three-dimensional base which is constructed of the same materials and
colors as the sign face it sell A "monolith sign" is one type of road sign which
consists of a base-mounted cylindrical structure upon which a message is
painted or posted.
26. Roof Sign: A sign which is erected constructed and maintained above the roof
or parapet of a building or any portion thereof.
27. Small Signs: A sign which is used as a temporary use for special events.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-5
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-6
Pole Signs are not permitted
Roof Signs are not permitted
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-7
28. Temporary Sign: An information sign, or banner, with or without a structural
frame, intended for a limited period of display, including decorative displays for
holidays or public demonstrations, not including accessory signs as defined
under (a) above, or signs pertaining to sale, rent, or lease of property.
29. Time and Temperature Sign: A sign that displays only the current time and/or
temperature.
30. Wall Sign: A sign attached to, painted on, inscribed, or otherwise set upon the
exterior wall or surface of any building, no portion of which projects more than
twelve (12) inches from the wall, and which may not project above the roof or
parapet line. The roofline meaning the vertical distance measured from the
established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the
deck line of mansard roofs; and the average height between eaves and ridge
boards for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
31. Window Sign: Signs which are affixed, painted, or otherwise inscribed on the
window of a building such that they are visible from the outside of said building.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, signs, which are not affixed directly to a
window but are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the
outside, shall be considered window signs.
(h) SIGN ERECTOR: Any person engaged in the business of erecting, conditions
altering, or removing signs on a contractual or hourly basis.
(i) SIGN AREA: The entire area within a circle, triangle, rectangle or other geometric
shape enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure
of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an
integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background
against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which
such sign is placed.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-8
SECTION 14.02 - MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA
The total sign area is to be expressed in square feet and shall be computed as herein
set forth and permitted in the "Schedule of Sign Regulations" attached to and made a
part of this Code.
(a) Single-Face Sign total area shall be computed as the number of square feet within
lines drawn at the outer perimeter forming any single and/or combination of
geometric shapes, such as a square, rectangle, triangle or circle encompassing the
extreme limits of an individual letter(s), word(s), message(s), representation,
emblem or any similar figure, including open space(s), together with any frame or
other material forming an integral part of display used to differentiate such sign from
the background against which it is placed.
(b) Double-Face Signs having two (2) faces of equal size arranged and/or positioned
back to back and parallel or with the faces at an included angle of not more than
thirty (30) degrees in the plan or vertical view; the area of the sign shall be
computed as one-half (1/2) the total area of the two (2) faces. When the faces of
such a sign are not of equal area, then the area of the sign shall be computed as
the total area of the largest face.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-9
SECTION 14.03 - PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS
(a) Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, alter or
relocate any sign unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the Building
Official, except as provided in Section 14.04 below, and a permit fee paid in
accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. Any sign
that makes use of electricity shall, in addition to a sign permit, require an electrical
permit, regardless of size.
(b) Undefined Signs: Any sign that is not explicitly defined in DEFINITIONS of this
Ordinance must be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals before a permit shall
be issued.
(c) Permits: Permits for the erection of signs shall only be issued to persons qualified
to carry on such work under the provisions of this chapter.
(d) Permit Expiration: A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which
the permit was issued is not completed within six (6) months of the date of issue.
(e) Applications: Applications for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by
the Building Department for this purpose.
(f) Servicing: No permit shall be required for ordinary servicing, repainting of existing
sign message, or cleaning of a sign. No permit is required for change of message of
a sign designed for periodic message change without change of structure, including
a bulletin board or billboard, but not including a sign to which a new permanent face
may be attached.
SECTION 14.04 - EXEMPT SIGNS
No erection permit shall be required for signs enumerated below. Such exemptions,
however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the sign from responsibility for
its proper location, erection and maintenance.
(a) Construction Signs
Signs advertising buildings or projects under construction shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet where the total parcel frontage is twenty-one (21) feet or less,
where parcel frontage exceeds twenty-one (21) feet, such signs shall not exceed
1.5 square feet per ten (10) lineal feet of thoroughfare frontage or fraction thereof,
up to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet. Such signs shall have a
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-10
maximum height of ten (10) feet and shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet
from any public right-of-way unless attached to a building, construction fence, or
barricade. All such signs shall be removed promptly upon completion of
construction. No more than one (1) construction sign shall be permitted per
thoroughfare frontage.
(b) Garage and Yard Sale Signs
Signs to be posted in ground only with a size no larger than 18” x 24”. No permit
required and following stipulations apply:
1. For a one-day sale the sign may be erected the morning of the sale with
removal at the end of the day.
2. For a two or three-day sale the sign may be erected the morning of the first
day of the sale with removal at the end of the second or third day.
3. Signs may not be posted for more than three (3) days.
(c) Government Signs
Signs erected on a City, County, State or Federal building or land which announce
the name, occupancy and information of the use or admission to the premise or the
flag of any nation or state which is respectfully displayed.
(d) Political Signs
Shall be solely for the purpose of providing information relating to the election of a
person to public office, or to a political party, or to a matter to be voted upon at an
election called by a public body, or any other public issue or expression of opinion,
and shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
1. Political signs shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to the edge of
the traveled portion of the roadway and not in a dedicated right-of-way or
attached to any utility pole. Political signs shall be ground or wall signs. No
ground sign shall be higher than thirty-six (36) inches above average mean
grade of the yard on which it is placed.
2. All political signs shall be removed within ten (10) calendar days after the
election or event.
3. Such signs shall not be erected in such a manner that they will or reasonably
may be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic.
(e) Real Estate Signs
1. Single and Multiple Family Real Estate
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-11
A sign with an area not in excess of six (6) square feet advertising the sale, rent
and/or lease of a single or multiple-family structure or vacant property, placed
adjacent to such a structure and upon the premises is permitted. Such a sign
may indicate only that the property is for sale, rent, and/or lease and the
address or telephone number where the inquiry can be made. It shall have a
maximum height of six (6) feet from grade and shall be set back ten (10) feet
from any public right-of-way unless attached to the building. It shall be unlawful
for any rental unit or dwelling, as defined in Article IX, Section 5-247 (Rental
Registration) of the City of Keego Harbor Code of Ordinances as amended, to
advertise the rent and/or lease of a rental unit or dwelling without receiving a
Certificate of Compliance in accordance with Article IX, Section 5-251
(Certificate of Compliance) of the City of Keego Harbor Code of Ordinances as
amended.
2. Non-Residential Real Estate Signs
One (1) sign, with a total area not in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet, shall
be permitted on each parcel for the purposes of advertising the sale, rent and/or
lease of non-residential real estate. Such signs shall have a maximum height of
ten (10) feet and shall be set back twenty-five (25) feet from any public right-ofway
unless attached to a permanent building.
3. Residential subdivision or condominium developments
The allowable area for one (1) accessory or sign pertaining to the sale, rent
and/or lease of real estate within a residential subdivision or condominium
complex being developed shall be limited to an area of one hundred (100)
square feet. Not more than one (1) non-accessory sign advertising the sale of
lots or residential buildings in other than the subdivision or condominium
complex being developed shall be permitted. The size of this non-accessory
sign shall be not more than one hundred (100) square feet in area. The Board
may allow additional signs if they find that due to location of the development or
some other hardship, the additional exposure can be justified. Such signs shall
have a maximum height of ten (10) feet and shall be set back twenty-five
(25) feet from any public right-of-way.
4. Not more than one (1) Real Estate sign per thoroughfare frontage shall be
placed on any premises. Real estate signs larger than six (6) square feet shall
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-12
not be placed on any premises with an occupied structure.
5. Removal
Real Estate signs shall be removed within ten (10) days of the sale, lease or
rental of the premises, land parcel or residential subdivision/complex.
6. Real Estate signs which indicate property is sold are prohibited.
(f) Residential Address Signs
For each dwelling unit in the R-1 and R-2 Districts, one (1) sign not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area indicating the address and name(s) of the occupants.
(g) Street Signs
Signs erected by the City, County, State or Federal Government for street direction
or traffic control.
SECTION 14.05 – CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
REQUIREMENTS
(a) Materials and Design
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in conformity with the
provisions for materials, loads, and stresses of the latest adopted edition of the City
Building Code and requirements of this Chapter.
(b) Erector's Imprint
Signs of every type which come within the Purview of this Chapter, must carry the
identification and address of the sign erector, electrical voltage, when applicable, and
date of erection in clearly legible letters whether for the initial erection or re-hanging
of a sign.
(c) Fastenings
All signs must be erected in such a manner and with such materials to remain safe
and secure during the period of use and all bolts, cables, and other parts of such
signs shall be kept painted and free from corrosion. Any defect due to the fault of
the erector shall be repaired by the erector.
(d) Support Location
No pole, cable or support of any nature shall be placed on any publicly owned
property, street right-of-way, or proposed street right-of-way.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-13
(e) Proximity to Electrical Conductors
No sign shall be erected so that any part including cables, guys, etc. will be within
ten (10) feet of any electrical conductor, electric light pole, street lamp, traffic light or
other public utility pole or standard.
(f) Re-Hanging
In case of re-hanging or re-erection of any sign, the new erector must place his
identification, address and the date on the sign.
(g) Sanitation
Property surrounding any ground sign shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from
obnoxious and offensive substances, free from weeds, rubbish, and inflammable
material.
(h) Illumination
No sign shall be illuminated by other than continuing white light using approved
electrical devices and shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the
provisions of this chapter. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for
display purposes unless specifically approved by the Building Official.
(i) Shielding
Any lighting for the illumination of signs shall be directed away from and shall be
shielded from any adjacent lots and shall be so arranged as to not adversely affect
driver visibility on adjacent public thoroughfares.
(j) Traffic Interference
No advertising device shall be erected or maintained which simulates or imitates in
size, color, lettering, or design any traffic sign or signal or other word, phrase,
symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse
traffic.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-14
SECTION 14.06 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
The following conditions shall apply to all signs erected or located in any zoning district:
(a) Sign Location
1. No sign, except those established and maintained by the City, County, State, or
Federal Governments, shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public
right-of-way or dedicated public easement. Projecting signs in the C-1 or C-2
area may project over a public sidewalk provided there is a minimum clearance
of eight (8) feet between the sidewalk and the bottom of the sign.
2. No sign shall be erected, established, or maintained on any lot which will
obstruct the view of drivers in vehicles approaching an intersection of two roads
or the intersection of a road and driveway. Accordingly, signs located in the
triangular area described below shall not be permitted to obstruct cross-visibility
between a height of thirty (30) inches and six (6) feet above the lowest point of
the intersecting roads or driveways. The unobstructed triangular area is
described as follows:
The area formed at the corner intersection of two public right-of-way lines,
the two (2) sides of the triangular area being twenty-five (25) feet in length
measured along the abutting right-of-way lines, and the third side being a
line connecting these two sides, or;
The area formed at the corner intersection of a public right-of-way and a
driveway, the two (2) sides of the triangular area being ten (10) feet in
length measured along the right-of-way line and edge of the driveway, and
the third side being a line connecting these two sides.
3. Construction signs advertising buildings or projects under construction may be
erected and maintained for a period not to exceed the term of construction, and
such sign shall be erected on the site of construction. Said sign shall advertise
only the building or project under construction and information related thereto
such as its developers, contractors, engineers, brokers and architects.
4. No sign shall be permitted at any location which, in the sole discretion of the
Building Official, creates any type of safety hazard or visual impediment to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-15
(b) Sign Height
No ground sign serving a single tenant or multi-tenant building having a common
entrance shall exceed a maximum height of six (6) feet, including a two (2) foot
base as measured from the elevation at a point along the nearest right-of-way line
the sign is directed to, determined by a line drawn from the closest point of the sign
to the right-of-way at a ninety (90) degree angle. In no instance shall the sign be
placed on an artificial mound or berm in such a manner to exceed the maximum
height of six (6) feet.
No ground sign serving a multi-tenant building shall exceed a maximum height of
eight (8) feet, including a two (2) foot base as measured from the elevation at a
point along the nearest right-of-way line the sign is directed to, determined by a line
drawn from the closest point of the sign to the right-of-way at a ninety (90) degree
angle. In no instance shall the sign be placed on an artificial mound or berm in such
a manner to exceed the maximum height of eight (8) feet.
(c) Liability Insurance
If the vertical distance of such sign above the street is greater than the horizontal
distance from the sign to the street right-of-way line and so located as to be able to
fall or be pushed onto public property, then the owner of such sign shall keep in
force a public liability insurance policy in the amount of One Hundred Thousand
($100,000.00) Dollars for injury to One (1) person and Three Hundred Thousand
($300,000.00) Dollars for injury to more than One (1) person and Property Damage
Insurance in the amount of Twenty-Five Thousand ($25,000.00) Dollars for damage
to property. In lieu of an insurance policy as required herein, an owner may present
satisfactory proof to the City Attorney that said owner is financially capable of selfinsurance
in the above amounts.
(d) Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in this chapter.
1. Signs which incorporate in any manner or are illuminated by any flashing or
moving lights such as strobe lights or police and fire type flashers other than for
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-16
conveyance of noncommercial information which requires periodic change. This
section does not prohibit barber poles which otherwise meet the provisions of
this Chapter.
2. Exterior banners, pennants, spinners and streamers, other than a banner or
pennant used as a permitted sign under provisions of this chapter.
3. Exterior string lights used in connection with a commercial premise, other than
holiday decorations.
4. Any sign which has any visible motion other than permitted flags of
governmental units or banners and other than for the conveyance of
noncommercial information requiring periodic change.
5. Any sign which is structurally or electrically unsafe.
6. Any sign erected on a tree or utility pole except signs of any political subdivision
of this state.
7. Any business sign or sign structure now or hereafter existing which no longer
advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product sold.
8. Portable Signs and any freestanding exterior sign not permanently anchored or
secured to either a building or the ground, except real estate "open house"
signs.
9. Signs displayed on licensed vehicles or trailers when the subject vehicle or
trailer is parked in such a manner that the obvious intent is to attract attention to
a business, service, or commodity on the premises.
10. Any sign on a motor vehicle or trailer which projects more than six (6) inches
from the surface of such a vehicle when it is parked at a location visible from a
public street, except political signs.
11. Any sign structure or frame no longer supporting or containing a sign.
12. Any roof sign which is located above the roof or parapet of a building or any
portion thereof.
13. Internally illuminated awnings shall not be translucent.
(e) Fire Escapes
No signs of any kind shall be attached to or placed upon a building in such a
manner as to obstruct any fire escape.
(f) Changeable Message Signs
The message change cycle of a changeable message sign shall be not less than
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-17
five minutes per message, except in a combined time and temperature sign where
the change cycle shall not be less than thirty (30) seconds.
(g) Revolving Signs
Revolving signs are not permitted.
SECTION 14.07 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS
(a) Signs Permitted in NR, R-2 Districts
Signs pertaining to other than single-family residential uses may be permitted,
subject to approval by the Building Official, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in
area for one (1) accessory sign or thirty-six (36) square feet in area for one (1)
bulletin board sign.
(b) Signs Permitted in R-M District
1. One (1) accessory sign identifying each subdivision, apartment or condominium
complex, or mobile home park per vehicle entrance not to exceed nine (9)
square feet in area for each sign and shall not be illuminated.
2. Accessory signs identifying community facilities or special uses within said City
of developments shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet for each building or
use and no such sign shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet to any property
line of adjacent single-family district.
(c) Signs Permitted in C-1, C-2, P-1 and 0-1 Districts
1. Signs for Single-Tenant Buildings or Multi-Tenant Buildings Having a Common
Entrance:
The following sign standards shall apply to (a) buildings which contain only one
(1) tenant, and (b) buildings which contain more than one (1) tenant but where all
tenants share a common building entrance or entrances (for example, an office
building or other type of building where access to individual tenant space is off of
a common hallway or atrium):
a. Any such building shall be permitted a total of up to three (3) signs,
consisting of wall or ground signs, provided that no more than one (1)
ground sign shall be permitted. To improve sign visibility, wall signs may be
located on the side or near the front of the building, subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-18
Where total parcel frontage is sixty-four (64) feet or less, the total area of all
such signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. Where the total
parcel frontage exceeds sixty-four (64) feet, the total sign area shall not
exceed two (2) feet per lineal foot of parcel frontage, up to a maximum of
one hundred (100) square feet.
b. For the purposes of enforcing these provisions, frontage shall be along the
front lot line as designated on the plat, site plan review application, or
request for a building permit. Although not required, use of road signs and
wall signs is encouraged (rather than pole signs), in accordance with the
goals and recommendations set forth in the City's master plan.
c. Permit Required.
2. Signs for Shopping Centers and Similar Multi-Tenant Buildings.
The following standards shall apply to shopping centers and similar multi-tenant
buildings, where each tenant has building frontage and their own entrance to
the outside:
a. Any such use shall be permitted a total of up to three (3) signs, consisting of
wall or ground signs, for group identification or to advertise the name of the
shopping center or premises, provided that no more than one (1) ground
sign shall be permitted. To improve sign visibility, wall signs may be located
on the side or near the front of the building, subject to review and approval
by the Planning Commission.
Where total parcel frontage is sixty-four (64) feet or less, the total area of all
such signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. Where the total
parcel frontage exceeds sixty-four (64) feet, the total sign area shall not
exceed two (2) feet per lineal foot of parcel frontage, up to a maximum of
one hundred (100) square feet.
b. For the purposes of enforcing these provisions, frontage shall be along the
front lot line as designated on the plat, site plan review application, or
request for a building permit. Although not required, use of road signs and
wall signs is encouraged (rather than pole signs), in accordance with the
goals and recommendations set forth in the City's master plan.
c. In addition, in multi-tenant structures such as shopping centers, one (1) wall
sign shall be permitted per building frontage. If an individual tenant has
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-19
multiple building frontages it shall be permitted not more than one additional
wall sign located on a second building frontage, subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission. The maximum area for each wall
sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet per lineal foot of building frontage
for the building frontage on which such sign is located.
(Ord. 462, 11/2/2017)
d. Ground signs permitted. Double inside post ground sign, base mounted
ground sign, and post and panel ground sign.
e. Landscaping is encouraged around base or bottom of sign. Post and panel
shall have decorative posts.
f. Ground sign to be permitted to use electronic messages and to be a
minimum of five minutes before changing. No rotating or flashing of
messages or symbols.
g. Permit Required.
3. Ground Sign Standards
a. Ground signs shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
residential district.
b. There shall be no more than one (1) ground sign for any single premises,
including shopping centers, regardless of the number of separate tenants or
uses located within said shopping center.
c. Landscaping is encouraged around the base or bottom of any ground sign.
Post and panel shall have decorative posts. Landscaping shall consist of a
combination of evergreen and deciduous shrubs. Creativity in landscaping is
encouraged.
d. Ground signs may not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in area and no
more than twenty-four (24) square feet per sign face.
4. Gasoline Price Signs
Gasoline service stations shall be permitted one (1) gasoline price sign, except
that two (2) price signs, one (1) facing each street, shall be permitted for
stations located at the intersection of two major thoroughfares. Such signs shall
not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area.
5. Theaters
Theaters shall be permitted two hundred (200) square feet of sign area in
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-20
addition to the district provisions of this Chapter for changeable-message type
marquee signs.
6. Window Signs
Temporary and permanent window signs shall be permitted on the inside in
commercial and office districts provided that the total combined area of such
signs does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total window area. The area of
permanent window signs shall be counted in determining compliance with
standards for total area of wall signs on the parcels. Temporary window signs
that are faded, yellowed, ripped or otherwise damaged shall be removed
immediately.
7. Awning Signs
Awning signs may be externally illuminated, with gooseneck lighting
direct downward to illuminate only the intended message. No more than fifty
(50) percent, or twenty-four (24) square feet, whichever is less, of the awning
may contain logos, symbols, or lettering intended to advertise the business.
Twenty-five (25) percent of awning signage shall count toward wall signage.
Permit required.
8. Outline Tubing (Neon)
a. Outline Tubing signs may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the following:
1. May be used to provide back lighting where the neon tubing is fully
obscured by opaque lettering or characters;
2. Outline tubing may be permitted where the proposed sign is in
character with the type of use;
3. Outline tubing may be permitted where the proposed sign has
significant historical references;
4. May not be used to outline the perimeter of a window.
9. Marquee Signs
1. May be permitted to be used additionally to allowed signage.Marquee
2. Sign may be a maximum of 2’x5’ or 105 square feet and can be
electric.
3. Message to be a minimum of five minutes before changing.
4. Sign can be attached to building flat on a wall and not to extend above
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-21
first floor roofline and not allowed above first floor of multi-story
building. Permit Required.
10. Projecting Signs
1. Projecting signs may be permitted on buildings containing one (1)
business.
2. The maximum size is eight (8) square feet.
3. Buildings containing more than one tenant, maximum size is sixteen
(16) square feet.
4. Support for sign must be architectural material (iron, industrialcable,
or warehouse hooks.
5. Permit Required.
11. Murals
a. Any proposed mural shall meet the intent of this section, as follows:
1. Creation of a City landmark
2. Demonstration of community identity and pride
3. Enlivening the downtown area
b. No more than 25% of the area of a mural, or 24 square feet, whichever is
less, may include text, numbers, trademarks, logos or other forms of
business advertisement. This area shall be counted toward the amount of
wall sign permitted.
c. Upon application for a mural, the following information will be required:
1. Objectives of the mural.
2. The specific location of the mural.
3. Concept sketch, in color and a written description of the artwork.
4. A schedule for the project.
5. Dimensioned elevation plans identifying the existing structureand
proposed mural.
d. The complete mural application shall be reviewed by thePlanning
Commission.
e. The following standards shall be used when formulating the design ofthe
proposed mural:
1. Integration of the windows and doors into the composition.
2. Determination of a suitable building or building side formural
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-22
application.
3. Consideration of mural materials and durability. (Painting directlyon
natural brick and bare concrete could require the repainting of the
mural regularly).
4. Completion of the mural in a reasonable amount of time.
f. The following maintenance regulations and standards apply to allmurals:
1. Where approval is given, it will be with the condition that two (2) years
after installation, a review by the Building Official or City Planning
Consultant, of the condition and continued relevanceof the mural may
require its removal.
2. The City shall not perform any maintenance on the mural. When a mural
has either faded or been damaged and the sponsor is unable to
continue to maintain it, the City may require removal at the cost of the
applicant. No City agency can commit to contacting the artist or sponsor
in the event that a mural needs to be removed.
3. A maintenance plan and budget for the mural is required. The plan will
allocate responsibility for monitoring the condition of themural on a
regular basis, for decision making related to repair and removal.
g. Permit Required.
12. Sandwich Board or A-Frame Signs
Portable sandwich board or A-Frame signs may be placed at the public
entrances to businesses, on either private property or the public sidewalk, in
accordance with the following standards:
a. No sign shall be placed within a distance of ten (10) feet from any fire
hydrant, or in any location where it would imperil public safety, as determined
by the Zoning Administrator, or their designee, or interfere with the function of
the fire department.
b. The sign shall not be located any further than the sidewalk immediately
adjacent to the subject property and its location shall not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular circulation as determined by the Zoning Administrator
or their designee.
c. There shall be only one portable sandwich board or A-Frame sign per
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-23
business. For buildings with front and rear customer entrances, one additional
portable sandwich board or A-Frame sign may be permitted at the second
entrance.
d. Each sign shall be placed outside only during the hours when the business is
open to the general public and shall be stored indoors at all other times.
e. Each sign shall be placed next to the building wall or outside of the road rightof-
way in a manner, which is safe for and does not interfere with normal
pedestrian or auto traffic. A clear path of five (5) feet must be maintained at all
times.
f. Portable sandwich board or A-Frame signs shall not have more than two (2)
sign faces.
g. The following design requirements shall apply to all sandwich board or AFrame
signs:
1. Portable sandwich board or A-Frame sign lettering, excluding that
which is part of the business logo, shall be between 2 to 4 inches
high. Chalkboard signs may be permitted.
2. Sandwich board or A-Frame sign designs shall be uncluttered, with
a minimum of text. Logos and graphics are encouraged.
3. The business name lettering and/or logo shall be neatly painted,
raised, or routed onto the sign.
4. The sign shall be kept in good repair at all times.
5. Portable sandwich board or A-Frame signs are encouraged to
relate to the nature or theme of the business advertised.
h. All sandwich board or A-Frame signs must be reviewed and approved by the
Zoning Administrator or their designee, prior to a sign permit being granted.
i. No portable sandwich board or A-Frame sign shall exceed an overall height of
forty-five (45) inches and an overall width of twenty-four (24) inches. The
maximum height of the sign area shall be thirty-six (36) inches. Sign supports
may be a maximum of nine (9) inches in height. The Maximum sign area per
sandwich board or A-Frame sign is six (6) square feet.
j. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provisions of this section
shall be subject to the penalties outlined in Section 16 of thisOrdinance.
k. An annual permit is required. The permit shall be renewed each calendar
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-24
year.
(Ordinance 434, 5/17/12)
13. Small signs
Small signs shall not be more than four (4) square feet in area and the total Area
of all signs on one premises shall not exceed two (2) signs. Permit is for Thirty
(30) days at a time and only twice per year. If more time is requested, must apply
to Planning Commission. Signs must be maintained in good condition.
14. Temporary Signs
Shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall be displayed for no
more than thirty (30) days, and no more than once per year. If requested for
more than once per year, it must be approved by Planning Commission. Exempt
temporary signs are; banners, or flags when in the nature of special decorative
displays used for public demonstrations or promotions of civic welfare or
charitable purposes on which there is no commercial advertising, provided the
City is held harmless and blameless for any damage or injury resulting there
from.
15. Permit Required.
(e) Signs Permitted in M-1 District:
1. For premises containing only one occupant, one (1) wall or accessory ground
sign, or combination thereof, the total of which shall not exceed an area of
seventy-five (75) square feet.
2. Where any premises has more than one occupant, as in the case of multitenant
complexes, there shall be permitted one (1) accessory ground sign not to
exceed seventy-five (75) square feet for group identification and/or to advertise
the premises if the name of the complex is distinct from that of any occupant. In
addition, multi-occupant complexes may identify individual tenants or uses with
not more than one (1) wall sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet located on
the face of the area occupied by the tenant or use.
3. Ground signs shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
adjacent residential district and shall be limited to one (1) ground sign for any
single premises regardless of the number of separate tenants or uses within the
complex.
SIGNS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-25
4. Non-Accessory Signs and Billboards: Off-premises, non-accessory signs are
permitted only in accordance with the following regulations and any other
applicable provisions of this chapter:
a. No such sign shall have a total area of all faces in excess of two hundred
(200) square feet or one hundred (100) square feet per sign face.
b. It shall have a maximum height not greater than twenty (20) feet from
average grade as calculated within a sixty (60) foot radius from the base of
the sign.
c. It shall not be closer than one thousand (1000) feet to any other nonaccessory
sign on the same side of the right-of-way.
d. The setback of the non-accessory sign shall be equal to the zoning yard
requirements for the M-1 District.
e. A non-accessory sign shall be situated on the property so as to: (1)
Maximize motor vehicle sight distance, clear view, and traffic safety in
general, in relation to other vehicles, pedestrians, and to other signage
which is, or is anticipated to be, nearby; and (2) Minimize the destruction of
trees, the visibility of the billboard and illuminations thereof by and from
residences, and any dangerous distraction and thus, hazard, of and to
motorists, as determined in the discretion of the Planning Commission.
f. A non-accessory sign shall not be materially incompatible with surrounding
improvements, as determined in the reasonable discretion of the Planning
Commission.
g. A non-accessory sign may be illuminated but shall not have moving parts
and/or intermittently flashing illumination. An illuminated non-accessory sign
shall be situated at least 500 feet from any residential zoning district or
residential use, and the illumination shall be directed away from all
residential uses.
h. Permit Required.
(f) Signs Permitted in R-MH DistrictM-1 District:
Refer to district provisions for sign requirements.
(g) Permit Required
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-26
SECTION 14.08 - SCHEDULE OF SIGN REGULATIONS
Except as otherwise provided herein, signs shall be permitted in zoning districts according to this Schedule of Sign Regulations.
SCHEDULE OF SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign Type
Permit
Required NR
R-M,
R-ME,
R-MH
CBD,
CBD
Fringe
C-1, C-2,
P-1, O-1 M-1
Billboard (Non-Accessory) X X
Bulletin Board X X X X X
Directional X X X X X
Ground X X X X X
Group Identification X X X X
Institutional X X X X
Marquee X X X X
Occupational X
Political X X X X X
Projecting X
Real Estate X X X X X
Temporary X X X X X
Time/Temperature X X
Wall X X X X X X
Window X X X
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-27
SECTION 14.09 - NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
(a) Lawful Existing Signs
Any sign lawfully existing at the time of this Chapter which does not fully comply
with all provisions shall be considered a non-conforming sign and may be permitted
to remain as long as the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the community except as hereafter provided.
(b) Continuance
A non-conforming sign shall not:
1. Be expanded or changed to another nonconforming sign;
2. Be relocated or structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or so as
to change the shape, size, type, placement, or design of the sign;
3. Be re-established or maintained after the activity, business or usage to which it
relates has been discontinued for 90 days or longer;
4. Be repaired or re-erected after being damaged if the repair or re-erection of the
sign would cost more than 50 percent of the cost of an identical newsign.
(c) Intent
It is the intent of this section to encourage eventual elimination of signs that, as a
result of the adoption of this Chapter, become non-conforming, and to administer
this Chapter to realize the removal of illegal non-conforming signs and to avoid any
unreasonable invasion of established private property rights, therefore;
1. No person shall be required to remove a sign which was erected in compliance
with previous regulations of this Chapter if said sign becomes nonconforming
due to a change occurring after adoption of this chapter, or in the location of
buildings, streets or other signs, which change, is beyond the control of the
owner of the sign and the premises on which it is located.
2. If the owner of a sign or the premises on which a sign is located changes the
location of a building, property line, or sign, or changes the use of a building so
that any sign on the premises is rendered nonconforming, such sign must be
removed or made to conform to this Chapter.
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 14-28
SECTION 14.10 - APPEALS
Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or order from the Building Official, may
make an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The ZBA may grant a variance as
provided for in this ordinance.
SECTION 14.11 - ENFORCEMENT
This Ordinance Section shall be administered and enforced by the Building Official.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-1
ARTICLE XV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 15.00 - ONE SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING PER LOT
Except in the instance of cluster developments or condominium developments where a
site plan is approved and except for lots used for education or religious institutions, not
more than one (1) single-family dwelling shall be located on a lot as defined herein, nor
shall a single-family dwelling be located on the same lot with another principal building.
This provision shall not prohibit the lawful division of land.
SECTION 15.01 - EXTERIOR LIGHTING
(a) Light and Glare from Indirect Sources.
1. The design and/or screening of the development shall ensure that glare from
automobile and commercial or industrial vehicle headlights shall not be directed
into any adjacent property, particularly residential property. Exterior doors shall
be located, operated, and maintained so as to prevent any glare and light from
creating a nuisance or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians,
and neighboring land uses.
(b) Exterior Lighting from Direct Sources.
1. Ground illumination shall not exceed an intensity ratio of 10 to 1 foot-candles
throughout the site. The light intensity at ground level shall not exceed 0.1 footcandles
at the property line adjacent to residentially zoned or used property and
1.0 foot candle measured at the property line adjacent to all other uses.
2. Free standing light standards including base shall not exceed twenty feet (20'-0”)
in total height.
3. All light fixtures shall be of a sharp cut-off, shoebox design with metal halide
fixtures. Fixtures that allow light to shine on adjoining property or create
horizontal glare shall not be approved. Lighting designs that allow light to shine
into a public street or right-of-way shall not be approved.
4. Free standing light fixtures shall be of a design to direct light into the
development and away from adjacent property. House side shields shall be
required in residential areas adjacent to any illuminated sites.
5. All lighting, including ornamental lighting, shall be shown on site plans in
sufficient detail to allow determination of the effects of such lighting upon
adjacent properties and traffic safety. Building or roof-mounted lighting, including
neon lighting, intended to attract attention to the building and/or use and not
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-2
strictly designed for security purposes shall not be permitted. Temporary holiday
lighting and decorations are exempt from the aforementioned provision. Lighting
designer and/or fixture manufacturer shall provide a drawing with photometric
layout of the proposed design to show actual initial foot-candle levels on a plot
plan sealed by a Professional Engineer or Architect licensed in the State of
Michigan. Submitted drawing shall include detailed fixture schedule, which shall
include manufacturer's name, catalog number, lamp type and wattage. A
complete set of manufacturer's catalog specification sheets for each fixture type
used on lighting design shall be included with photometric submittal.
SECTION 15.02 - RESIDENTIAL ENTRANCEWAY
In "R" (Residential) Districts, so called entranceway structures including but not limited
to walls, columns, and gates, marking entrances to single family subdivisions or multiple
housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard except as
provided in Section 15.03, Corner Clearance, provided that such entranceway
structures shall comply with all codes and ordinances of the City, and shall be approved
by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SECTION 15.03 - CORNER CLEARANCE
No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of thirty
(30) inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular
area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn
between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet
form their point of intersection.
SECTION 15.04 - WALLS
(a) In addition to walls specifically required by other sections of this Ordinance,
between the protected use district and uses and districts listed below there shall be
provided and maintained a masonry wall of not less than six feet in height. In the
case of comer and/or double-frontage lots where the screen wall is required
alongside and/or rear lot lines adjacent to a local street as designated in the City's
Master Plan, said wall shall be four (4) ft. in height and subject to Section 15.03
above.
Use or District to Provide Wall Protected Use or District
1. All vehicular parking and
other off-street facility
All residential uses or districts
2. C-1, C-2, 0-1, P-1 Districts All residential uses or districts
3. M-1 District All residential uses or districts
4. Utility buildings, stations, and
sub-stations, except in cases
where all equipment is
contained within a building or
All residential areas
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-3
structure constructed so as to
be similar in appearance to
the residential building in the
surrounding area.
(b) Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities
interfere and except in instances where this Ordinance requires conformance with
front yard setback lines abutting Residential Districts. Required walls may, upon
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley
right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually
agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a
given block shall be a major consideration of the Board of Appeals in reviewing
such request.
(c) Such walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other
purposes, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance and except such
openings as may be approved by the Building Inspector for the purposes of public
safety. All walls herein required shall be constructed of such masonry.
(d) The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify or waive wall requirements under
circumstances where strict enforcement of such requirements would be
unreasonable or serve no good purpose. In such cases as the Board of Appeals
determines the residential district to be a future nonresidential area, the Board of
Appeals may temporarily waive wall requirements for an initial period not to exceed
twelve (12) months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided
that the Board of Appeals shall make a determination as herein-before described,
for each subsequent waiver prior to the granting of such waiver by the Board of
Appeals. Such waivers shall be in the form of written agreements and filed with the
Oakland County Register of Deeds.
(e) In lieu of a masonry wall, the Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the use of a
greenway or other fencing material.
(f) When site alterations involve the addition or expansion of off-street parking, a
screen wall shall be constructed in all areas where it is required in order to conform
to the regulations of this Chapter regardless of whether the absence of the wall was
lawfully permitted prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 15.05 - COMMERCIAL ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
(a) General Commercial Architectural Standards
The following standards shall apply to all new non-residential development,
substantial redevelopment, or any facade modification within the City except the
area in the Central Business Design Overlay District.
1. Purpose
Architectural design is a key element in establishing a sense of place for a
community. Buildings of high quality contribute to the attractiveness and
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-4
economic well-being of a community, making it a better place to live and work.
The community recognizes the importance of good architecture and its lasting
impact.
The objective of these design standards is to direct builders toward creating
buildings of timeless character that are in harmony with the natural and built
environment. This is a function of good architectural principles such as
selecting durable materials, composing elevations using good proportions,
selecting harmonious colors, and combining all the architectural elements in a
balanced composition.
2. Architectural Design Elements
a. Building Materials - Select materials possessing durability and aesthetic
appeal.
b. Windows - Windows are the main element contributing to an inviting facade.
They give visual interest to a facade. Provide a large quantity of attractive
windows on a facade that fronts a street.
c. Architectural Features - Include architectural features on the building facade
that provide texture, rhythm, and ornament to a wall.
d. Colors - Select natural and neutral colors that are harmonious with both the
natural and man-made environment. Stronger colors can be used as
accents to provide visual interest to the facade.
e. Building Form - Provide an interesting form to a building through
manipulation of the building massing. This can be achieved through certain
roof types, rooflines, and massing elements such as towers, cupolas, and
stepping of the building form.
f. Composition - It is not sufficient to include the desired architectural
elements on a facade, but to arrange them in a harmonious and balanced
manner. The following category provides weight to the architectural
composition of the building.
3. Method of Evaluation
The design standards are not intended to promote buildings that appear uniform
and similar. Variety and creativity in design are encouraged. The standards
are structured in a point rating system, with desirable architectural elements
given positive points and undesirable elements given negative points.
The points assigned for each category are weighted according to its
importance. The standards apply to all nonresidential building facades with the
facade facing a public road, private road, or water body being more heavily
weighted.
Buildings shall be judged by the following scale:
59 points or less = Unacceptable
60-69 = Passing
70-79 = Satisfactory
80-89 = Good
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-5
90-99 = Very Good
100 or points = Excellent
The minimum acceptable score is:
60 points for M-1 District
80 points for C-2 District
90 points for C-1 and O-1 Districts.
Any modification to the facade shall not result in a reduction in the score of the
building at the time of the requested modification.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-6
KEEGO HARBOR
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN CHECKLIST
Date/Revision Date of
Site Plan
Times
Reviewed
Project Name/Location
Reviewed By
Date
Application
Number/Community
Applicant/Designer Telephone Number -
Applicant
INTRODUCTION
The Architectural Guidelines are in the form of a point rating system. The applicant or
representative should assess the front facade of the proposed building using this form.
Questions can be addressed to the City Planners, John Jackson, AICP, McKenna
Associates, Inc., phone (248) 596-0930, fax (248) 596-0630.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-7
I. BUILDING MATERIAL
Objective: Select materials possessing durability and aesthetic appeal. Building
Materials — Scoring method: For primary exterior material composing
more than 60% of the facade (including window area), the point allocation
for that material should be doubled. For example, for a building consisting
primarily of brick (+16 points x 2 = +32 points) with split face block accents
(+4 points), the total score would be 36 points. The score for each facade
shall be averaged with the facade facing a public road, private road, or
water body being double weighted.
Exterior Wall Material M-1 C-2 C-1
O-1
Score
Brick masonry +16 +16 +16
Concrete slab (e.g., poured-in-place, tilt-up
construction)
+10 +10 +4
Concrete masonry units
Split face block +4 +4 +2
Scored block +2 +2 +0
Ground-face block +2 +2 +0
Smooth face block -4 -4 -8
Metal siding
Standing seam panels -12 -12 -12
Aluminum siding -20 -20 -20
Architectural grade +8 0 0
Exterior Insulation Finish System (e.g., “dryvit”),
scoring depends on the location of the finish on the
exterior wall as follows:
8 or more feet above approved grade +2 +2 +0
4 to 8 feet above approved grade -6 -6 -6
Less than 4 feet above approved grade -10 -10 -10
Stone (e.g., limestone, granite) +12 +12 +12
Wood (lap, board and batten, shake) 0 +6 +6
Vinyl -6 -2 -0
T-111 and other wood panel siding -20 -20 -20
Subtotal:
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-8
II. WINDOWS
Objective: Windows are the main element contributing to an inviting facade.
They give visual interest to a facade. Provide a large quantity of
attractive windows on a facade that fronts a street.
Characteristic M-1 C-2 C-1
O-1
Score
A. Percentage of front facade composed of windows
More than 30% +20 +20 +20
20 - 29% +10 +10 +10
10 - 19% -10 -10 -10
Less than 10% -20 -20 -20
B. Window shapes
Rectangular, including square +4 +4 +4
Palladian (rectangular window with a halfcircular
top)
+4 +4 +4
Circular or octagonal other than decorative
gable windows
-8 -8 -8
Diamond -8 -8 -8
C. Proportions of window openings (width-to-height)
Horizontal - more than 4:1 proportion (e.g.,
ribbon window)
+4 +2 +2
Horizontal - 2:1 to 4:1 proportion +4 +2 +2
Horizontal - square to 2:1 proportion +4 +2 +2
Vertical - square to 1:2 proportion +4 +4 +4
Vertical - more than 1:2 proportion -8 -8 -8
D. Glazing
Clear +0 +4 +4
Tinting - green, blue, bronze, smoke +4 0 0
Tinting - all other colors -4 -4 -4
Subtotal:
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-9
III. ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
Objective: Include architectural features on the building facade that provide
texture, rhythm, and ornament to a wall.
Description: There are two categories of architectural features. The first category
consists of compositional elements, that is, architectural features that contribute to
dividing the elevation into interesting parts. Horizontal compositional elements include a
cornice and a base, which give the facade a top and a bottom. Vertical compositional
elements include pilasters and columns, which give the facade a sense of rhythm. The
second category includes decorative elements, which contribute to the visual appeal of
the facade.
Architectural Features M-1 C-2 C-1
O-1
Score
Compositional Elements:
Roof cornice +4 +4 +4
Contrasting base +4 +4 +4
Contrasting masonry courses, water table, or
molding
+4 +4 +4
Pilasters or columns +4 +6 +6
Corbelling +4 +4 +4
Contrasting band of color +2 +2 +2
Stone or ceramic accent tiles +2 +2 +2
Downspouts and gutters -8 -12 -12
Decorative Elements
Wall clock +4 +4 +4
Decorative light fixtures +4 +6 +6
Door or window canopies - canvas or metal +2 +2 +2
Door or window canopies - vinyl -8 -8 -8
Signage integrated with the architecture +4 +4 +4
Signage that appears tacked onto building -4 -4 -4
Subtotal:
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-10
IV. COLORS
Objective: Select natural and neutral colors that are harmonious with both the
natural and man-made environment. Stronger colors can be used as
accents to provide visual interest to the facade.
Characteristic M-1 C-2 C-1
O-1
Score
Primary Color (covers more than 60% of surface area)
Neutral - earth tones (sand to brown), grays +8 +8 +8
Traditional (e.g., brick red) +8 +8 +8
Light, subdued hues (e.g., salmon) +4 +4 +4
White 0 0 0
All other colors -12 -12 -12
Accent Color
Accent color is compatible with primary color +8 +8 +8
Bright colors (e.g., purple, orange, bright pink,
lime)
-10 -10 -10
Fluorescent colors -20 -20 -20
Method of Application
Color is natural to material +4 +4 +4
Color is pigmented within material +2 +2 +2
Color is painted onto material 0 0 0
Subtotal:
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-11
V. BUILDING FORM
Objective: Provide an interesting form to a building through manipulation of the
building massing. This can be achieved through certain roof types,
rooflines, and massing elements such as towers, cupolas, and
stepping of the building form.
Characteristic M-1 C-2 C-1
O-1
Score
Roof Type
Pitched, e.g., gable, hip, shed (at least 4 inches
of vertical rise per 1 foot of horizontal run)
+8 +8 +8
Mock gable roof +2 +2 +2
Flat 0 0 0
Mansard or mock mansard -8 -8 -8
Barrel (e.g. Quonset hut structure) -16 -16 -16
Standing seam metal roof +2 +2 +2
Dormer windows 0 +2 +2
Vertical masses - tower, cupolas, chimneys +4 +4 +4
Curved or stepped walls +2 +2 +2
Wall projections (e.g., vestibules that project from the
plane of the wall)
+2 +2 +2
Subtotal:
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-12
VI. COMPOSITION
Objective: It is not sufficient to include the desired architectural elements on a
facade, but to arrange them in a harmonious and balanced manner.
The following category provides weight to the architectural
composition of the building.
Characteristic M-1 C-2 C-1
O-1
Score
The overall composition of the facade is judged on
the relationship of all of the elements listed above,
i.e., how they relate in proportion, scale,
arrangement, and balance. The score is on a scale
of 0 to 20.
+20
possible
+20
possible
+20
possible
Subtotal:
TOTAL
SCORE:
______
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-13
(b) Keego Harbor Central Business District Design Overlay District
The following standards shall apply to all new
development, redevelopment, or renovation
within the area designated as the Central
Business Design Overlay District.
1. Building Scale
The intent of these guidelines is to encourage
the construction of buildings that are in scale
with the majority of the existing buildings in
the “Central Business District”. The majority
of the older buildings are narrow in width.
The intent of these guidelines is not to limit
building width, but, to encourage the
subdivision of wider facades, breaking-up the
scale and mass of larger buildings, making
them more compatible with existing facades.
a. Large, long facades shall be subdivided into bays, through the location and
arrangement of openings and architectural treatments that are compatible
in size and scale to existing buildings: bay width to be 16' to 28'.
b. The height to width ratio of one-story, single bay facades, or individual bays
of multiple bay facades, is not to exceed 1:2.
c. The height to width ratio of two-story, single bay facades, or individual bays
of multiple bay facades, is not to exceed 1:1.
2. Building Height
Buildings in the CBD are a mix of one and two story buildings. The existing
buildings range in height from 14' to 28'.
a. Buildings shall be limited to two stories in height or 28'-0".
b. Special architectural features will be allowed to exceed the above height if:
- The feature is located at a corner or,
- The feature is deemed necessary to the type, use, or style of the
building in question.
- Special architectural features shall not exceed the height of the
remainder of the building by more than 35%.
3. Building Roof Types
a. Maintain existing flat roof and parapets
b. All new buildings to have flat roof and parapets.
c. Sloping roofs, gabled or hipped, to be allowed only as special architectural
features.
d. Mansard roofs are prohibited.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-14
4. Street Facade
The majority of the existing street facades, the facade that faces a public rightof-
way, are comprised of common facade components. The arrangement of
facade elements shall follow this model which include the following typical
components: Facade Frame, Storefront Opening, Canopy/Awning and Sign.
a. Facade Frame - The facade frame, or wall, shall be brick masonry,
constructed principally in a single plane. The top of the parapet wall shall
be flat or step slightly to accentuate end piers. The facade frame shall be
capped by a stone, or simulated stone, coping or narrow cap flashing. Brick
shall be laid primarily in running bond with minimal decorative detail.
b. Storefront Opening - The storefront opening shall be a rectangular opening,
10' to 12' high, and approximately 80% of the width of the storefront, or bay.
The opening shall be almost entirely glass (window or showcases) with few
subdivisions. The glass framing system shall be metal; natural finish
aluminum is a typical material and finish. The building entry is often
centered in the storefront opening and is commonly recessed.
c. Canopies/Awnings - A canopy or awning is typically located at the top of the
storefront opening.
1. Awning shall be traditional in design; they shall be triangular in section,
sloping outward and down from the top of the opening. Narrow front
and side flaps are common. Round-top, half-round, box, or other
unusual awning shapes are discouraged. Internally lighted awnings are
prohibited. Signage on awnings shall be limited.
2. Canopies shall be narrow in elevation, 6" to 12", and flat. Typically
such canopies would have internal drainage. Canopies shall be selfsupporting
or supported by tension rods. Canopy projections to be
limited to 48". Sloping, or unusually shaped, canopies are prohibited.
5. Rear Facades
Rear facades, facades not facing a public right-of-way, are in many cases as
important as street facades as they are often located adjacent to parking and,
therefore, serve as the primary entrance to the building. Often times they must
also accommodate service and delivery functions. Rear facades shall exhibit
the same components as street facades; however, need not follow as rigorous
a design model:
a. Facade Frame - The facade frame, like that at the street facade, shall be
constructed principally in a single plane. If a parapet is used at the rear
facade, the top of the parapet wall shall be flat or step slightly to accentuate
end piers, as illustrated. If no parapet is used, downspouts shall be located
at the outer sides of the facades, not in the middle of the facade.
Acceptable materials include brick, decorative CMU (concrete masonry
unit), stucco, or EIS (exterior insulation systems). Each is, or gives the
appearance of, masonry construction. Aluminum siding, metal panels,
wood siding, or wood panels are prohibited.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-15
b. Storefront Opening - Like the street facade, the storefront opening shall be
a rectangular or square opening, 10' to 12' high, yet it may be a smaller
portion of the width of the facade, or bay than the street facade;
approximately 40% of the width. The opening shall be almost entirely glass
(window, showcases, or door) with few subdivisions. The glass framing
system shall be metal; natural finish aluminum is a typical material and
finish.
c. Canopies/Awnings - A canopy or awning typically located at the top of the
storefront opening is recommended.
1. Awnings shall be traditional in design; they shall be triangular in section,
sloping outward and sown from the top of the opening. Narrow front
and side flaps are common. Round-top, half-round, box, or other
unusual awning shapes are prohibited. Internally lighted awnings are
also prohibited. Awnings are not intended to be a principal means of
signage.
2. Canopies shall be narrow in elevation and flat. Typically such canopies
would have internal drainage. Canopies shall be self-supporting or
supported by tension rods, as illustrated. Canopy projections to be
limited to 48".
3. Sloping canopies are permitted at the rear facade. If space is available,
rear canopies can be ground supported.
6. Materials
Maintained consistent palette of materials is important to establish continuity
within the streetscape and to improving the overall appearance of the Central
Business District. The following are identified as acceptable building materials.
a. Street Facade
1. Facade Frame - Acceptable materials:
A. Brick: Shall be standard modular brick with common tooled mortar
joints. Untooled joints, distressed brick, or irregular shaped brick
are prohibited. Brick color and texture shall be compatible with
original brick facades in the Central Business District, constructed
in the 1950's and 1960's. Brick of this period was commonly blond,
yellow-blond, beige, or dull red with very little color range. Textures
varied from smooth or glazed to rough. Textures tended to be
uniform.
B. Stone: Smooth finish stone such as limestone or sandstone. Color
to be light to medium ‘buff’.
C. Aluminum Parapet Cap: Typical material is aluminum or painted
sheet steel. Color and finish shall match that of window framing
system.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-16
D. Artificial Stone and Pre-Case Parapet Cap: To simulate traditional
limestone and sandstone caps.
2. Storefront Opening - Acceptable materials:
A. Storefront Framing System: Aluminum or pre-painted steel
storefront glazing system. Natural finish aluminum is the most
common material and finish.
B Glass: Clear or with slight green tint.
C. Entry Door: One or two-lite door matching storefront glazing
system.
3. Canopies - Acceptable materials:
A. Canopy Fascia Trim: Metal. Typically, natural finish aluminum or
painted.
B. Soffit: Metal or cement plaster.
C. Support Rods: Metal.
4. Awnings - Acceptable materials:
A. Frame: No requirements.
B. Fabric: Standard fabrics for non-internally lighted awnings.
Patterns and colors to be compatible with other facade materials.
b. Rear Facade
1. Facade Frame - Acceptable materials:
A. Brick, decorative CMU (concrete masonry unit), stucco, or EIS
(exterior insulation system): See Section 1 Street Facade, 1.1 for
materials
B. Stone: Smooth finish stone such as limestone or sandstone. Color
to be light to medium ‘buff’.
C. Aluminum Parapet Cap, Gutters, and Downspouts: Typical material
is aluminum or painted steel. Color and finish shall match that of
window framing system.
D. Artificial Stone and Pre-Cast Parapet Cap: To simulate traditional
limestone and sandstone caps.
2. Storefront Opening - Acceptable materials:
A. Storefront Framing System: Aluminum or pre-painted steel
storefront glazing system. Natural finish aluminum is most common
material and finish.
B. Glass: Clear or with slight green tint. Reflective, mirror, heavily
tinted, or unusually colored glass prohibited.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-17
C. Entry Door: One or two-lite door matching storefront glazing
system.
3. Canopies - Acceptable materials:
A. Canopy Fascia Trim: Metal. Typically, natural finish aluminum.
B. Soffit: Metal or cement plaster.
C. Support Rods: Metal.
D. Canopy Roof: Asphalt shingles, slate, tile, or metal. Wood shakes
and shingles prohibited.
4. Awnings - Acceptable materials:
A. Frame: No requirements.
B. Fabric: Standard fabrics for non-internally lighted awnings.
(Ord. 353, 10/21/1999)
SECTION 15.06 - ENCUMBERING OF LAND REQUIRED TO
SATISFY REGULATIONS
No portions of a lot or parcel used in connection with an existing or proposed building,
structure or use and necessary for compliance with the area, height, bulk, density,
placement and related provisions of this Ordinance shall through sale or otherwise be
used again as part of the lot or parcel required in connection with any other building,
structure or use existing or intended to exist at the same time.
SECTION 15.07 ESSENTIAL SERVICES
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and the
ordinances of the City.
SECTION 15.08 - VOTING PLACE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be so construed as to interfere with the
temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other
public election.
SECTION 15.09 - PERMITTED HEIGHT
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered
to exceed the height limit hereinafter established for the district in which the building is
located except that penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators,
stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain
the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts and
screens, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, individual domestic radio and television
aerials, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above the height limits herein
prescribed. No such structure may be erected to exceed by more than fifteen (15) feet
the height limits of the district in which it is located; nor shall such structure have a total
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-18
area greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area of the building; nor shall such
structure be used for any residential purpose or any commercial or industrial purpose
other than a use incidental to the main use of the building. The erection of radio and
television transmission, relay, or other types of antenna towers, where permitted, shall
abide by the regulations set forth in Section 15.21 and 16.08. Site plan review is
required in specific districts. Wireless communications facilities and support structures,
where permitted shall abide by the regulations set forth in Sections 15.28 and 16.08.
SECTION 15.10 - EXCEPTION TO HEIGHT LIMITS
The height limitations of this Ordinance may be modified by the Zoning Board of
Appeals in their application to church spires, chimneys, flagpoles, belfries, cupolas,
domes, penthouses, water towers, masts and aerials, smokestacks, ventilators,
derricks, cooling towers and other similar and necessary mechanical appurtenances,
pertaining to and necessary to the permitted uses of the zoning districts in which they
are located.
SECTION 15.11 - PERMITTED PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED
OPEN SPACE
(a) Architectural features such as chimneys and bay windows may project a
maximum of three (3) feet into the required front or rear yard, and two (2) feet
into the required side yard.
(b) A porch, covered or balcony may project into the required front yard or open
space for a distance not to exceed eight (8) feet or into the required side yard for
a distance not closer than three (3) feet from the property line or into the required
rear yard or waterfront yard not to exceed five (5) feet.
(c) A terrace/patio may project into the required front yard or open space for a
distance not to exceed eight (8) feet or into the required side yard for a distance
not closer than three (3) feet from the property line or into the required rear yard
or waterfront yard for a distance not to exceed thirty (30) feet.
(d) A deck may project into the required side yard or open space for a distance not
to exceed five (5) feet or into the required rear yard or waterfront yard for a
distance not to exceed thirty (30) feet. A deck may not project into the required
front yard.
(e) A fire escape may project into the required side yard or rear yard or waterfront for
a distance not to exceed three (3) feet. A fire escape may not project into the
required front yard.
(f) An awning may project into the required front yard, rear yard or waterfront yard
for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet or into the required side yard for a
distance not to exceed five (5) feet.
(g) A vestibule may project into the required front yard or open space for a distance
not to exceed four (4) feet or into the required side yard for a distance not to
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-19
exceed three (3) feet. A vestibule may not project into the required rear yard or
waterfront yard.
SECTION 15.12 - FENCES REGULATIONS
Fences are permitted or required subject to the following:
(a) From the date of adoption of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to construct or cause to be constructed, any permanent fence or wall
on the lot line or otherwise upon any property within the City of Keego Harbor
without first having obtained a permit from the City.
(b) All fences established on or near the property lines require a registered survey or
mortgage survey.
(c) Fences in Single Family Residential Zones shall comply with the following standards:
1. Front Yard Fences:
(a) When located within the front yard, fences shall not exceed three (3) feet
in height measured from the existing grade at the fence line and may be
located on the front property line provided the fence may not be located
closer than ten (10) feet to the road pavement.
(b) When located within the front yard, fences shall be of a decorative nature
including picket (with a minimum of 50% open space between pickets),
split rail, or wrought iron and wrought iron type fencing. Chain link and
solid wood fencing is prohibited in front yards.
(c) Fences located within the front yard are exempt from Section 15.03 -
Corner Clearance provided they are a minimum of fifty percent (50%)
open.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-20
2. Side Yard Facing Road:
(a) Fences located between the rear building line and the rear property line
and located adjacent to a road my not exceed four (4) feet in height
measured from the existing grade at the fence line with a maximum of up
to two (2) additional feet of lattice for a total height of six (6) feet and must
be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of the road pavement
or at the property line whichever is greater.
3. Interior Side Yard:
(a) When located in an interior side yard between the front building line and
the rear building line, fences must be setback a minimum of 5 feet from
the front building line and may not exceed six (6) feet in height measured
from the existing grade at the fence line.
4. Rear Yard:
(a) If the property is not a through lot, a fence may be located on the rear
property line not to exceed six (6) feet in height measured from the
existing grade at the fence line.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-21
5. Through Lot:
(a) When located within a rear yard on a through lot where all of the lots
located on the same side of the street between two intersecting side
streets are through lots, fences may not exceed six (6) feet in height
measured from the existing grade at the fence line and must be setback a
minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of the road pavement or at the
property line whichever is greater.
(b) When located within a rear yard on a through lot where there are a mix of
lots with front and rear yards facing the street between two intersecting
side streets, fences may not exceed four (4) feet in height measured from
the existing grade at the fence line, with a maximum of up to two (2)
additional feet of lattice for a total of six (6) feet measured from the
existing grade at the fence line and must be setback a minimum of ten
(10) feet from the edge of the road pavement or at the property line
whichever is greater.
6. Waterfront Yards:
(a) Decorative fences a maximum of three (3') feet in height measured from
the existing grade at the fence line are permitted in waterfront yards
provided the vertical surface area is a minimum of 75 percent open to the
free passage of air and light. Decorative fences must be located no closer
than the water’s edge at a seawall, or in the absence of a seawall, five (5)
feet from the ordinary high water mark.
(d) Fences which enclose public or institutional playgrounds shall not exceed seven (7)
feet in height measured from the existing grade at the fence line, and shall not
obstruct vision to an extent greater than twenty-five (25) percent of their total areas.
(e) Fences shall be permitted in non-residential districts, provided that such fences
shall not exceed six (6) feet in height measured from the existing grade at the fence
line, and shall not extend toward the front of the lot farther than any portion of the
main building, except where permitted for the purposes of enclosing outside
storage.
Fences shall be required in non-residential zones for the enclosing of areas used for
outside storage of goods, material or equipment. Such fences shall not be less than
six (6) feet in height measured from the existing grade at the fence line.
Fences in non-residential districts shall not consist of barbed wire or
electrically- charged wiring, provided, however, that fences which enclose storage
areas may have barbed wire connected there with, if such barbed wire is more than
six (6) feet above grade.
(f) Fences shall not contain barbed wire, electric current or charge of electricity.
(g) If, because of the design or construction, one side of a fence has a more finished
appearance than the other, the side of the fence with the more finished appearance
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-22
shall face the exterior of the lot. All wooden fence posts must be properly treated to
prevent decay. Posts must be installed inside the property line, facing the interior of
the lot.
(h) Solid material shall not be permitted in chain link fences.
(i) Maintenance. Fences and walls shall be maintained in a manner so as to prevent
rust, corrosion and deterioration, so as to not become a public or private nuisance,
and so as not to be dilapidated or a danger to adjoining property owners or the
public. Fences shall not create an appearance of patchwork, which is indicative of a
state of disrepair. The property owner is responsible for the maintenance of the
fence in such a way that it will remain plumb and in good repair.
(j) On properties with an already existing fence, the existing fence must be removed
prior to installation of a new or replacement fence in the same general location.
(Ordinance 429 12/15/11, Ordinance 446 3/18/13)
SECTION 15.13 - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance shall be subject to
the following regulations:
(a) Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, except as
provided in Section 15.10, it shall be subject to, and must conform to all regulations
of this Ordinance applicable to main buildings.
(b) Detached accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required yard except a
rear yard.
(c) No accessory building shall be permitted in any front yard.
(d) Accessory buildings may occupy not more than twenty-five (25) percent of a
required rear yard, plus twenty (20) percent of any non-required rear yard.
(e) No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any
main building nor shall it be located closer than three (3) feet to any side or rear lot
line. In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley
right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than one (1) foot to such rear
lot line. In no instance shall an accessory structure be located within a dedicated
easement.
(f) No detached accessory building shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height in any
residential or commercial zone and shall be no larger than sixty-five (65) percent of
the principal building.
(g) No more than one accessory building shall be located on a single- family residential
lot. This provision shall not prohibit the keeping of one small accessory structure
such as a storage shed not to exceed one-hundred (100) square feet. No such
structure shall be located in the front or required side open space or within
permanent easement.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-23
(h) Accessory buildings are permitted only in conjunction with, incidental to and on the
same lot with a principal building which is permitted in the particular zoning district.
(i) A central air conditioning unit, central heat pump, compressors, generators,
swimming pool heater or any other noise-producing mechanical system which is
typically located on the exterior of a residential unit, shall be located as follows:
1. Within a rear yard or side yard provided that such system is not located closer
to a side lot line than the distance required by the side yard setback.
2. Within a required side yard setback provided that such system does not extend
into the required setback by more than three (3) feet and if the abutting parcel
is:
a. A street.
b. Occupied by a use other than a residential use.
3. If such system is visible from the street, it shall be screened with landscape
material with the starting size not less than one foot higher than the height of
the system.
(j) Accessory buildings within waterfront yards shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 15.15. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
(k) The following accessory structures shall be exempt from floor area ratio
calculations:
1. That portion of a detached accessory building occupying no more than 440
square feet or 15% of the lot area of lots 6,000 square feet or less, whichever is
less.
2. That portion of an attached accessory building occupying no more than 220
square feet or 7.5% of the lot area of lots 6,000 square feet or less, whichever
is less.
3. That portion of a detached accessory building occupying no more than 576
square feet or 15% of the lot area of lots over 6,000 square feet, whichever is
less.
4. That portion of an attached accessory building occupying no more than 278
square feet or 7.5% of the lot area of lots over 6,000 square feet, whichever is
less. (Ord. 378, 11/15/2001)
(l) The following accessory structures shall be exempt from lot coverage
calculations:
1. That portion of a detached or attached accessory building occupying no more
than 440 square feet or 15% of the lot area of lots 6,000 square feet or less,
whichever is less.
2. That portion of a detached or attached accessory building occupying no more
than 576 square feet or 15% of the lot area of lots over 6,000 square feet,
whichever is less. (Ord. 378, 11/15/2001)
(Ordinance 431, 12/15/11)
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-24
SECTION 15.14 - NOISE
Objectionable sounds, including those of an intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as
not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. The permitted noise in the C-1, C-2, 0-1,
M-1 and P-1 Districts shall not exceed seventy-five (75) decibels is between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. nor more than seventy (70) decibels between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. All measurements shall be made at the property line. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a temporary waiver of this requirement.
SECTION 15.15 - WATERFRONT YARDS
All new residential development adjacent to Cass Lake, Dollar Lake or Sylvan Lake or
any of their canals must comply with the applicable sections of this ordinance. In
addition, the following standards will apply to all new residential development with
frontage on these water bodies.
(a) Waterfront Yard Setbacks: For the purpose of determining the required setback for
a lot located on a waterway, the established residential building pattern shall be
equal to the average of the waterfront setbacks of the immediate adjacent dwelling
on each side, subject to the following requirements:
1. The waterfront setback of an adjacent dwelling shall be measured at the
shortest horizontal distance between the high watermark and the lakeside
corner of the adjacent dwelling that is nearest the subject parcel. In the event
that the nearest lakeside corner of the adjacent dwelling cannot be determined
by the City's Building Inspector (for example, if the adjacent structure is
curvilinear), then the measurement shall be made at the shortest horizontal
distance between the high watermark and the point of the adjacent structure
that is nearest to the subject parcel.
2. A deck which is attached to a residence shall not be considered a part of the
main structure from which the measurements are made.
3. Swimming pools, tennis courts, unenclosed decks and similar encroachments
into the waterfront setback area shall not be considered in making the
determination of established residential building pattern.
4. In the event that either or both of the two adjacent parcels are vacant or if either
or both of the two adjacent dwellings are located closer than 40 feet to a
waterway, then a setback of 50 feet shall be used for the adjacent parcel(s) in
computation to determine the established residential building pattern. In no
instance shall the waterfront setback be less than 50 feet.
5. Fences: Fences shall not be permitted within the waterfront yard.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-25
(b) Clear Vision Triangles: Each lot shall maintain clear vision triangles along both side
lot lines between the waterfront yard setback and the shoreline as described below.
The area within clear vision triangles shall be maintained free of recreational
vehicles, waterfront structures, accessory buildings, and plant material over the
height of three (3) with the following exceptions:
1. Within clear vision triangles, plant material that reaches a mature height of over
three (3) feet shall not be newly installed between the shoreline and the
midpoint of the waterfront setback line. The midpoint shall be defined as the
point halfway between the shoreline and the waterfront yard setback line, as
measured at the side lot line.
Between the midpoint of the waterfront yard setback and the waterfront yard
setback line, shrubs and evergreen plants shall be trimmed so as to not exceed
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-26
a height of three (3) feet and deciduous and evergreen trees shall be trimmed
so as to not have foliage below a height of six (6) feet, provided that vegetation
may occupy a portion of such area between the heights of three (3) feet and six
(6) feet as long as it does not significantly obstruct views to the lake or canal, as
determined by the Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or other City
official charged with enforcing the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Recreational vehicles and temporary waterfront structures may be stored within
the clear vision triangle of a waterfront lot between September 15 and May 15.
Such triangles shall be bounded by the following sides:
1. the side lot line;
2. the shoreline; and,
3. a line that commences at the intersection of the side lot line and the waterfront
yard setback and runs towards the shoreline at a thirty (30) degree angle from
the side lot line.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-27
(c) Waterfront Structures: The following waterfront structures and appurtenances are
permitted within a waterfront yard provided such structures are accessory to a
permitted principal use of waterfront property and the use is limited to recreational
and personal use of the principal user (occupants) residing on the property. No
structure will be approved without an existing primary structure on the parcel.
1. Permitted projections as regulated in Section 15.11 - Permitted Projections into
Required Open Space.
2. A shed, not exceeding a floor area of more than one hundred (100) square feet
and a height of eight (8) feet shall be permitted within the waterfront yard,
provided such shed is setback a minimum of twenty five (25) feet from the
shoreline and complies with all accessory building standards contained in
Section 15.13, and subsection (c) above.
3. The following waterfront structures and appurtenances shall be permitted,
provided that they meet the requirements of subsection (c) Clear Vision
Triangles above:
a. piers and wharves, including floating types;
b. flush mount and swivel hoists, overhead hoists, davits and mooring whips;
c. spring or mooring piles; and,
d. unenclosed boat port/well having a roof only and not exceeding a height of
twenty-two (22) feet above mean high water.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-28
4. Within a single family residential zoning district, a maximum of two (2) boat
ports/wells and two (2) hoists or other out of water lifting devices are permitted
per residential lot. Within the multiple family residential zoning district, the
maximum number of boat ports/wells shall be limited by the marina operating
permit issued by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
5. Bulkheads or seawalls are permitted, provided no bulkhead or seawall may
extend into the waterway beyond the lot line of any lot.
6. Construction, installation, storage, docking, or mooring of structures,
appurtenances, or watercraft shall not obstruct the natural flow of water or
access of boaters to: adjoining or nearby parcels; to deeper waters; or, normal
boating routes.
7. All permitted structures and appurtenances shall be kept safe, secure and in
good repair.
8. The placement of aids to navigation and regulatory markings are specifically
exempt from the requirements of this section.
9. Temporary waterfront structures may be stored within the clear vision triangle of
a waterfront lot between September 15 and May 15:
10. All temporary waterfront structures such as docks, boat hoists, mooring buoys,
etc. shall be removed no later than November 15, and installed no earlier than
April 15.
(d) Number of Boats and Structures.
1. Within the multiple family residential zoning district, the allowable accessory use
of the waterfront shall be limited to the specific conditions of special land use
approval under Section 5.02.
2. On-land storage of boats shall be subject to the requirements of this Section
and the limitations of the respective zoning district regulations.
SECTION 15.16 - KEEPING OF FARM ANIMALS AND OTHER
NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS
The keeping, raising, or breeding of animals including farm animals and non-domestic
animals and reptiles (except domesticated cats, dogs, canaries, parakeets, parrots,
gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, turtles, fish, rabbits and similar animals commonly kept
as pets) shall be prohibited, except as otherwise may be permitted by this Ordinance or
under conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
SECTION 15.17- RESERVED
SECTION 15.18 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS
The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the moving of any building within a district and
placed upon a foundation, or the moving of any building into a district from any other
district, provided said building meets all the limitations and requirements set forth in this
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-29
Ordinance for the district in which it is to be located.
SECTION 15.19 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
(a) Required
To insure compliance with this Ordinance and any conditions imposed under this
Ordinance, including conditions of the site plan approval, special approval, cluster
development, planned development, and street access approval, the City Council,
Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may require that financial
security acceptable to the City be deposited with the City Clerk to insure faithful
completion of improvements as defined in (b) below. The amount of the cash
deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall cover the estimated
cost of improvements associated with a project and other reasonable incidental
costs associated therewith, for which approval is sought.
(b) Improvements
"Improvements" means those features and actions associated with a project which
are considered necessary to protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of the proposed
project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, landscaping, parking,
paving of parking and circulation areas, screening, drainage and other site
improvements. "Improvements" does not include the entire project which is the
subject of the approval.
(c) Timing
The performance guarantee along with a detailed description and schedule of
improvements to be completed shall be deposited with the Clerk prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy authorizing use of the activity or project.
(d) Type
The applicant shall be required to provide the performance guarantee or financial
security in one or a combination of the following arrangements, whichever the
applicant elects.
1. Irrevocable Letter of Credit
An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank authorized to do business in
Michigan in an amount to cover the cost of the contemplated improvements as
estimated by the City.
2. Escrow Fund
A cash deposit, or deposit by certified check drawn on a bank authorized to do
business in Michigan sufficient to cover the cost of the contemplated
improvements as estimated by the City shall be deposited with the Clerk. The
escrow deposit shall be for the estimated time period necessary to complete the
required improvements.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-30
(e) Rebate
In the case of cash deposits, the Clerk shall rebate or release to the applicant, as
the work progresses, amounts equal to the ratio of the completed and accepted
work to the entire project, after approvals described below.
(f) Inspection and Certification
Private Improvements and Acceptance for Maintenance of Required Public
Improvements.
1. Certification by the Building Department
The applicant shall furnish the Clerk a letter or document signed by the Building
Department indicating satisfactory completion of the required improvements in
accordance with the above description of improvements.
2. Inspection of Public Improvements by the City Engineer or Building Department
After the completion of the construction of the required public improvements,
the Engineer or Building Department, or the County, State or Federal agency
with jurisdiction to grant approval or accept, shall conduct a final inspection and
certify compliance with the above required improvements. This inspection shall
be made to assure the improvements are completed according to the approved
plans and specifications.
3. Partial Street
In no case shall acceptance of any partial street be made for maintenance.
(g) Failure
In case the applicant shall fail to complete the required improvements work within
such time period as required by the conditions or guarantees as outlined above, the
City Council may proceed to have such work completed and reimburse itself for the
cost thereof by appropriating the cash deposit or certified check, or by drawing upon
the letter of credit.
(h) Maintenance Bond
The City may require, prior to the acceptance by the City of public improvements, a
maintenance bond acceptable to the City for a period of up to three years in an
amount not to exceed (35%) of the total cost of the public improvements.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-31
(i) Subdivisions
This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited
pursuant to the Subdivision Control Act, No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as
amended, being Section 560.101 to 560.293 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
SECTION 15.20 - TEMPORARY AND PORTABLE BUILDINGS,
USES AND STRUCTURES
The Planning Commission may permit temporary buildings, structures, and uses for a
period not to exceed six (6) months provided that all requirements and conditions
relative to the type of structure and use, and timing and arrangements for termination
and removal, are met. The Commission may require safeguards related to setbacks,
screening, off-street parking considered necessary to protect the health, safety, welfare
and comfort of inhabitants of the City. Further, the Commission may require site plan
approval and performance guarantee as conditions of approval. Trucks, truck trailers,
vans or other passenger vehicles shall not be used for storage, warehousing, retail
sales or service or offices.
SECTION 15.21 - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
In all zoning districts, satellite dish antennas may be permitted as an accessory use,
subject to the following regulations:
(a) Roof mounted antenna greater than three (3) feet in diameter and up to ten (10) feet
in diameter shall be permitted only in commercial and industrial districts. If located
on a roof, such antenna shall be considered a roof structure and shall comply with
the provisions of Section 15.09 of this Ordinance.
(b) Ground mounted antenna greater than three (3) feet in diameter and up to ten (10)
feet in diameter shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. An accessory use building permit for satellite dishes shall be required.
2. Maximum height permitted shall be twenty (20) feet.
3. The satellite dish structure shall be securely mounted and anchored to a pole,
and secured in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer and the
building code.
4. If elevated off of the ground, all such antennas shall be located so that there is
an eight (8) foot clearance between the lowest part of the dish and grade.
5. Satellite dish antenna shall not be permitted in front yards.
6. Such antenna shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any street line
and three (3) feet from any other property line.
7. All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground or otherwise
obscured from view.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-32
(c) The surface of roof or ground mounted antennae greater than three (3) feet in
diameter shall be open mesh and painted black so as not to reflect glare from
sunlight, and shall not be used as any sign or message board. All installations shall
be placed and constructed to blend with the surroundings.
SECTION 15.22 - DEVELOPMENT WITHIN FLOOD HAZARD
AREAS
Development within flood hazard areas, as defined in Article II herein, shall comply fully
with the adopted Flood Hazard Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 211 of 1982, as
amended.
SECTION 15.23 - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Landscaping, greenbelts, and screening are necessary for the continued protection and
enhancement of all land uses. Landscaping and greenbelts are capable of enhancing
the visual image of the City, preserving natural features, improving property values, and
alleviating the impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction associated with certain
uses. Screening is important to protect less-intensive uses from the impacts of more
intensive non-residential uses. Accordingly, the provisions set forth herein are intended
to set minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and
screening, and for the protection and enhancement of the City's environment.
(a) Scope of Application
The requirements set forth herein shall apply to all uses which are developed,
expanded, or changed, and to all lots, sites, and parcels which are developed or
expanded upon following the effective date of this Ordinance. No site plan shall be
approved unless said site plan shows landscaping consistent with the requirements
of this section. Where landscaping is required, a building permit shall not be issued
unless provisions set forth in this section have been met or a performance
guarantee has been posted in accordance with Section 15.19.
(b) Minimum Requirements
The requirements set forth herein are minimum requirements, and nothing herein
shall preclude the developer and the City from agreeing to more extensive
landscaping.
(c) Design Creativity
Creativity in landscape design is encouraged. Accordingly, required trees and
shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings, depending
on the designer's desired visual effect and, equally important, the intent of the City
to coordinate landscaping on adjoining properties.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-33
(d) Landscaping Requirements:
1. General Requirements
All developed portions of the site shall conform to the following general
landscaping standards, except where specific landscape elements, such as a
greenbelt, berms, or screening are required:
a. All unpaved portions of the site shall be planted with grass, ground cover,
shrubbery, or other suitable live plant material.
b. A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted at the rate of
one (1) tree per 3,000 square feet or portion thereof of unpaved open area.
Required trees may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in
groupings.
c. All required landscaping shall be served by an in-ground sprinkling system.
d. Landscaped areas which adjoin paved parking or driveways shall be
protected with curbs from encroachment of vehicles.
2. Landscaping Adjacent to Roads
All front, side and rear yards adjacent to roads in commercial, office and
industrial districts shall be landscaped in accordance with the following
standards:
A minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each
forty (40) lineal feet or portion thereof of road frontage, PLUS, a minimum of
one (1) ornamental tree shall be planted for each one hundred (100) lineal feet
or portion thereof of road frontage, PLUS, a minimum of eight (8) shrubs shall
be planted for each forty (40) lineal feet or portion thereof of road frontage. For
the purposes of computing length of road frontage, openings for driveways and
sidewalks shall not be counted. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform
intervals, at random, or in groupings.
3. Greenbelts
Where required, greenbelts and greenbelt buffers shall conform to the following
standards:
a. A required greenbelt may be interrupted only to provide for pedestrian or
vehicular access.
b. Grass, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material shall be planted
over the entire greenbelt area, except where paved walkways are used.
c. A minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each
thirty (30) lineal feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt length, or
alternatively, eight (8) shrubs may be substituted for each required tree.
Trees may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
d. Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet to the property
line or right-of-way line when a greenbelt abuts a public sidewalk.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-34
e. For the purposes of calculating required plant material, greenbelt length
shall be measured along the exterior edge of the greenbelt.
4. Berms
Where required or proposed, berms shall conform to the following standards:
a. Berms shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical
for each three (3) feet horizontal (33 percent slope), with at least a two (2)
foot flat area on the top.
b. The planting requirements for greenbelts, above, shall also apply to berms.
5. Parking Lot Landscaping
In addition to required screening, all off-street parking areas shall provide
landscaping as follows:
a. Landscaping Ratio. Off-street parking areas containing greater than fifteen
(15) spaces shall be provided with at least fifteen (15) square feet of interior
landscaping per parking space. Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping
shall be designed to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
guide traffic movement, and improve the appearance of parking areas.
b. Minimum Area. Landscaping areas in parking lots shall be no less than five
(5) feet in any single dimension, and no less than one hundred fifty (150)
feet in area. Landscaped areas in or adjacent to parking lots shall be
protected with curbing or other means to prevent encroachment of vehicles.
c. Other Landscaping. Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not
be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements.
d. Required Plantings. Requirements for plant material shall be based on the
location, size, and shape of the parking lot landscaped area. A minimum of
one (1) tree shall be planted per three hundred (300) square feet or fraction
thereof of interior landscaped area. The landscape plan shall indicate the
types, sizes, and quantities of plant material proposed for such area.
6. Evergreen or Landscaped Screening
Wherever an evergreen or landscaped screen is required or proposed,
evergreen screening shall consist of closely-spaced plantings which form a
complete visual barrier that is at least six (6) feet above ground level within five
(5) years of planting.
7. Landscaping of Rights-of-Way
Public rights-of-way located adjacent to required landscaping areas and
greenbelts shall be planted with grass or other suitable live ground cover, and
shall be maintained as if the rights-of-way were part of the required landscaped
areas or greenbelt.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-35
8. Maintenance of Unobstructed Visibility for Drivers
Landscaping located at an intersection of two streets shall comply with the
requirements in Section 15.03 so as to maintain unobstructed cross- visibility for
drivers.
(e) Standards for Landscape Materials
Unless otherwise specified, all landscape materials shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Plant Quality
Plant materials used in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be nursery grown, free of pests and diseases, hardy in Oakland County, in
conformance with the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen,
and shall have passed inspections required under state regulations.
2. Non-Living Plant Material
Plastic and other non-living plant materials shall not be considered acceptable
to meet the landscaping requirements of this Ordinance.
3. Plant Material Specifications
The following specifications shall apply to all plant material proposed in
accordance with the landscaping requirements in this Ordinance:
a. Deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of two (2) inches in caliper
measured twelve (12) inches above grade with the first branch a minimum
of four (4) feet above grade when planted.
b. Deciduous ornamental trees shall be a minimum of one and one- half (1
1/2) inches in caliper measured six (6) inches above grade with a minimum
height of four (4) feet above grade when planted.
c. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height when planted,
except that juniper, yew and arborvitae species shall be a minimum of three
(3) feet in height when planted. Furthermore, evergreen trees shall have a
minimum spread of three (3) feet, and the size of the bur lapped root ball
shall be at least ten (10) times the caliper measured six (6) inches above
grade.
d. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height when planted. Low
growing shrubs shall have a minimum spread of fifteen (15) inches when
planted.
e. Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous,
unbroken, visual screen within two (2) years after planting.
f. Vines shall have a minimum of three (3) runners, six (6) inches to eight (8)
inches long when installed, and be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in length
after one growing season.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-36
g. Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses shall be planted in such a manner
as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage
after one (1) complete growing season.
h. Grass area shall be planted using species normally grown as permanent
lawns in Oakland County. Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and free of
weeds, noxious pests, and diseases. Straw or other mulch shall be used to
protect newly seeded areas.
i. Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum of three (3)
inches deep, and installed in a manner as to present a finished appearance.
j. Use of the following plant materials or their clones (or cultivars) is not
encouraged because of susceptibility to storm damage, disease, and other
undesirable characteristics:
Box Elder Poplar
American Elm Willow
Tree of Heaven Horse Chestnut
European Barberry Silver Maple
Northern Catalpa
(f) Installation and Maintenance
The following standards shall be observed where installation and maintenance of
landscape materials are required:
1. Installation
Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner to ensure the
continued growth of healthy plant material. Trees, shrubs, hedges, and vines
shall be generously mulched at the time of planting.
2. Protection from Vehicles
Landscaping shall be protected from vehicles through the use of curbs.
Landscape areas shall be elevated above the pavement to a height adequate to
protect the plants from snow removal, salt and other hazards.
3. Off-Season Planting Requirements
If development is completed during the off-season when plants cannot be
installed, the owner shall provide a performance guarantee to ensure
installation of required landscaping in the next planting season.
4. Maintenance
Landscaping required by this Ordinance shall be maintained in a healthy, neat,
and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead
plant material shall be replaced immediately upon notice from the Building
Official, unless the season is not appropriate for planting, in which case plant
material shall be replaced at the beginning of the next planting season.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-37
All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and acceptable
supply of water. Trees, shrubs, and other plantings and lawn areas shall be
watered regularly throughout the growing season.
All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as but not limited to
benches, retaining walls, edging, and so forth, shall be maintained in good
condition and neat appearance. Rotted, deteriorated, or damaged landscape
elements shall be repaired, replaced, or removed.
(g) Modifications to Landscape Regulations
In consideration of the overall design and impact of a specific landscape plan, and
in consideration of the amount of existing plant materials to be retained on the site,
the Planning Commission may modify the specific requirements outlined herein,
provided that any such adjustment is in keeping with the intent of this Section. In
determining whether a modification is appropriate, the Planning Commission shall
consider whether the following conditions exist:
1. Topographic features or other unique features of the site create conditions such
that strict application of the landscape regulations would result in a less
effective screen than an alternative landscape design.
2. Parking, vehicular circulation, or land use are such that required landscaping
would not enhance the site or result in the desired screening effect.
3. The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be better
achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements of the Ordinance.
SECTION 15.24 - SCREENING OF ROOF TOP EQUIPMENT
Elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment and other similar
apparatus shall be screened from view by a structure equal in height to the height of the
equipment being screened and constructed of the same type of building material used
in the principal structure.
SECTION 15.25 - SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS
For all developments requiring site plan approval, either a new public sidewalk or
bikeway, or the reconstruction of existing sidewalks or bikeways, shall be required to be
constructed to City standards for the perimeter of the lot which abuts a major,
intermediate or collector street as defined in the City's Master Plan. New or
reconstructed sidewalks or bikeways shall be aligned with existing or proposed
sidewalks or bikeways. All multiple family residential projects require interior sidewalks.
Other residential and non-residential projects may require interior sidewalks to facilitate
pedestrian traffic safety, organization and convenience.
SECTION 15.26 - SITE GRADING
(a) Intent
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-38
Site grading regulations are established to assure adequate drainage away from
structures and to a natural or established drainage course and to assure protection
of trees on sites where grading is to take place.
(b) Scope of Application
A Grading Permit shall be required in all instances where grading, excavating,
filling, stockpiling, or other alterations to the land are proposed. “Filling” includes
the dumping of soil, sand, clay, gravel, or other material on a site. However, where
minor alterations to the land that do not affect the storm drainage pattern are
proposed, a Grading Permit shall not be required. The Grading Permit fee shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.
(c) Grading Plan
In the event that a Grading Permit is required, the applicant shall first submit
duplicate copies of the Grading Plan for review and approval by the Building Official,
City Engineer, or other authorities having jurisdiction such as Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality or Oakland County Drain Commissioner. Grading plans
may be submitted in conjunction with a site plan review, or may be submitted as a
separate plan. Such plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or
licensed professional civil engineer. One signed, approved copy shall be retained
by the city and one returned to the applicant.
(d) Grading Plan Standards
At a minimum, grading plans shall show existing and proposed grade elevations
adjacent to existing and proposed structures on the subject property and at the
structures on adjacent properties. In addition, sufficient existing and proposed
elevations are needed for the site and for as much of the adjacent property as is
necessary to establish the proposed surface drainage pattern. If excavation or
filling is proposed, the amount of material to be excavated or filled shall be indicated
on the grading plan. All elevations shall be based on U.S.G.S. datum. Elevations
and location of bench marks used for determining elevations shall be shown on the
plan.
1. Slope Away From Buildings and Finished Floor Elevations
All buildings and structures shall be constructed at an elevation which provides
a sloping grade away from the building or structure, thereby causing surface
water to drain away from the walls of the building to a natural or established
drainage course. The grade shall not exceed 6 inches of rise in 10 feet from
side lot line. The slope shall be measured from the highest point along the side
lot line to the building line.
In no case shall the finished floor of the proposed dwelling unit be less than
0.75 feet or exceed 2.5 feet above the centerline of the fronting street at the
lowest point along frontage of subject lot.
2. Runoff Onto Adjacent Properties
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-39
New grades shall not be established that would permit an increase in the runoff
of surface water onto adjacent properties, except through established drainage
courses.
3. Stockpiling
Stockpiling of soil, sand, clay, gravel and similar material shall be prohibited,
except where permitted as part of an approved construction project.
4. Clean Fill
Fill material brought into the city shall be free of contamination from hazardous
substances, debris, junk, or waste. The Building Official or City Engineer may
require verification from a qualified soil testing laboratory that the fill is free of all
contamination.
5. Excavations of Holes
The excavation or continued existence of unprotected holes or pits that
constitute or are reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to the
public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. This section also shall not apply
to lakes, streams, ditches, reservoirs, or other bodies of water under the
jurisdiction of the State of Michigan, County of Oakland, Keego Harbor, or other
governmental agency.
(e) Review, Inspection & Approval of Procedures
Grading plans shall be reviewed by the Building Official, City Engineer or other
authorities having jurisdiction. In the event that the grading plan is submitted in
conjunction with a site plan, the Planning Commission shall review the grading plan
as a part of normal site plan review. The Building Official shall issue a Grading
Permit after the determination has been made that the requirements set forth herein
and in other applicable ordinances have been complied with.
An as-built plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor clearly indicating compliance with the approved plan or those
areas not in compliance with the approved plan. Compliance must be attained prior
to an occupancy permit being issued.
SECTION 15.27 - SCREENING OF TRASH STORAGE AREAS
(DUMPSTERS)
Outdoor trash storage areas shall be designed, constructed, and maintained according
to the standards of this Section. Trash storage area locations and details of
construction shall be shown on site plans per Section 16.08, Site Plan Review and
Approval Procedures. The following requirements shall be met whenever an outdoor
trash storage area is proposed in conjunction with a use for which site plan approval is
required under this ordinance, where any change in the location or site of an existing
trash storage area is proposed, or where an outdoor trash storage area is created for a
new or existing use:
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-40
(a) Trash storage areas shall be located in the rear yard or non-required side yard, and
no less than twenty (20) feet from any residential district, as far as practical.
(b) Permitted trash storage areas shall be used to store only the refuse generated onsite
which shall be removed on a weekly basis or more frequently, as necessary.
Trash storage areas and enclosures shall be continuously maintained in a neat,
orderly, and sanitary condition at all times.
(c) A brick or decorative faced masonry wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall
enclose three (3) sides of the storage area and be at least one (1) foot higher than
the trash receptacle. An obscuring gate shall be provided on the remaining side to
provide complete enclosure of the trash storage area and said gate shall be kept
closed except during loading or unloading.
(d) The trash storage area shall be located on a concrete pad, at least ten (10) feet
wide by twenty (20) feet deep, constructed with a minimum of six (6) inches of 3500
P.S.I. concrete with air entrainment containing 6 x 6 inch ten (10) gauge welded
wire mesh. The above mentioned concrete pad shall provide an approach no less
than ten (10) feet in width or no less than the width of the gate; it shall extend at
least eight (8) feet in front of the obscuring gate to support the front axle of a refuse
vehicle. In addition, the trash storage area shall be large enough to accommodate
recyclables, grease disposal receptacles, etc. The Planning Commission may
increase or reduce the size of the enclosure where a different size storage area is
deemed necessary.
(e) Steel bollards, a minimum of 6" in diameter and filled with concrete, shall be placed
at both sides of the gate opening and to the rear of the storage area to prevent
damage to the walls and gates.
(f) In no instance shall any garbage or rubbish be stored at a height greater than the
required enclosure. The trash receptacle cover shall be kept closed except during
loading or unloading.
(g) Trash storage areas shall be accessible by garbage or rubbish vehicles without
endangering buildings, overhead lines, automobiles in designated parking spaces,
pedestrians, or impede pedestrian or vehicular access.
(h) The construction and storage of any such facility shall comply with City building
code requirements.
SECTION 15.28 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND
SERVICES
(a) In the following circumstances, a proposal to establish a new wireless
communications facility shall be deemed a principal use permitted, subject to site
plan review and the conditions set forth in subsection (d) below, and if approved,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and conditions of this
Section.
1. Attached wireless communications facilities within all R-M, RME, RMH, O-1, C-
1, C-2, P-1, and M-1 districts, where the existing structure is not, in the
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-41
determination of the City Council, proposed to be either materially altered or
materially changed in appearance.
2. Collocation of an attached wireless communications facility which has been preapproved
for such collocation as part of an earlier approval by the City Council.
3. Attached wireless communications facilities consisting of a utility pole located
within a public right-of-way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be
modified in a manner which, in the determination of the City Council, would
materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or
other safety interests.
(b) Wireless communications support structures are principal uses permitted subject to
special conditions in any district on public or quasi-public/institutional sites,
conditioned upon site plan and special land use review and approval. All wireless
communications support structures are subject to the conditions provided in
subsection (f) below, the application requirements specified in subsection (d) below,
and the general special land use approval standards and procedures specified in
Section 16.09.
1. Site locations shall be permitted on a priority basis on the following sites,
subject to application of all other standards contained in this Section:
a. Governmentally owned sites.
b. Sites owned by public school districts or private schools.
c. Religious or other institutional sites.
d. Public parks and other large permanent open space areas when
compatible.
2. Wireless communications facilities shall be of a design such as a steeple, bell
tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the
proposed site, neighborhood, and general area, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
(c) If it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Council by an applicant that a
wireless communications facility may not reasonably be established as a principal
use permitted under subsection (a) above, or as a principal use permitted subject to
special conditions under subsection (b) above, and is required to be established in
districts or areas other than those identified in subsections (a) and (b) above, in
order to operate a wireless communications service, then wireless communications
facilities may be permitted in the C-1, C-2, and M-1 districts, and in the RM, RMH
and RME districts when the site is adjacent to an existing utility tower, conditioned
upon site plan and special land use review and approval. All wireless
communications support structures are subject to the conditions provided in (f), the
application requirements specified in subsection (d) below, and the general special
land use approval standards and procedures specified in Section 16.09. At the time
of submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that a location within an allowable
district cannot reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity needs of the
applicant.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-42
(d) All applications to erect construct or modify any part or component of a wireless
communications facility shall include the following:
1. A site plan prepared in accordance with Section 16.08, showing the location,
size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and
the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and
species of proposed landscaping, and as-built drawings for all proposed
attached wireless communications facilities and/or wireless communications
support structures.
2. A disclosure of what is proposed, demonstrating the need for the proposed
wireless communications support structure to be located as proposed based
upon the presence of one or more of the following factors:
a. Proximity to an interstate highway or major thoroughfare.
b. Areas of population concentration.
c. Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers.
d. Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses
of trees, or other obstruction.
e. Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities
within which the proposed facility is to operate.
3. The reason or purpose for the placement, construction or modification with
specific reference to the provider’s coverage, capacity and/or quality needs
goals and objectives.
4. The existing form of technology being used and any changes proposed to that
technology.
5. As applicable, the planned or proposed and existing service area of the facility
and the attached wireless communications facility, and wireless
communications support structure height and type, and signal power expressed
in ERP upon which the service area has been planned. A propagation map
should also be provided to illustrate this information.
6. The nature and extent of the provider/applicant’s ownership or lease interest in
the property, building or structure upon which facilities are proposed for
placement, construction or modification.
7. The identity and address of all owners and other persons with a real property
interest in the property, buildings, or structure upon which facilities are
proposed for placement, construction or modification.
8. A map showing existing and known proposed wireless communications facilities
within the City of Keego Harbor, and further showing existing and known
proposed wireless communications facilities within areas surrounding the
borders of the City in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms
of potential collocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility.
The map shall also show existing buildings and/or other structures of the same
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-43
approximate height within a one-half (½) mile radius of the proposed site which
could accommodate a feasible collocation of the applicant’s proposed attached
wireless communications facility.
If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the City, the
applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any such information
which is trade secret and/or other confidential commercial information which, if
released would result in commercial disadvantage to the applicant, may be
submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with the development
of governmental policy. MCL 15.243(l) (g). This ordinance shall serve as the
promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request
for confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it to the attention
of the City.
9. For each location identified on the applicant/provider’s survey maps and
drawings, the application shall include the following information, if known, with
the applicant / provider expected to exercise reasonable due diligence in
attempting to obtain information through lawful means prior to application:
a. The structural capacity and whether it can accommodate the applicant’s
facility, as proposed or modified.
b. Whether property owner approvals exist or have been requested and
obtained.
c. Whether the location could be used by the applicant/provider for placement
of its attached wireless communications facility, or if not, a disclosure of the
technological considerations involved, with specific reference to how use of
the location would prohibit the applicant/provider from providing wireless
communications services.
10. A certification by a State of Michigan licensed and registered professional
engineer regarding the manner in which the proposed structure will fall. The
certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable
regulations for the district in question, in determining appropriate setbacks to be
required for the structure and other facilities.
11. A description of the security to be posted at the time of receiving a building
permit for the wireless communications support structure to ensure removal of
the structure when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided
in subsection (e) below. The security shall, at the election of the applicant, be in
the form of cash, surety bond, letter of credit, or an agreement in a form
approved by the City Attorney and recordable at the office of the Oakland
County Register of Deeds, a promise of the applicant and owner of the property
to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this Section, with the
further provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the
payment of any costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the City in securing
removal.
12. The site plan shall include a landscape plan illustrating that the wireless
communications support structure is being placed at a location which is not
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-44
otherwise part of another site plan with landscaping requirements. The purpose
of landscaping is to provide screening for the wireless communications support
structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases there shall be
fencing of at least eight (8) feet in height which is required for the protection of
the tower.
13. The applicant must provide a visual simulation of the proposed support
structure that illustrates the relationship between the height and the visual
appearance of the structure. The visual simulation must be provided from two
(2) different perspectives and accurately depict the scale of the proposed
structure in the context of the surrounding area.
(e) Approval Procedures
1. Within 30 days of the receipt of an application for site plan review, the City
Planning Department shall either: (a) inform the applicant in writing of the specific
reasons why the application is incomplete and does not meet the submittal
requirements; or (b) deem that the application is complete. If the Planning
Department informs the applicant of an incomplete application within 30 days, the
overall timeframe for review is suspended until such time that the applicant provides
the requested information.
2. If an application is deemed incomplete, an applicant may submit additional
materials to complete the application. An applicant’s unreasonable failure to
complete the application within 60 business days after receipt of written notice shall
constitute a withdrawal of the application without prejudice. An application
withdrawn without prejudice may be resubmitted upon the filing of a new application
fee.
3. An application deemed complete shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning
Commission at their next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration.
4. The Planning Commission shall review the application pursuant to Section 16.08
of the Zoning Ordinance and within 60-days, either deny, approve, or conditionally
approve the site plan.
5. The applicant shall be notified of the Planning Commission’s decision in writing
by the City Planning Department within 150 days of the submission of the initial
application unless:
a. The City Planning Department notified the applicant that his/her application
was incomplete within thirty (30) days of filing. If so, the remaining time from the one
hundred-fifty (150) day total review time is suspended until the applicant provides
the missing information; or
b. An extension of time is agreed to by the applicant. Failure to issue a written
decision within one hundred-fifty (150) days shall constitute an approval of the
application.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-45
(f) When a wireless communications facility has not been used for one hundred eighty
(180) days or more, or six (6) months after new technology is available which
permits the operation of a wireless communications facility without the requirement
of a wireless communications support structure, all and/or part of the wireless
communications facility shall be removed by the users and/or owners of the wireless
communications facility. The situation(s) in which removal of a wireless
communications facility is required may be applied and limited to a portion of the
facility.
1. Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, the
property owner or persons who had used the wireless communications facility
shall immediately apply for and secure the application for any required
demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the
demolition/removal, restoring the condition which existed prior to the
construction of the wireless communications facility.
(g) Wireless communications support structures permitted as principal uses subject to
special conditions by subsection (b) or subsection (c) above must meet the
following standards:
1. The wireless communications support structure shall not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare. The
wireless communications support structure shall be located and designed to be
harmonious with the surrounding areas, and to be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the natural environment, as well as the
environment as altered by development.
2. The maximum height of all attached wireless communications facilities and
wireless communications support structures shall be one hundred fifty (150)
feet as measured from the average grade surrounding the base of the
equipment structure upon which the tower is mounted. The switching equipment
enclosure at the base of the wireless communications support structure shall be
limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective
district. The applicant shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed height of
the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in
lower heights.
3. Where a monopole wireless communications support structure abuts a parcel of
land zoned for residential purposes, the setback from any lot line shall be in
accordance with the required setbacks for main or principal buildings as
provided in the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which the
monopole is proposed. The minimum setback of all other wireless
communications support structures from any lot line shall be no less than the
height of the tower, unless it can be demonstrated and certified by a registered
professional engineer, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, that the wireless
communications support structure has a shorter fall-zone distance.
4. Where the wireless communications support structure abuts a parcel of land
zoned for other than residential purposes, the minimum setback of the wireless
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-46
communications support structure and accessory structures shall be in
accordance with the required setbacks for the main or principal buildings as
provided in the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which the
wireless communications support structure is located. In all cases, the fall-zone
distance for the wireless communications support structure must be provided
and certified by a registered professional engineer.
5. There shall be an unobstructed access to the wireless communications support
structure, which may be provided through an easement. This access is
necessary for maintenance of the facility and will have a width and location
determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and traffic
circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the wireless
communications support structure and any attendant facilities; the location of
buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing
disturbance to the natural landscape; and the type of equipment which will need
to access the site.
6. The division of property for the purposes of locating a wireless communications
support structure is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions
are met.
7. Where a wireless communications support structure is proposed on the roof of
a building, the switching equipment module must be screened or architecturally
compatible with the building. The switching equipment module may be located
within the principal building or may be an accessory building, provided that an
accessory building conforms with all district requirements for principal buildings,
including yard setbacks and building height.
8. The Planning Commission shall, with respect to the color of the wireless
communications support structure and all accessory buildings, review and
approve so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility and maximize aesthetic
appearance. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the tower
and structure(s) in a neat and orderly condition.
9. The wireless communications support structure shall be constructed in
accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission
of a professional soils report from a soils engineer licensed in the State of
Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements indicating
the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The clearance
requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration and Federal
Communications Commission shall be noted.
10. A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement shall be
presented as part of the site plan for the proposed facility.
11. Any proposed commercial wireless communications support structures shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the
applicant’s attached wireless communications facility and comparable attached
wireless communications facilities for additional users. Wireless
communications support structures must be designed to allow for future
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-47
rearrangement of attached wireless communications facilities upon the wireless
communications support structure and to accept attached wireless
communications facilities mounted at varying heights.
12. A proposal for a new wireless communications support structure shall not be
approved unless it can be documented by the applicant that the
communications equipment planned for the proposed wireless communications
support structure cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved wireless
communications support structure or building due to one or more of the
following reasons:
a. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing
or approved wireless communications support structure or building, as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the
existing or approved wireless communications support structure cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment.
b. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the wireless
communications support structure or building as documented by a qualified
and licensed professional engineer and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
c. Existing or approved wireless communications support structures and
buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned
equipment at a height necessary for the coverage area and capacity needs
to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer.
d. Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the planned
communications equipment upon an existing wireless communications
support structure or building.
If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communications
support structure shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to
accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible collocation, such facility
shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure
and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended.
If a party who owns or otherwise controls a facility shall fail or refuse to
permit a feasible collocation, and this requires the construction and/or use
of a new wireless communications support structure, the party failing or
refusing to permit a feasible collocation shall be deemed to be in direct
violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of this Section
of the Zoning Ordinance, and, consequently such party shall take
responsibility for the violation, and shall be prohibited from establishing a
new wireless communications facility within the City of Keego Harbor for a
period of five (5) years from the date of the failure or refusal to permit the
collocation.
General Provisions
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 15-48
13. The wireless communications support structure shall comply with applicable
federal and state standards relative to electromagnetic impact.
SECTION 15.29 - HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations as defined in Article II, Definitions are permitted accessory
uses in the R-1, R-2, R-M, R-ME, R-MH, RT, C-1, C-2, O-1, M-1 districts
subject to the following standards:
(a) That such occupation is incidental to the residential use to the extent that
not more than twenty percent (20%) of the useable floor area of the
principal building or fifty percent (50%) of the accessory building shall be
occupied by such occupation.
(b) No change to the exterior of the building that alters the residential character
or appearances of the residence.
(c) That such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or
construction features or equipment or machinery not customary in
residential areas.
(d) No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall
be engaged in such occupation.
(e) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, times, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in
a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other
than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes
fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
(f) Clinics, hospitals, barber shops, beauty parlors, nursery schools, tourist
homes, tea rooms, animal hospitals, kennels and millinery shops, among
others, shall not be deemed to be home occupations and therefore shall not
be permitted in residential districts.
No outdoor display and/or materials, goods, supplies, or equipment used in
the home occupations shall be permitted on the premises.
(g) That there be no sign of any nature advertising said occupation. (Ord.
11/15/2001)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-1
ARTICLE XVI
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 16.00 – ZONING ADMINISTRATION
The Zoning Administrator, or such deputies, shall be appointed by the City Council and
designated to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
(a) Duties. The Zoning Administrator shall:
1. Receive and review for completeness all applications for site plan review and
Special Land Use permits which the Planning Commission is required to
decide under this Ordinance and refer such applications to the Planning
Commission for determination.
2. Receive and review for completeness all applications for appeals, variances,
or other matters, which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to decide
under this Ordinance and refer such applications to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for determination.
3. Receive and review for completeness all applications for amendments to this
Ordinance and refer such applications to the Planning Commission and City
Council for determination.
4. Make periodic site inspections of the City to determine Ordinance compliance,
and answer complaints on Zoning Ordinance violations. The Zoning
Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; and/or shall take any other action authorized by this
Ordinance to ensure compliance with or prevent violations of its provisions.
5. Grant Certificates of Zoning Compliance, review administrative sketch plans,
and make inspections of premises necessary to carry out administration and
enforcement of this Ordinance.
6. Implement the decisions of the Planning Commission and City Council.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-2
SECTION 16.01 – CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
(a) A building permit for erection, alteration, moving, or structural repair of any
building or structure shall not be issued until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance
has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. Issuance of such a Certificate
shall indicate the use(s) and plans for which the permit is requested comply with
this Zoning Ordinance.
(b) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or premises, or both,
or part thereof, until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued
by the Zoning Administrator.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all Certificates of Zoning
Compliance and said record shall be open for public inspection.
(d) Certificates of Zoning Compliance authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in an approved application and plans, therefore no other
use, arrangement, or construction is permitted. Use arrangement or construction
at variance with the authorization shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
Any change in approved plans shall occur only as provided for in this Ordinance
and shall require issuance of an amended Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
SECTION 16.02 - DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR
The Building Inspector shall:
(a) Have the power to grant building and occupancy permits, to make inspections of
buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this
Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector to approve any plans or
issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction
until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this
Ordinance.
(b) The Building Inspector shall record all non-conforming uses existing at the
effective date of this Ordinance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
Article XII - Nonconformity.
(c) Under no circumstances is the Building Inspector permitted to make changes to
this Ordinance nor to vary the terms of this Ordinance in carrying out his duties
as Building Inspector.
(d) The Building Inspector shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions
imposed by this Ordinance are complied with by the applicant despite violations
of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the
granting of said permit.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-3
SECTION 16.03 – PERMITS
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit:
(a) Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection,
alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any
land which is not in accordance with all provisions of this Ordinance.
(b) Permits for New Use of Land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used
or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a different class or type unless
a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use.
(c) Permits for New Use of Buildings. No building or structure or part thereof, shall
be changed to or occupied by a use or a different class or type unless a
certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the newer different use.
(d) Permits Required. No building or structure, or part thereof shall be hereafter
erected, altered, moved, or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first
issued for such work. The terms "altered and repaired" shall include any
changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of
occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes
affecting or regulated by the Building Code, or by this Ordinance, except for
minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features.
SECTION 16.04 - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
No land, building, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a
Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply
in the issuance of any certificate:
(a) Certificates Not to be Issued. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for
any building, structure or part thereof or for the use of any land, which is not in
accordance with all the provisions of this Ordinance.
(b) Certificates Required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is
hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be
done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such
building or structure.
(c) Certificate Including Zoning. Certificates of Occupancy as required by the
Building Code for new buildings or structures, or part thereof, or for alterations to
or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute
Certificates of Occupancy as required by this Ordinance.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-4
(d) Certificates for Existing Buildings. Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued for
existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after
inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such
use of land are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(e) Records of Certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in
the office of the Building Inspector, and copies shall be furnished upon request
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved.
(f) Certificates for Dwelling Accessory Buildings. Buildings or structures accessory
to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be
included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot
plan and when completed at the same time as such dwelling.
(g) Application for certificates. Applications for certificates of occupancy shall be
made in writing to the building inspector on forms furnished by that department,
and such certificates shall be issued within five (5) days after receipt of such
application if it is found that the building or structures, or part thereof, or the use
of land is in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. If such certificate
is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified of such refusal and
cause thereof, within the aforesaid five (5) day period.
SECTION 16.05 – FEES
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and a
collection procedure, for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other
matters pertaining to this ordinance. The City shall have the authority to include fees for
the use of engineering, planning, legal or other special consultants. The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the City Offices, and may be altered or amended only by the City
Council. No permit or certificate shall be issued or special use site plan, rezoning, or
variance acted upon unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been
paid in full.
SECTION 16.06 - SITE PLAN REVIEW
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to review and to approve or reject all
site plans (i.e. preliminary, final and combined site plans). Prior to the issuance of
building permits or commencement of construction, site plan review and approval is
required in accordance with the procedures contained in this section.
(a) When required.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-5
1. Site plan review is required for all proposed uses, including change of use,
and certain existing uses within the City where an alteration, addition,
expansion, change or conversion constitutes an increase or reduction to the
existing structure or use of more than five hundred (500) square feet or ten
(10%) percent, whichever is less; or would require a variance from the
provisions of this Ordinance, regardless of its size.
2. Any development, except single family residential, for which an off street
parking area is required in Article XIII – Off Street Parking Requirements.
3. Any use except single family residential which lies contiguous to a major
thoroughfare or collector street.
4. All residentially related special land uses permitted in single family districts
such as, but not limited to: churches, schools, and public facilities.
5. Projects not eligible for sketch plan review as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
(b) Sketch Plan Review.
1. Intent. The intent of this section is to permit submittal of a sketch plan in
instances where a complete site plan is not considered essential to ensure
compliance with the intent and standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
2. Eligibility. The Zoning Administrator and Building Official may allow a sketch
plan for the following activities:
a. Changes in use, as defined in this Zoning Ordinance, that do not increase
the gross floor area, provided all other improvements are consistent with
the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
b. Alterations to the off-street parking layout or installation of pavement or
curbing improvements provided the total number of spaces shall remain
constant, and the construction plans and lot construction are approved by
the City.
c. Relocation of a waste receptacle to a more inconspicuous location, or the
installation of screening, both consistent with the requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance.
d. Changes to a facade, architectural features or wall signs, provided such
changes are consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance
and do not significantly change the appearance of the building. (An
elevation plan showing changes and construction materials is required).
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-6
e. A change from a nonconforming use, building or site to a more conforming
situation consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
f. Modifications to upgrade a building to improve barrier-free design, comply
with Americans with Disabilities Act or other federal, state or county
regulations.
g. Internal construction or change in the floor plan for a conforming use that
does not increase gross floor area, provided the construction cost over a
twelve (12) month period does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
building’s state equalized value or effect parking requirements on a site.
h. Construction, improvements, or alterations of signs, retaining walls,
fences, waste receptacles, sidewalks, antennae, lights, poles,
cooling/heating or other mechanical equipment, telephone booths,
newspaper boxes, landscaping or similar structures which conform to the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance or other City standards, and where
site plan review is not specifically required under other sections of this
Zoning Ordinance.
3. Procedure.
a. The process shall involve submittal of a sketch plan, required application
form, and fee to the City. The Zoning Administrator and Building Official
shall review the sketch plan in accordance with the same procedures,
requirements, and standards used by the Planning Commission for a
formal site plan. After the sketch plan review, the Zoning Administrator
and Building Official will approve, approve with modifications, or deny the
proposed plan. The Zoning Administrator and Building Official shall make
a report of each sketch plan review to the Planning Commission including
the rationale for allowing sketch plan review and the complete sketch plan
review checklist.
b. The Zoning Administrator and Building Official retain the option to require
additional information or a complete site plan for review by the Planning
Commission, particularly for sites which do not comply with previously
approved site plans, sites with parking deficiencies, sites abutting
residential districts or sites experiencing problems with drainage, traffic,
noise, aesthetics or other general health and safety issues. If a formal site
plan is required, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant to
submit a complete application in accordance with this Section. The
applicant may also request review by the Planning Commission.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-7
4. Information Required. The Zoning Administrator shall require all applicable
criteria set forth below to be met.
a. General information required for all cases.
1. Details of the propose changes to the use or structure in question.
2. Proprietors’, applicants’, and owners’ names, addressed and telephone
numbers.
3. Location map with north point indicated.
4. Locations of existing landscaping, lighting, parking, if applicable.
5. Gross acreage and building figures.
6. Zoning classification of petitioners’ parcel and all abutting parcels.
5. Duration and Termination. Approval of a Sketch Plan by the Zoning
Administrator shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year. If
construction is not initiated within this time period, such failure shall be
considered abandonment of the Sketch Plan and shall make its approval null
and void. The Zoning Administrator may grant an extension not to exceed
one (1) year. No further extension may be permitted.
(c) Preliminary Site Plan Review.
1. Application. Any applicant may submit a request for preliminary site plan
review by filing with the Zoning Administrator completed forms, site plan
review checklist, payment of the review fee, and eighteen (18) copies of the
preliminary site plan drawing(s) properly signed and sealed by a licensed
professional. The Administrator, upon receipt of the application, shall transmit
only complete submittals of the preliminary site plan drawings to the Planning
Commission, City Planning and Engineering consultants, and any other
consultants as necessary, at least twenty-one (21) days prior to its next
regular meeting. The purpose of such preliminary review is to confirm
general compliance with City standards as well as to suggest changes, if
necessary, for final site plan approval.
2. Information Required. Each preliminary site plan submitted for review shall
provide the following information:
a. Property owner and applicant name and address;
b. Scale, north arrow, and date of plan;
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-8
c. Location, description, dimensions, and area of the site; zoning
classification; and, demonstration of compliance with lot area, width,
coverage and setback requirements.
d. General topography and soils information and existing natural and manmade
features to be retained or removed;
e. Use, location and dimensions of proposed buildings/structures; including
floor area, number of floors, height, number and type of dwelling units
(where applicable);
f. Proposed streets/drives; including general alignment, right of way, surface
type, and width, based on ordinance requirements for proposed use;
g. Proposed parking; including location and dimensions of spaces and aisles,
and surface type;
h. Demonstration that all barrier free requirements have been met;
i. Adjacent land uses, property owners, and zoning and location of adjacent
buildings and drives/streets;
j. Proposed phasing;
k. Location and width of any easements on the site.
3. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall approve,
approve with conditions or deny the preliminary site plan. The Planning
Commission shall set forth the reason for its action in the record of the
meeting at which action is taken.
4. Effect of Approval. Approval of a preliminary site plan by the Planning
Commission shall indicate its general acceptance of the proposed layout of
buildings, streets and drives, parking areas, other facilities and overall
character of the proposed development.
5. Expiration of Approval. Approval of a preliminary site plan shall be valid for a
period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of approval and shall
expire and be of no effect unless an application for a final site plan is filed with
the Zoning Administrator within that time period. The Zoning Administrator or
duly appointed agent shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of action of the
Planning Commission of the preliminary site plan, transmit a written
certification of such approval to the applicant.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-9
(d) Final Site Plan Review.
1. Application. Following approval of a preliminary site plan, the applicant shall
submit to the Zoning Administrator eighteen (18) copies of a final site plan as
well as other data and exhibits hereinafter required, the review fee, and a
completed application form. The Administrator, upon receipt of the
application, shall transmit only complete submittals of the final site plan
drawing(s) to the Planning Commission, City Planning and Engineering
consultants, and any other consultants as necessary, prior to its next regular
meeting.
2. Information Required. A Final Site Plan submitted for review and approval
shall contain all of the following data presented in a clear and legible format.
Site Plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development. Sheet
size shall be at least 24" x 36" with plan view drawn to a scale of no greater
than 1" = 50’ for property less than three acres or no greater than 1" = 100' for
property three or more acres.
General Information
a. Proprietors', applicants', and owners' names, addresses and telephone
numbers.
b. Date of preparation, including revisions.
c. Scale.
d. Northpoint.
e. Location map drawn at a scale of 1" = 2,000' with north point indicated.
f. Architect, Engineer, Surveyor, Landscape Architect, or Planner's seal and
signature.
g. Existing and proposed lot lines, building or structures, parking areas,
drives, etc., on the parcel and within one hundred (100) feet of the site.
h. Centerline and existing and proposed right-of-way lines of any street.
i. Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels.
j. Gross acreage figure.
Physical Features
a. Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes and approaches.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-10
b. Proposed locations of access drives, street intersections, driveway
locations, sidewalks, and curbing.
c. Location of existing and proposed service facilities above and below
ground, including:
i. Chemical and fuel storage tanks and containers.
ii. Water supply facilities.
iii. Sanitary sewage disposal facilities.
iv. Storm water control facilities and structures.
v. Location of all easements.
d. Location of all structures with setback, yard dimensions and gross area.
e. Dimensioned parking spaces and parking and loading calculations, drives
type of surfacing and on-site circulation patterns.
f. Details of barrier free parking, access and similar site features.
g. Dimensioned floor plans, elevations, and proposed construction materials
of all proposed buildings on the site.
h. Proposed site lighting information.
i. Location and description of all existing and proposed landscaping, berms,
fencing and screening walls.
j. Trash receptacle pad location, size and method of screening.
k. Transformer pad location and method of screening.
l. Dedicated road or service drive locations.
m. Entrance details including sign locations, types and size.
n. Designation of fire lanes.
o. Any other pertinent physical features.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-11
Natural Features
a. Soil characteristics of the parcel to at least the detail provided by the U.S.
Soil Conservation Service, Soil Survey of Oakland County, Michigan.
b. Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet.
Areas with slopes greater than ten (10%) percent (one (1) foot of vertical
elevation for every ten (10) feet of horizontal distance) shall be delineated.
Topography on the site and beyond the site for a distance of one hundred
(100) feet in all directions shall also be indicated.
c. Grading plan, showing finished contours at a maximum interval of one (1)
foot, correlated with existing contours so as to clearly indicate required
cutting, filling and grading.
d. Location of existing drainage courses and associated bodies of water, on
and off site, and their elevations. The location of existing wetlands and
flood plains shall be included.
e. Location, size and type of all single trees having a diameter breast height
(d.b.h.) of four (4) inches or greater. Wooded areas shall be delineated by
symbolic lines tracing the spread of the outermost branches and shall be
described as the general sizes and kinds of trees contained.
f. Keyed plan outlining soil erosion and sedimentation measures to be
provided.
Additional Requirements for Residential Developments:
a. Density calculations by type of unit by bedroom counts.
b. Designation of units by type and number of units in each building.
c. Carport locations and details where proposed.
d. Specific amount, location and type of recreation spaces.
e. Number and location of visitor parking spaces to be provided.
Additional Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Developments:
a. Loading/unloading areas.
b. Gross floor area.
c. Number of employees in peak usage.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-12
3. Standards for Review. In reviewing the final site plan, the Planning
Commission shall determine whether the plan meets the following
specifications and standards:
a. The plan conforms to the approved preliminary site plan and with all
Zoning Ordinance regulations;
b. All required information is provided;
c. The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood
and protects the general health, safety, welfare and character of the City.
d. A proper relationship exists between major thoroughfares and proposed
service drives, driveways and parking areas. Proper access to all portions
of the site and all sides of any structure is provided. All structures or
groups of structures shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle
access by some practical means to all sides.
e. The location of buildings is such that the adverse effects of such uses will
be minimized for the occupants of that use and surrounding areas.
f. Natural resources will be preserved to the maximum extent possible in the
site design by developing in a manner which will not detrimentally affect or
destroy natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, steep
slopes, soils, groundwater and woodlands.
g. Storm water management systems and facilities will preserve the natural
drainage characteristics and enhance the aesthetics of the site to the
maximum extent possible, and will not substantially reduce or increase the
natural retention or storage capacity of any wetland, water body or water
course, or cause alterations which could increase flooding or water
pollution on or off site.
h. Wastewater treatment systems, including on-site septic systems, will be
located to minimize any potential degradation of surface water or
groundwater quality and meet County and State standards.
i. Sites which include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels, salt, or
chemicals will be designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting
materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater or nearby water
bodies in accordance with County and State standards.
j. Landscaping, including grass, trees, shrubs and other vegetation is
provided to maintain and improve the aesthetic quality of the site and
area.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-13
k. The proposed use is in compliance with all City Ordinances and any other
applicable laws.
4. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the final site plan. The Planning
Commission may suggest and/or require modifications in the proposed final
site plan as are needed to gain approval.
In the interest of ensuring compliance with this Ordinance and protecting the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City, the Planning
Commission, as a condition of final approval of the site plan, shall require the
applicant to deposit a performance guarantee as set forth in Section 15.19 of
the Zoning Ordinance for the completion of improvements associated with the
proposed use.
5. Effect of Approval. Approval of a final site plan authorizes applicant to apply
for a building permit, certificate of zoning compliance and/or certificate of
occupancy. A building permit, certificate of zoning compliance and/or
certificate of occupancy will not be granted for site plans approved with
conditions until the remaining issues have been addressed and resolved to
the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
6. Expiration of Approval. Approval of a final site plan shall expire and be of no
effect one (1) year following the date of approval unless construction has
begun on the property in conformance with the approved final site plan. The
applicant can request a one (1) year extension from the Planning Commission
a month prior to the date of expiration. Approval shall also expire and be of
no effect unless a building permit shall have been taken out within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the date of approval of the final site plan.
(e) Combining Preliminary and Final Site Plans. An applicant may, at his or her
discretion and risk, combine a preliminary and final site plan application for
approval. In such a situation the portion of the review process concerning
preliminary site plan application and review may be waived by the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to require
submittal of a preliminary site plan separate from a final site plan, where, in its
opinion, the complexity and/or scale of the site for the proposed development so
warrant.
(f) Amendment of Approved Site Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to determine if a proposed change requires an amendment to an
approved final site plan. A site plan may be amended upon application and in
accordance with the procedure herein for a final site plan. The Zoning
Administrator may approve minor changes in an approved final site plan,
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-14
provided that a revised final site plan drawing (s) be submitted showing such
minor changes, for purposes of record.
(g) Modification of Plan during Construction. All improvements shall conform to the
final site plan. Any changes, which result in a material alteration of the site plan
approved by the Planning Commission, shall require re-submittal to the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may require the
applicant to correct the changes so as to conform to the approved final site plan.
(h) Phasing of Development. The applicant may, at his discretion, divide the
proposed development into two (2) or more phases. In such case, the
preliminary site plan shall cover the entire property involved and shall clearly
indicate the location, the size, and character of each phase. A final site plan
shall be submitted for review and approval for each phase.
(i) Inspection. The Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator shall be responsible
for inspecting all improvements for conformance with the approved final site plan.
All sub-grade improvements such as utilities,utilities; sub-base installations for
drives and parking lots, and similar improvements shall be inspected and
approved prior to covering. The applicant shall be responsible for requesting the
necessary inspections.
(j) Violations. The approved final site plan shall regulate development of the
property and any violation of this Article, including any improvement not in
conformance of the approved final site plan, shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance as provided in Article XXI, and shall be subject to all penalties therein.
SECTION 16.07 - SPECIAL LAND USE REVIEW
(a) Application. Applications for special land use permits authorized in this
Ordinance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a form provided by
the City. In addition to a complete application form, the applicant is required to
pay all required fees and submit a preliminary site plan prepared in accordance
with Section 16.06, Site Plan Review. Incomplete submittals shall not be
accepted by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Procedures.
1. Planning Commission Hearing and Review. Special Land Use Approval shall
not be granted until a public hearing has been held by the Planning
Commission, in accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended. The
Planning Commission shall make a recommendation with comments on the
Special Land Use to the City Council.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-15
2. City Council Review. Following the public hearing and recommendation from
the Planning Commission, that application will be forwarded to the City
Council for review. The City Council shall deny, approve, or approve with
conditions, requests for Special Land Use approval. The decision of the City
Council shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the
Special Land Use under consideration. Any decision, which denies a request
or imposes conditions upon its approval, shall specify the basis for the denial
or the conditions imposed.
The City Council may impose such additional conditions and safeguards
deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual
property rights, and for insuring that the purposes of this Ordinance and the
general spirit and purpose of the district in which the special use is proposed
will be observed.
(c) Basis of Determinations. The Planning Commission and City Council shall
review the proposed Special Land Use in terms of the standards stated within
this Ordinance and shall establish that such use and the proposed location:
1. Taking into consideration the size, location and character of the proposed
land use, viewed within the context of surrounding land uses and the Master
Plan for such area, the proposed use shall not be incompatible nor
inharmonious, as determined by the application of generally accepted
planning standards and/or principles, with:
a. The surrounding uses; and/or
b. The orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood and/or vicinity
in accordance with this Section and the Master Plan.
2. The proposed use shall be of a nature that will make vehicular and pedestrian
traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved, taking into
consideration vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow,
proximity and relationship to intersections, adequacy of sight distances,
location and access of off-street parking and provisions for pedestrian traffic,
with particular attention to minimizing child-vehicle interfacing.
3. The proposed special land use shall not unreasonably impact upon
surrounding property in terms of noise, dust, fumes, smoke, air, water, odor,
light and/or vibration, and further, shall not unreasonably impact upon
persons perceiving the operation in terms of aesthetics. Where such
concerns can be remedied by way of design, construction and/or use, the
proposed use shall be designed, constructed and used so as to eliminate the
effects of the use which would otherwise substantiate denial thereof, taking
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-16
into consideration the location, size, intensity, layout and periods of operation
of such use.
4. The proposed use shall be such that the proposed location and height of
buildings or structures and location, nature and height of walls, fences and
landscaping will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate development
and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value.
5. The proposed use shall relate harmoniously with the physical, historic, and
economic aspects of adjacent land uses as regards prevailing shopping
habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, continuity of
development, and need for particular services and facilities in specific areas
of the City.
6. The proposed use is in general agreement with the master plan designation
for the area where the use is to be built.
7. The proposed use is so designed, located, planned and to be operated that
the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
8. The proposed use shall not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which it is to be located and will not be
detrimental to existing and/or other permitted land uses in the zoning district.
9. The proposed Special Land Use shall not result in an impairment, pollution
and/or destruction of the air, water, natural resources and/or public trust
therein.
10. The proposed Special Land Use shall not unreasonably burden the capacity
of public services and/or facilities.
(c) Duration, Voiding and Extensions of Permit. Unless otherwise specified by the
City Council, any Special Land Use permit granted under this section shall be
null and void unless the development proposed shall have its first building
inspection within one (1) year from the date of the granting of the permit. The
City Council may grant an extension thereof for good cause for a period not to
exceed one (1) year.
The Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke a permit issued under the
provisions of this Ordinance whenever the permit is issued erroneously on the
basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant or his agent and is in
violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or of any other ordinances or
regulations of the City.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-17
(d) Reapplication. No application for a special use permit which has been denied
wholly or in part shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one (1) year or more
from the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or
change of conditions found to be sufficient to justify reconsideration by the City
Council.
SECTION 16.08 – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
(a) Purpose & Intent. Planned Unit Development (PUD) district regulations are intended
to provide for various types of land uses planned in a manner which shall:
1. Encourage the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability;
2. Conserve natural resources and energy;
3. Encourage innovation in land use planning;
4. Provide enhanced housing, employment, shopping, traffic circulation and
recreational opportunities for the people of the City; and,
5. Bring about a greater compatibility of design and use.
The provisions of this Article provide enabling authority and standards for the
submission, review, and approval of applications for planned unit developments.
(b) PUD Regulations.
1. A planned unit development (PUD) may be applied for in any zoning district. The
granting of a Planned Unit Development application shall require a rezoning by
way of amendment of this Ordinance upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission and approval of the City Council.
2. Any land use authorized in this Ordinance may be included in a Planned Unit
Development, subject to adequate public health, safety, and welfare protection
mechanisms being designed into the development to ensure the compatibility of
varied land uses both within and outside the development.
3. The applicant for a Planned Unit Development must demonstrate each of the
following criteria as a condition to being entitled to Planned Unit Development
treatment:
a. Granting of the Planned Unit Development will result in at least one (1) of the
following:
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-18
1. A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the project and
to the community, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or
unlikely to be achieved without application of the planned unit
development regulations; or
2. Long-term protection and preservation of natural resources and natural
features of a significant quantity and/or quality, where such benefit would
otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of
the planned unit development regulations; or
3. A non-conforming use shall, to a material extent, be rendered more
conforming, or less offensive, to the zoning district in which it is situated.
b. The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable
increase in the need for or burden upon public services, facilities, streets and
utilities.
c. The proposed development shall be consistent with the public health, safety
and welfare of the City.
d. The proposed development shall not result in an unreasonable negative
environmental impact on the subject site or surrounding land.
e. The proposed development shall not result in an unreasonable negative
economic impact upon surrounding properties.
f. The proposed development shall be under single ownership and/or control
such that there is a single person having responsibility for completing the
project in conformity with this Ordinance.
g. The proposed development shall be consistent with the Goals and Policies of
the Master Plan.
(c) Procedure for Review.
1. Pre-application Conference. Prior to the submission of an application for planned
unit development approval, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator, together with any staff and consultants the Administrator deems
appropriate. The applicant shall present at such conference, or conferences, at
least a sketch plan of the proposed planned unit development, as well as the
following information:
a. Total number of acres in the project;
b. A statement of the number of residential units, if any;
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-19
c. The number and type of nonresidential uses, the number of acres to be
occupied by each type of use;
d. The known deviations from ordinance regulations to be sought;
e. The number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space; and,
f. All known natural resources and natural features to be preserved.
2. Preliminary Plan. Following the Pre-application Conference, the applicant shall
submit a preliminary site plan of the proposed Planned Unit Development. The
preliminary site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the standard set forth
in Section 16.06(c). A narrative report shall accompany the site plan providing a
description of the project, discussing the market concept and feasibility of the
project, and explaining the manner in which the criteria set forth in Section
16.08(b)(3) have been met.
a. Planning Commission Action. The Preliminary Plan shall be noticed for
public hearing as a zoning amendment before the Planning Commission.
Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the
preliminary site plan and shall take one of the following actions:
i. Approval. Upon finding that the Preliminary Plan meets the criteria
and standards set forth in Sections 16.08(a) and 16.08(b), the
Planning Commission shall grant preliminary approval. Approval
shall constitute approval of the uses and design concept as shown
on the Preliminary Plan and shall confer upon the applicant the
right to proceed to preparation of the Final Plan. Approval of the
Preliminary Plan by the Planning Commission shall not constitute
rezoning of the property to PUD nor bind the City Council to
approval of the Final Plan.
ii. Tabling. Upon finding that the Preliminary Plan does not meet the
criteria and standards set forth in Sections 16.08(a) and 16.08(b),
but could meet such criteria if revised, the Planning Commission
may table action until a revised Preliminary Plan is resubmitted.
iii. Denial. Upon finding that the Preliminary Plan does not and cannot
meet the criteria and standards set forth in Sections 16.08(a) and
16.08(b), the Planning Commission shall deny preliminary approval.
3. Final Plan. Within six (6) months following receipt of the Planning Commission
comments on the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit a final plan and
supporting materials conforming with this Section. If a final plan is not submitted
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-20
by the applicant for final approval within six (6) months following receipt of
Planning Commission comments, the preliminary plan approval becomes null
and void.
a. Information Required. A final site plan and application for a PUD shall
contain the following information:
i. A site plan meeting all requirements of Section 16.06(d), Final Site
Plan.
ii. A separately delineated specification of all deviations from this
ordinance, which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and
development proposed in the absence of this planned unit
development article.
iii. A specific schedule of the intended development and construction
details, including phasing or timing.
iv. A specific schedule of the general improvements to constitute a
part of the development, including, without limitation, lighting,
signage, the mechanisms designed to reduce noise, utilities, and
visual screening features.
v. A specification of the exterior building materials with respect to the
structures proposed in the project.
vi. Signatures of all parties having an interest in the property.
b. Planning Commission and Action. The final plan shall constitute an
application to amend this Ordinance, and shall be noticed for public
hearing as a zoning amendment before the Planning Commission, and
otherwise acted upon by the Planning Commission and the City Council,
as provided by law.
i. Approval. Upon finding that the Final Plan meets the criteria and
standards set forth in Section 16.08(a) and 16.08(b), the Planning
Commission shall recommend approval to the City Council.
ii. Tabling. Upon finding that the Final Plan does not meet the criteria
and standards set forth in Section 16.08(a) and 16.08(b), but could
meet such criteria if revised, the Planning Commission may table
action until a revised Final Plan is resubmitted.
iii. Denial. Upon finding that the final plan does not and cannot meet
the criteria and standards set forth in Section 16.08(a) and
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-21
16.08(b), the Planning Commission shall recommend denial to the
City Council. The Planning Commission shall, to the extent it
deems appropriate, submit detailed recommendations relative to
the Planned Unit Development project including, without limitation,
recommendations with respect to matters on which the City Council
must exercise discretion.
c. City Council Action. Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall review the Final Plan. Taking into
consideration the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the
criteria and standards set forth in Sections 16.08(a) and 16.08(b), the City
Council shall approve, table or deny the Final Plan. Prior to approval of a
Final Plan, the City Council shall require all standards and conditions of
approval to be incorporated in a Development Agreement. The
Agreement shall be prepared by the City Attorney, reviewed by the City
Planner, approved by the City Council, and signed by both the City and
the Applicant.
(d) Design Standards
1. Residential Design Standards.
a. Residential density shall not be greater than the maximum density permitted
in the zoning district in which the property is situated immediately prior to
reclassification under this Article. Additional density for residential uses may
be allowed at the discretion of the Planning Commission and based upon a
demonstration by the applicant of consistency with the Master Plan and of
planning and design excellence resulting in a material benefit to the City,
adjacent land uses, and/or the ultimate users of the project, where such
benefit would otherwise be unlikely to be achieved without the application of
the PUD regulations, including, without limitation, innovative design producing
significant energy efficiency, pedestrian or vehicular safety, long term
aesthetic beauty, and protection and preservation of natural resources and
features.
2. Non-residential Design Standards.
a. Non-residential uses may be permitted in combination with other nonresidential
uses or as part of a common development with residential uses.
b. The non-residential uses, including parking and vehicular traffic ways, shall
be separated and buffered from residential units in a manner consistent with
good land and community planning principles.
3. General Design Standards
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-22
a. All regulations applicable to setbacks, parking and loading, general
provisions, and other requirements shall be met in relation to each respective
land use in the development based upon zoning districts in which the use is
listed as a Principal Permitted Use. In all cases, the strictest provisions shall
apply.
b. Notwithstanding the immediately preceding paragraph, deviations with
respect to such regulation may be granted as part of the overall approval of
the Planned Unit Development, provided features or elements demonstrated
by the applicant and deemed adequate by the Planning Commission are
designed into the project plan for the purpose of achieving the objectives of
this Article.
c. To the maximum extent feasible, the development shall be designed so as to
preserve the natural resources and natural features. The benefit, which
would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced
against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity, taking into
consideration the local, state and national concern for the protection and
preservation of the natural resources or features and the following criteria:
1. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative methods of
accomplishing any development.
2. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects of the
proposed activity.
3. The size, quality and rarity of the natural resources or natural features,
which would be impaired or destroyed.
d. A perimeter setback and/or berm shall be required from the Planning
Commission for the purpose of buffering the development in relation to
surrounding properties. If the Planned Unit Development project includes
non-residential uses adjacent to a district authorizing residential uses, and/or
if the project is larger than one (1) acre in area, such perimeter setback shall
be established with a dimension from the property line of up to fifty (50) feet at
the discretion of the Planning Commission, taking into consideration the use
or uses in and adjacent to the development. The setback distance need not
be uniform at all points on the perimeter of the development.
e. Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards
otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective types of uses
served.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-23
f. Underground installation of utilities shall be required, including electricity and
telephone, as found necessary by the Planning Commission.
g. Pedestrian walkways shall be separated from vehicular circulation, as found
necessary by the Planning Commission.
h. Signage, lighting, landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all
structures, and other features of the project, shall be designed and completed
with the objective of achieving an integrated and controlled development,
consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development or
developments, and natural features of the area.
i. Where non-residential uses adjoin off-site residentially zoned property, noise
reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as earthen and/or
landscape berms and/or decorative walls, shall be employed. The Planning
Commission, at its discretion, shall review and approve the design and
location of such mechanisms.
j. The City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall
resolve all ambiguities as to applicable regulations using the Zoning
Ordinance, Master Plan, and other City standards or policies as a guide.
(e) Conditions.
1. Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of a Planned Unit
Development, to the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that
public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be
capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the
land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural
resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and
promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
2. Conditions imposed shall be designed to: protect the public health, safety, and
welfare; preserve natural features and resources; and, be necessary to meet the
intent and purpose of this Ordinance, and ensure compliance with the standards
of this Ordinance. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the record of
the approved Planned Unit Development.
(f) Phasing and Commencement of Construction.
1. Phasing. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning
and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be capable
of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open
space, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of
natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the Planned
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-24
Unit Development and the residents of the surrounding area. All conditions that
are phase specific shall be completed during development of the subject phase,
and cannot be postponed for completion during other phases. In addition, in
developments which include residential and non-residential uses, the relative mix
of uses and the scheduled completion of construction for each phase shall be
disclosed and determined to be reasonable at the discretion of the City Council
after recommendation from the Planning Commission.
2. Commencement and Completion of Construction. To ensure completion of
required improvements, the City is authorized to impose performance guarantees
in accordance with Section 15.19. Construction shall be commenced within one
(1) year following final approval of a planned unit development and shall proceed
substantially in conformance with the schedule set forth by the applicant, as
required by Section 16.08(f)(1). If construction is not commenced within such
time, any approval of a site plan on the project shall expire and be null and void,
provided, an extension for a specified period may be granted by the City Council
upon good cause shown if such request is made to the City Council prior to the
expiration of the initial period. Moreover, in the event a site plan has expired, the
City Council, based on a recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall
be authorized to rezone the property in any reasonable manner, and, if the
property remains classified as PUD, a new application shall be required, and
shall be reviewed in light of then existing and applicable law and ordinance
provisions.
(g) Effect of Approval.
1. When approved, the Planned Unit Development amendment, with all conditions
imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use authorization for the property, and
all improvement and use shall be in conformity with such amendment. Notice of
adoption of the final PUD plan and conditions shall be recorded by the applicant
at the Oakland County Register of Deeds, evidence of which shall be supplied to
the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 16.09 - PLANNING COMMISSION
The City Planning Commission shall perform all of the duties of such Commission as
are set forth in the ordinance creating said Planning Commission, any amendments
thereto and this ordinance.
In cases where the Planning Commission is required to recommend certain use of
premises under the provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant shall furnish such
surveys, plans or other information as may be required by said Commission for the
proper consideration of the matter.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
City of Keego Harbor Zoning Ordinance Page 16-25
The Planning Commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and
shall notify such parties, who may in its opinion be affected thereby, of the time and
place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of
procedure.
The Planning Commission may impose such conditions or limitations in recommending
approval as may, in its judgment, be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this
ordinance.
When site plan review is required by the Planning Commission under the terms of this
Ordinance, a site plan fee may be required to cover the cost of such reviews including
plans, engineers and other such professional services in accordance with a schedule of
fees adopted by Council resolution.
(Ordinance 431, 12/15/11); (Ordinance 433, 3/19/12)
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 17-1
ARTICLE XVII
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established, the membership, powers, duties of
which are prescribed in Act 110 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan of 2006 (PA
110 of 2006), as amended. The Zoning Board of Appeals in addition to the general
powers and duties conferred upon it, by said Act, in specific cases and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, shall interpret and determine the application of
the regulations established under this ordinance in harmony with their purpose and
intent as hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 17.01 - MEMBERSHIP
A Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than five (5) members and two (2) alternate
members to be appointed by the City Council, in accordance with PA 110 of 2006, as
amended. Vacancies shall be filled by resolution of the City Council for any expired
term of the vacant term. One (1) member of the Board shall be a member of the
Planning Commission. A member of the zoning board of appeals may be removed by
the legislative body for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written
charges and after a public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a
vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify
himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes
malfeasance in office.
SECTION 17.02 - MEETINGS
All meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as
such board may determine. All hearings conducted by said board shall be open to the
public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and
shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. The board shall have
the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths,
compel testimony and the production of books, papers, and other evidence pertinent to
the matters before it.
SECTION 17.03 - POWERS OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the authority to act on those matters
where this Ordinance provides for administrative review/appeal, interpretation, and shall
have authority to authorize a variance as defined in this Ordinance and law of the State
of Michigan. The ZBA shall not have the authority to alter or change zoning district
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 17-2
classifications of any property, nor to make any change in the text of this Ordinance.
(a) Administrative Review
The ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that
there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by an
official, council or commission in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this
Ordinance. In hearing and deciding appeals under this sub-section, ZBA review
shall be based upon the record or the administrative decision being appealed, and
the ZBA shall not consider new information which had not been presented to the
administrative official, council or commission from whom the appeal is taken.
(b) Interpretation
The ZBA shall have the authority to hear and decide requests for interpretation of
the zoning ordinance, including the zoning map. The ZBA shall make such decision
so that the spirit and intent of this Ordinance shall be observed. Text interpretations
shall be limited to the issues presented, and shall be based upon a reading of the
Ordinance as a whole, and shall not have the effect of amending the Ordinance.
Map interpretations shall be made based upon rules in the Ordinance, and any
relevant historical information. In carrying out its authority to interpret the
Ordinance, the ZBA shall consider reasonable and/or practical interpretation, the
ZBA may confer with staff and/or consultants to determine the basic purpose of the
provision subject to interpretation and any consequences which may result from
differing decisions. A decision providing an interpretation may be accompanied by
a recommendation for consideration of an amendment of the Ordinance.
(c) Variances
The ZBA shall have the authority in specific cases to authorize one or more
variances from the strict letter and terms of this Ordinance by varying or modifying
any of its rules or provisions so that the spirit of this Ordinance is observed, public
safety secured, and substantial justice done. Such authority shall be exercised in
accordance with the following standards:
Dimensional Variance:
A. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a dimensional (nonuse)
variance to provide relief from a specific standard in this Ordinance relating to an
area, a dimension or a construction requirement or limitation, upon the concurring
vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Practical Difficulty. A nonuse variance shall not be granted unless the Zoning
Board of Appeals finds that there is a practical difficulty in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of this ordinance. In determining whether a practical difficulty exists,
the Zoning Board of Appeals must find that:
1. Compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing area, setback,
frontage, height, bulk, lot coverage, density or other dimensional or construction
standards will unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a
permitted purpose or will render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily
burdensome.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 17-3
2. A grant of the variance will do substantial justice to the applicant as well as
to other property owners in the district, and a lesser variance will not give
substantial relief to the applicant as well as be more consistent with justice to
other property owners in the zoning district.
3. The plight of the applicant is due to the unique circumstances of the
property.
4. The problem is not self-created.
5. The spirit of this ordinance will be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done.
Use Variance:
A. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a use variance to authorize
a land use which is not otherwise permitted by this ordinance in the district where
the property is located, upon the concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members
of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Remedies Exhausted. An application for a use variance shall not be submitted
or considered unless the applicant has first received a written determination from
the planning department that the proposed land use is not permitted under this
ordinance in the district where the property is located.
C. Unnecessary Hardship. A use variance shall not be granted unless the Zoning
Board of Appeals finds, on the basis of substantial evidence presented by the
applicant, that there is an unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of this ordinance. In determining that an unnecessary hardship exists, the
Zoning Board of Appeals must find that:
1. The property in question cannot be reasonably used or cannot yield a
reasonable return on a prudent investment if the property would be used only for
a purpose allowed in the zoning district.
2. The plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not to
general neighborhood conditions.
3. The use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area and locality.
4. The problem is not self-created.
5. The spirit of this ordinance will be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done.
2. In all variance proceedings, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide information, plans, testimony and/or evidence from which the ZBA may
make the required findings. Administrative officials and other persons may, but
shall not be required to, provide information, testimony and/or evidence on a
variance request.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 17-4
3. The following are specified as appropriate considerations by the ZBA in
hearings and deciding variance requests, provided, this list shall in no respect
constitute a limitation upon the considerations which may be made by the ZBA:
a. Other lands, structures, buildings, lots and uses in the same district and in
the general vicinity of the property in question.
b. Whether granting the variance will confer special privileges on the applicant
that have been denied by the Ordinance and/or ZBA in other cases.
c. Whether the requested variance is the minimum necessary to authorize
reasonable use of the property in relation to the surrounding area.
d. Reasonable and available alternatives, which, although not requested by
the applicant, would minimize or eliminate the need for variance relief.
e. The provisions of this Ordinance from which a variance is requested,
including the purpose and intent of such provisions within the context of the
Ordinance as a whole.
f. The imposition of appropriate and authorized conditions.
g. The existence of nonconforming structures, uses of land, or the
combination of structures and uses, shall not be used as a singular basis or
rational for granting a variance.
(d) Conditions
The ZBA may impose reasonable conditions in connection with an affirmative
decision on an interpretation or variance request. The conditions may include
requirements necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a
proposed planned use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased
service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural
environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility
with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and
economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall meet the following
requirements:
1. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare and the
social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity
under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the
proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
2. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are
affected by the proposed use or activity.
3. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, be
related to the standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity
under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those
standards.
Conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a variance shall be recorded
as part of the ZBA minutes, and shall remain unchanged except upon the
mutual consent of the ZBA and the landowner following notice and hearing as
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 17-5
required in a new case. Moreover, to insure adequate notice of the decision,
and conditions imposed, the ZBA may require as a condition to the
effectiveness of relief granted that the property owner record with the Oakland
county Register of Deeds, in a form acceptable to the ZBA, an affidavit detailing
the relief granted and conditions imposed.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall have the power to permit the erection and use of a
building or an addition to an existing building of a public service corporation or for
public utility purposes in any permitted district to a greater height or larger area than
the district requirements herein established, and permit the location, in any use
district, of a public utility building, structure or use, if the Board shall find such use,
height, area, building, or structure reasonably necessary for the public convenience
and service, and if an applicant under this subsection shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Board that no reasonable alternative exists, which if employed
would allow full compliance with this Ordinance. In the exercise of its power
granted under this subsection, the Board shall attach such conditions and
requirements as shall reduce to a minimum any detrimental effects.
(f) Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to
secure an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape, or so located
with relation to surrounding development or physical characteristics, that it cannot
otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification.
(g) Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space
requirement where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements.
(h) Permit the moving of buildings within a district and placed upon a foundation, or the
moving of any building into a district from any other district.
SECTION 17.04 - LIMITATIONS ON THE POWERS OF THE
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
(a) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be necessary (Ord. 403, 6/19/2003):
1. To reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any
administrative official.
2. To decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the Board is
required to pass under this Ordinance; or
3. To effect any variance in this Ordinance.
(b) The concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be necessary:
1. To grant a variance from uses of land permitted in an ordinance.
(c) Every decision of the Board shall be based upon finding of fact and each and every
such finding shall be supported in the record of the proceedings of the Board.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 17-6
(d) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to empower the Board to change the
terms of this Ordinance, to effect changes in the Zoning Map, or to add to the uses
permitted in any Zoning District, except when specifically empowered to do so.
SECTION 17.05 - PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS TO THE BOARD
(a) Appeals of any nature in which Board action is sought shall be commenced by a
person filing a notice with the Building Inspector and with the Board on such forms
and accompanied by such fee as may be specified by the City. The notice of
appeal shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall be
signed. Applications involving a request for a variance shall specify the
requirements from which a variance is being sought and the nature and extent of
such variance.
Applications involving a specific site shall be accompanied by a plot plan which shall
contain the following information, where applicable:
1. Applicant's name, Address, and telephone number.
2. Scale, northpoint, and date of submission.
3. Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels.
4. Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, driveways, and other
improvements on the site and immediately adjacent to the site.
5. Proposed lot lines and lot dimensions, and general layout of proposed
structures, parking areas, driveways, and other planned improvements on the
site.
6. Dimensions, centerlines, and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and
alleys.
7. Building facade elevations where the application involves a nonresidential use.
The Board may also require elevations where the application involves a
residential use if deemed necessary to make the decision required herein.
8. Photographs of the site showing the relationship to surrounding uses.
9. If any of the items listed are not applicable to a particular plot plan, the applicant
shall specify on the plot plan which items do not apply, and furthermore, why
the items are not applicable.
(b) Hearings
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing, not to
exceed forty-five (45) days from the filing of the notice of appeal, and give due
written notice of the hearing, to be personally delivered or mailed, at least fifteen
(15) days thereof to the appellant and all owners of any real property within 300 feet
of the premises in question according to the last assessment role. At the hearing,
any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall prepare an official record for each appeal and shall
base its decision on this record. The official record shall include:
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 17-7
1. The relevant administrative records and the administrative orders issued
thereon relating by the appeal.
2. The notice of appeal.
3. Such documents, exhibits, photographs, or written reports as may be submitted
to the Board for its consideration.
(d) The requisite written findings of fact, the conditions attached and the decisions and
orders by the Board of Appeals in disposing of the appeal shall be entered into the
official record after they have been signed by the Chairman of the Board and after
written notice of the disposition of the appeal has been served, either in person or
by mail, upon the parties to the appeal and the Building Inspector. The Chairman
shall within ten (10) days after the date Board has reached its final decision on an
appeal, sign the necessary orders to effectuate the decision of the Board.
(e) A copy of the official record of an appeal shall be made available for the parties to
the appeal upon request and after the payment of $1.00 per page.
(f) A variance shall run with the land, except that if no building permit has been
obtained within one year of the effective date of the variance, the variance shall
become null and void. The Board of Appeals shall review any subsequent
application for a variance on the applicable conditions and circumstances which
exist at the time of the subsequent application.
(g) Any party aggrieved by any order, determination, or decision of any officer, agency,
board, commission, zoning board of appeals, or legislative body of any local unit of
government shall have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court on questions of law
and fact. Such appeal must be taken within thirty (30) days after the date of the
officer, agency, board, commission, zoning board of appeals, or legislative body
decision is issued in writing signed by the Chairperson. Following the decision of the
Circuit Court, an appeal may be taken to the Court of Appeals. A request for
reconsideration of an appeal by the officer, agency, board, commission, zoning
board of appeals or legislative body shall not toll the time for taking such appeal. In
the event a request for reconsideration is granted, the time period for appeal shall
commence from the approval of the minutes of the meeting where the appeal was
reconsidered. In any event, only one request for reconsideration on each appeal
shall be allowed.
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 18-1
ARTICLE XVIII
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION 18.00 - STATEMENT OF INTENT
For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable
development within the territorial limits of the municipality, this Ordinance shall not be
amended except to correct an error in the Ordinance or, because of changed or
changing conditions in a particular area or in the municipality generally to rezone an
area, extend the boundary of an existing District or to change the regulations and
restrictions thereof. Such amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by City Council
on its own motion, may be initiated by any person, firm, or corporation filing an
application therefore with City Council, or by the Planning Commission, at its discretion
who may also initiate amendments to this Ordinance and recommend the same to
legislative body for adoption.
SECTION 18.01 - AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
Filing of Applications
All petitions for amendments to this Ordinance shall be in writing, signed, and filed in
triplicate with the Clerk for presentation to City Council.
(a) All petitions for amendments to this Ordinance, without limiting the right to file
additional material, shall contain the following:
1. The petitioner's name, address and interest in the petition as well as the name,
address and interest of every person, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the land.
2. The nature and effect of the proposed amendment.
3. If the proposed amendment would require a change in the Zoning Map, a fully
dimensioned Site Plan showing the land which would be affected by the
proposed amendment, a complete legal description of the land, the present
zoning classification of the land, the zoning classification of all abutting districts,
all public and private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting
the land under consideration.
4. If the proposed amendment would require a change in the Zoning Map, the
names and addresses of the owners of all land and their legal descriptions
within the area to be changed by the proposed amendment.
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 18-2
5. The alleged error in this Ordinance which would be corrected by the proposed
amendment, with a detailed explanation of such alleged error and detailed
reasons the proposed amendment will correct the same.
6. The changed or changing conditions in the area or in the municipality that make
the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to the promotion of the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
7. All other circumstances, factors and reasons which applicant offers in support of
the proposed amendment.
(b) The Council upon receipt of the petition to amend, after having been examined and
approved as to form by the clerk, shall refer the same to the Planning Commission
for study and report. The Planning Commission shall cause a complete study of the
petition to be made and shall recommend to City Council such action as it deems
proper. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission before their
recommendation to Council of any proposed amendment to this Ordinance. Notice
of the public hearing shall be given by publishing said notice at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality stating the time and place of
such hearing and the substance of the proposed amendment. This notice shall
appear in said newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the
public hearing. In addition to the above, if an individual property or several adjacent
properties are proposed for rezoning, the Planning Commission shall give a notice
of the proposed rezoning to the owner of the property in question, to all persons to
whom any real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and
to the occupants of all single and two-family dwellings within 300 feet. The notice
shall be delivered personally or by mail to the respective owners and tenants at the
address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is not known, the
term "occupant" may be used. If the notice is delivered by mail, an affidavit of
mailing shall be filed with the Planning Commission before the hearing. The notice
shall be made not less than 8 days before the hearing stating the time, place, date,
and purpose of the hearing.
(c) The Council may not enact the proposed amendment until thirty (30) days after
such referral to the Planning Commission or until the Planning Commission makes
its report to the City Council, whichever first occurs. The Council may adopt such
with or without amendments, or refer same again to the Planning Commission.
(d) In case a protest against any proposed amendment to this Ordinance is presented
in writing to the Clerk prior to the public hearing thereon, duly signed by the owners
of twenty (20) percent or more of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the
owner of twenty (20) percent or more of the frontage immediately to the rear
thereof, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed be altered, such amendment shall not be passed
except by a vote of four-fifths of the members of the Council.
SECTION 18.02 - COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF ORDINANCE
The Planning Commission shall, from time to time at intervals of not more than three (3)
years, examine the provisions of this Ordinance and the location of district boundary
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 18-3
lines and shall submit a report to City Council recommending changes and
amendments, if any, which are desirable in the interest of public health, safety, and
general welfare.
SECTION 18.03 – REZONING WITH CONDITIONS
Rezoning With Conditions:
In accordance with MCL 125.3405, the City Council, following a public hearing and
recommendation by the Planning Commission, may approve a petition for a rezoning
with conditions requested by a property owner. The standards of this section shall grant
a property owner the option of proposing conditions for the development and use of
property in conjunction with an application for rezoning. Such conditions may be
proposed at the time the application for rezoning is filed, or at a subsequent point in the
process of review of the proposed rezoning.
(a) Conditional Rezoning Agreement. The conditions attached to the rezoning
shall be set forth by submitting a conditional rezoning agreement listing the
proposed conditions. A conditional rezoning agreement shall contain the
following information:
1. A statement acknowledging that the rezoning with conditions was proposed
by the applicant to request the City to grant the rezoning, and that the City relied
upon such proposal and would not have otherwise granted the rezoning but for
the terms spelled out in the conditional rezoning agreement; and, further
agreement and acknowledgment that the conditions and conditional rezoning
agreement are authorized by all applicable state law, federal law, and both
constitutions, and that the Agreement is valid and was entered into on a
voluntary basis, and represents a permissible exercise of authority by the City.
2. Agreement and understanding that the property in question shall not be
developed or used in a manner inconsistent with the conditional rezoning
agreement.
3. Agreement and understanding that the approval and conditional rezoning
agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property owner
and City, and their respective heirs, successors, assigns, and transferees.
4. The date upon which the rezoning with conditions becomes void, as
specified in Section (c), below. If an extension of approval is granted by the City
Council, a new conditional rezoning agreement with the new expiration date shall
be recorded.
5. Agreement and understanding that, if a rezoning with conditions becomes
void in the manner provided in Section (c), below, no development shall be
undertaken or permits for development issued until a new zoning district
classification of the property has been established.
6. Agreement and understanding that each of the requirements and conditions
in the conditional rezoning agreement represents a necessary and reasonable
measure which, when considered with all other conditions and requirements, is
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 18-4
roughly proportional to the increased impact created by the use represented in
the approved rezoning with conditions, taking into consideration the changed
zoning district classification and the specific use authorization granted.
7. A legal description of the property affected by the rezoning with conditions.
8. Development regulations affected by the conditions of rezoning, including
but not limited to density, setbacks, height, site coverage, signs, parking,
architecture, lighting, landscaping etc.
9. Revocation of approval provisions returning the property to its original zoning
designation if the developer violates the terms of the agreement.
10. A conditional rezoning agreement may contain a conditional rezoning plan
as an attachment, with such detail and inclusions proposed by the applicant and
approved by the City Council in accordance with this Section, following
recommendation by the Planning Commission. Inclusion of a conditional
rezoning plan as an attachment to a conditional rezoning agreement shall not
replace the requirement for preliminary and final Site Plan, subdivision,
condominium, or special condition land use review and approval, as required.
(b) Amendment. A proposed amendment to a conditional rezoning agreement
shall be reviewed and approved in the same manner as a new rezoning with
conditions.
(c) Period of Approval. Unless extended by the City Council for good cause, the
rezoning with conditions shall expire following a period of one (1) year from the
effective date of the rezoning unless bona fide development of the property
pursuant to approved building and other permits required by the City commences
within the one (1) year period and proceeds diligently and in good faith as
required by ordinance to completion.
1. Expiration. In the event bona fide development has not commenced within
one (1) year from the effective date of the rezoning, the rezoning with conditions
and the conditional rezoning agreement shall be void and of no effect. The
landowner may apply for a one (1) year extension one (1) time. The request must
be submitted to the City Clerk before the expiration of the initial one (1) year time
limit period. The landowner must show good cause as to why the extension
should be granted.
2. Effect of Expiration. If the rezoning with conditions becomes void in the
manner provided in this section, either or both of the following actions may be
taken:
a. The property owner may seek a new rezoning of the property; and/or
b. Pursuant to MCL 125.3405, the land shall revert to its former zoning
classification following the process for approval of a rezoning with
conditions.
(d) Zoning Map. If approved, the zoning district classification of the rezoned
property shall consist of the district to which the property has been rezoned
accompanied by a reference to “RWC Rezoning with Conditions” The Zoning
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 18-5
map shall specify the new zoning district plus a reference to RWC. For example,
the zoning classification of the property may be “C-1 Local Business District with
Conditional Rezoning,” with a Zoning Map designation of “C-1, RWC.”
(e) Review and Approval Process. An application for a rezoning with conditions
shall be reviewed following the same process and procedures applicable to a
rezoning set forth in Section 18.01 (Amendment Procedure), with the exception
that the conditional rezoning agreement shall be executed between the applicant
and the City Council at the time of City Council approval of a rezoning with
conditions.
(f) Recordation of a Conditional Rezoning Agreement. A rezoning with
conditions shall become effective following publication in the manner provided by
law, and after the conditional rezoning agreement is recorded with the Oakland
County Register of Deeds.
(g) Violation of Conditional Rezoning Agreement. If development and/or actions
are undertaken on or with respect to the property in violation of the conditional
rezoning agreement, such development and/or actions shall constitute a
nuisance per se. In such case, the City may issue a stop work order relative to
the property and seek any other lawful remedies. Until curative action is taken to
bring the property into compliance with the conditional rezoning agreement, the
City may withhold, or, following notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke
permits and certificates in addition to or in lieu of such other lawful action to
achieve compliance.
REPEAL
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 19-1
ARTICLE XIX
REPEAL
SECTION 19.00 - REPEAL
The existing zoning regulations of the City of Keego Harbor being the City of Keego
Harbor Zoning Ordinance Number 16, as amended, are hereby repealed. The adoption
of this Ordinance however, shall not affect or prevent any pending or future prosecution
of, or action to abate, any existing violation of the aforementioned Ordinance dated
November 13, 1956, as amended, if the use so in violation is in violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance.
INTERPRETATION AND VESTED RIGHT
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 20-1
ARTICLE XX
INTERPRETATION AND VESTED RIGHT
SECTION 20.00 - INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience,
comforts, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to
interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of
buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this Ordinance; nor is it intended
by this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or
other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this Ordinance
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of
buildings, or required larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or
required by such other ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
SECTION 20.01 - VESTED RIGHT
It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this Ordinance be held or construed to
give or grant to any person, firm or corporation any vested right, license, privilege or
permit.
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 21-1
ARTICLE XXI
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION 21.00 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
(a) Wherever by the provisions of this Ordinance the performance of any act if
prohibited, or omission to act, or wherever any regulation, dimension or limitation is
imposed on the use of, or upon any land, or on the erection or alterations or the use
of change of occupancy of structure or the use within such structure, a failure to
comply with such provisions of this Ordinance shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
when a violation occurs or continues.
(b) Any person, or any other acting in behalf of said person, violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars (500) and the costs of the prosecution or by
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the Court.
The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offense from compliance with
the requirements of this Ordinance.
(c) Civil Rights or Remedies not affected: The provisions of this Ordinance are not to
be deemed to affect any civil rights or remedies existing at the time when this
Ordinance takes effect, by virtue of the common law or of any provisions of statute.
(d) Civil Remedies Preserved: The omission to specify or affirm in this Ordinance any
liability to damages, penalties, forfeiture or other remedy, imposed by law, and
allowed to be recovered or enforced in any civil action or proceeding, for any act or
omission declared punishable herein does not affect any right to recover or enforce
the same.
SECTION 21.01 - PUBLIC NUISANCE
Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises
or land which is begun or changes subsequent to the time of passage of this Ordinance
in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
per se and shall be abated by order of a court by competent jurisdiction.
SEVERANCE CLAUSE
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 22-1
ARTICLE XXII
SEVERANCE CLAUSE
SECTION 22.00 - SEVERANCE CLAUSE
Sections of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, should any section,
paragraph, or provision thereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION 22.01 - RULE OF CONSTRUCTION
The rule that a penalty statute is to be strictly construed shall not apply to this
Ordinance or any of the provisions thereof. All provisions of this Ordinance shall be
construed according to the fair import of their terms, to promote justice and to effect the
objects of this Ordinance.
EFFECTIVE DATE
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 23-1
ARTICLE XXIII
EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 23.00 - EFFECTIVE DATE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days following the
publication of a notice of its adoption in the Oakland Press, a newspaper circulated in
the City. This Ordinance was adopted by the City Council of the City of Keego Harbor,
Oakland County, Michigan on January 15, 1987. The Notice of its Adoption was
published in the Oakland Press on January 24, 1987.
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 24-1
ARTICLE XXIV
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
SECTION 24.00 — AREA, HEIGHT, BULK, AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS — ALL
ZONE DISTRICTS
Minimum Setback
Measured from Lot Line (feet) 1,(h)
Lot Minimums Maximum Building
Maximum
Lot
Coverage Side Open Space
Minimum
Useable
Floor Area
Zoning Districts Area
(sq. ft.)
Width
(feet)
Stories Height
(feet)
All
Buildings
Front
Open
Space(b)
Least
One
Total of
Two
Rear
Open
Space
Per Unit
(sq. ft.)
NR Residential See Section 4.08 for Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements
R-T Townhouse — — 2 25 25 10 20 25 1,200 (l)
R-M Multi-Family (a) 100 2½ 30 30% 30 (d) 20 (d) 40 (d) 30 (d) (a)
R-ME Elderly Housing (i) — 2½ 30 30% 30 (d) 20 (d) 40 (d) 30 (d) (i)
R-MH Mobile Home
Park 2
—
P-1 Parking — 60 1 15 — 10 (e) 5 (e) 10 (e) 10 (e) —
C-1 Local Business — — 1 20 — 25 20 (c) 40 25 —
C-2 General Business — — 2 30 — 25 (f),(g) 10 (c),(g) 20 25 —
O-1 Office — — 2 30 — 25 20 (c) 40 25 —
M-1 Light Industrial — — 1 30 — 25 20 40 25 —
1 Refer to Section 15.15 for waterfront setback requirements.
2 Refer to Article VI for District Provisions for area and bulk requirements.
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 24-2
SECTION 24.01 - NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
(a) Minimum land area per dwelling unit for R-M District as follows:
Number of
Bedrooms
Minimum
Land Area
per Unit
(square feet)
Minimum
Floor Area
per Unit
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling
units/acre)
Minimum Lot
Width
Efficiency Unit 4,200 600 10.4 Dependent
upon site
arrangement.
1-Bedroom Unit 4,200 600 10.4 However,
development of
one lot
2-Bedroom Unit 5,445 800 8.0 shall meet
requirements
set forth
3-Bedroom Unit 6,800 1,000 6.4 above.
(b) Front yard setbacks are measured from the edge of the existing and/or planned
right-of-way, said planned right-of-way as shown on the officially adopted Master
Plan. Where a parcel or lot is at an intersection, the setback shall be measured
from the maximum requirement for the district considering each side as a front yard
area.
(c) No side yards are required along interior lot lines, except as required by the Building
Code, provided that walls so located shall be solid and shall not contain any
windows, doors, or any other openings. On exterior lot lines the minimum setbacks
shall be maintained.
(d) Spacing of multiple dwellings shall be controlled by the following schedule:
Building Relationship Overall Distance Between Buildings
Front to Front 50 Feet
Front to Rear 60 Feet
Rear to Rear 60 Feet
Rear to Side 45 Feet
Side to Side 20 Feet
Corner to Corner 15 Feet
Parking may be permitted in up to fifty (50) percent of the required yard provided
that there shall be at least 20 feet of yard space between said parking area and the
multiple family building.
(e) Side and Rear Yards - Where the P-1 District is contiguous to the side and/or rear
lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be
located along said lot line.
Front Yards - Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a residentially zoned district
which has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or
wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback
equal to the required residential setback for said residential district, or a minimum of
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 24-3
thirty-five (35) feet, or whichever is the greater. Such area shall be landscaped and
properly maintained.
Parking Space Layout, Standards, Construction and Maintenance: P-1 Vehicular
Parking Districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the Parking
Requirements of Sections 7.01 and 12.02.
No parking structure shall be erected closer than forty (40) feet to any residentially
zoned district.
(f) In order to achieve quality site design, to maintain the continuity of the streetscape
in the downtown area of Keego Harbor, to provide adequate views of commercial
uses, and to achieve functional pedestrian and vehicular circulation, the front yard
setback in the C-2 district along Orchard Lake Road shall be as follows:
Location
Required
Setback
CBD and CBD Fringe 55 feet from Cass Lake or Orchard Lake Roads
40 feet from any intersecting side street
1. Front yard setbacks in the CBD and CBD-Fringe areas shall be measured from
the centerline of the adjacent right-of-ways.
2. The front yard setback may be increased in the CBD-Fringe areas subject to
Section 16.09, Procedures and Standards for Principal Uses Permitted Subject
to Special Conditions and the following specific criteria;
(a) A sidewalk no less than 10 feet in width must be maintained along all
sides of the building facing a road or parking area.
(b) The sidewalk(s) adjacent to the building must be linked to the sidewalk(s)
on adjacent properties to maintain the continuity of the pedestrian
environment.
(c) Decorative and coordinated pedestrian amenities including benches,
planters, waste receptacles, and bicycle racks should be provided to
encourage pedestrian activities.
(d) There may be no more than one, single loaded, aisle of perpendicular
parking and no more than one, double loaded aisle of angled or parallel
parking located in the front yard.
(e) Any parking located in front yard must be separated from the adjacent
road with a 10 foot wide median. The median shall be planted with live
ground cover and contain either a continuous evergreen hedge a
minimum of 30 inches in height at the time of planting or a decorative wall
consisting of brick columns and wrought-iron type fencing 36 inches in
height.
(f) Deciduous trees a minimum of 2.5 inches in caliper must be planted
within the median a minimum of every 40 feet of the property frontage.
(g) Decorative street lighting consistent with the streetscape elements along
the adjacent roads must also be provided within the median (Ord. 386,
03/21/2002).
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE 24-4
(g) On corner lots in the C-2 District, the side yard facing the street shall conform with
the minimum side setback requirements as specified, and shall not be required to
conform with front yard setback requirements.
(h) Properties abutting water shall also comply with Section 15.15, Waterfront Land
Setbacks.
(i) Minimum land area per dwelling unit for R-ME District as follows:
Number of
Bedrooms
Minimum
Land Area
per Unit
(square feet)
Minimum
Floor Area
per Unit
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling
units/acre)
Efficiency Unit 4,200 600 10.4
1-Bedroom Unit 4,200 600 10.4
2-Bedroom Unit 5,445 800 8.0
For independent elderly housing, the number of efficiency units shall not exceed
fifteen (15) percent of the total number of units.
For dependent elderly housing only, the number of efficiency units shall not be
limited to fifteen (15) percent.
(j) In order to maintain a compatibility of scale within single family residential districts,
the maximum allowable floor area ratio shall be limited to forty percent (40%). (Ord.
338, 2/19/1998)
(k) In the event the lot width is increased by the acquisition of adjacent property and
the least side yard setback is less than 15% in R-1 districts or 20% in R-2 districts
of the increased lot width, the combination of the two side yards must total 30% in
R-1 districts or 40% in R-2 districts of the increased lot width. (Ord. 338, 2/19/1998)
(l) Townhouses must have a minimum floor area of 1,200 square feet per unit. (Ord.
340, 4/16/1998)
(Ordinance 432, 12/15/11)
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE DEV-1
KEEGO HARBOR DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
EXPLANATION OF THE STEPS
STEP 1. PRESENT YOUR IDEA FOR A NEW BUSINESS,
HOUSE, GARAGE, SHED, DECK, FENCE…
If you have an idea for a new business or found a spot to build a new home, or have
home improvement plans, contact the Planning Department. The City Planner can
provide the information about zoning and other regulations needed to move your new
project forward. For an appointment, contact the City of Keego Harbor at 248-682-1930.
STEP 2. ZONING COMPLIANCE APPLICATION.
After presenting your project proposal to the City Planner, you need a “zoning
compliance permit approval.” Applications for zoning compliance are available at City
Hall. The Planning Department will explain what documents and information are
required for your application. Then, it is reviewed against the Zoning Ordinance
standards. If your project receives zoning approval, you can move to the next step. If
your project is denied for zoning, the Planner will explain the reasons and assist with
possible options.
STEP 3. FOR A NEW HOUSE...
Submit architectural plans, elevations, and a survey for review by the (Architectural
Review Committee). All new construction homes must the Architectural Design
Standards and obtain a score of 90 or higher. All new homes must comply with the Site
Grading and Drainage standards as well. See the City Planner for more details.
STEP 3. FOR A NEW BUSINESS...
For an existing building, an occupancy inspection is required. The Building Official shall
inspect the property and prior to occupancy, the building must meet the current safety
codes. For new construction, the building must meet current State of Michigan codes.
The Building Official can provide more details.
STEP 3. FOR A GARAGE OR SHED...
Submit plans for the size and location of the garage or shed in the back yard only.
Generally, garages and sheds must match the design of the principal residence.
Construction plans are need for a garage. The Building Official can provide details.
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE DEV-2
STEP 3. FOR A NEW DECK...
Submit construction plans for review showing the location of the deck in the back yard.
The deck must be constructed to meet weight loads as required by the Building Code.
See the Building Official for more details.
STEP 3. FOR A FENCE...
All fences require a property line survey or mortgage survey of the lot for the proposed
fence installation. A survey is required to ensure the fence is installed in the proper
location. (See the FAQ section for info) Attach the survey to the zoning compliance
application and submit it to the clerk. See the City Planner for more details.
STEP 4. OBTAIN A BUILDING PERMIT FOR ALL
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS (HOUSE, GARAGE, DECK)
Submit detailed construction documents to the Building Department for commercial
buildings, residential homes, garages, and decks. The plans will be reviewed by the
Building Official and City Engineer for compliance with the building construction codes
and the site grading standards. All new construction must comply with the current
requirements for construction, site grading, and drainage. Some plan revisions may be
required during the review process. See the Building Official or City Engineer for details.
STEP 5. CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTIONS
After all required building and engineering permits are issued and obtained, construction
may begin and inspections must be scheduled in accordance with the current codes.
STEP 6. FINAL INSPECTION, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
After all required final building and engineering inspections are approved. The Building
Official is authorized to issue a certificate of occupancy based on final approval of all
required conditions. See the Building Official for greater detail.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE FAQ-1
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR-PLANNING DEPARTMENT
WHAT DO I NEED TO BUILD A SHED?
Sheds or “accessory buildings” and are only permitted for a lot with a residential house;
subject to specific regulations as follows: 1. Only allowed in back yard. 2. Max size for
storage shed is 100 sq feet. 3. Sheds are not permitted on vacant lots. Specific
regulations are in Section 15.13 of the Zoning Ordinance. See the City Planner for more
details.
CAN I BUILD A GARAGE FOR MY HOUSE?
Garages are also “accessory buildings” and are only permitted for a lot with a residential
house; subject to specific regulations as follows: 1. Only allowed in back yard. 2. Max
size for a garage depends on the lot size/area. 3. Garages are not permitted on vacant
lots. Specific regulations are in Section 15.13 of the Zoning Ordinance. See the City
Planner for more information.
CAN I PUT A FENCE AROUND MY YARD?
Fences are only permitted for a lot with a residential house; subject to specific
regulations as follows: 1. No chain link fences in front yard. 2. Maximum 6-foot privacy
fence in back yard. 3. No fences are permitted on vacant lots. Specific regulations are in
Section 15.13 of the Zoning Ordinance. See the City Planner for more details.
CAN I BUILD A NEW HOUSE ON THIS LOT?
Keego Harbor is a historic lake and cottage community with unique character. Most lots
are buildable in the City. Importantly, architectural design standards are in place in
Keego Harbor to promote and maintain quality design. New home construction
information packets are available at City Hall. You can also contact the City Planner for
assistance.
WHERE CAN I OPEN MY BUSINESS IN KEEGO HARBOR?
There are commercial and office districts in the City of Keego Harbor. Most commercial
and office property is located along Orchard Lake Road and the area along Cass Lake
Road. Nearly all restaurant and retail-service type uses are permitted in Keego Harbor.
Special Land Uses, such as outdoor cafes and restaurants serving alcohol require
approval by the Planning Commission and City Council. See the City Planner for details.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
CITY OF KEEGO HARBOR ZONING ORDINANCE PAGE FAQ-2
WHAT DO I NEED FOR A BACK YARD DECK OR PATIO?
Backyard decks and patios are only permitted for a lot with a residential house; and are
subject to specific regulations as follows: 1. only allowed in back yard. 2. Max size for a
deck or patio is approximately the size of rear yard. (For small lots, a deck can cover the
rear yard). 3. Patios or decks are not permitted on vacant lots. Regulations are in
Section 15.11 of the Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Department has more details.
I WANT TO OPEN A BUSINESS, BUT IT’S NOT IN THE
ZONING ORDINANCE? WHAT CAN I DO?
Most types of retail and commercial businesses are permitted in the City of Keego
Harbor. However, businesses that are not listed in the Zoning Ordinances are not
permitted. Importantly, options available to prospective business owners based on an
appeal process. The City Planner can provide details.
POLITICAL SIGNS IN MY FRONT YARD?
Election signs are regulated in the sign ordinance under Section 14.04. Political signs
begin to appear about 90 days prior to an election and the signs must be removed
within 10 days after the event or election. Maximum height of political signs is 3-feet and
they must be 15-feet from the edge of the road. They cannot be placed on utility poles
or public property.
CAN I RUN A BUSINESS OUT OF MY HOUSE
Certain types of home occupations are permitted in residential districts, such as a home
office space and accountant, or attorney services. However, barber and beauty shops
are not permitted. Car repair and other similar businesses are not permitted. The City
Planner can provide more detail.
CAR REPAIR BUSINESS AT MY HOUSE OR GARAGE?
Car repairs and other similar types of business are not permitted in residential
neighborhoods. A commercial auto service business must be approved by the City
Council and they are only permitted in specific commercial zone districts.
FRONT YARD PARKING SPACE?
A parking space or parking pad is permitted in the front yard of a residential house, but
the space is subject to specific standards and conditions. The City Planner can provide
further details.