CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF KENTWOOD, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

> 
____________ 
Stephen C.N. Kepley 
Mayor 
____________ 
Betsy Artz (At Large) 
Maurice Groce (At Large) 
Emily Bridson (First Ward) 
Robert Coughlin (First Ward) 
Michael W. Brown (Second Ward) 
Tom McKelvey (Second Ward) 
City Commission 
____________ 
Laurie Sheldon 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
Dan Kasunic 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Jeffrey Sluggett 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Kentwood, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2004 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2004 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Kellyn Wilcox, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Dan Kasunic, City Clerk, and Jeffrey Sluggett, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kentwood, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kentwood, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kentwood, Michigan. 2016. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance No. Date Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 3-16  5-17-2016 Included 1 4-16  7-19-2016 Included 1 5-16  7-19-2016 Omitted 1 Supp. No. 2 6-16  8- 8-2016 Included 2 7-16 12-20-2016 Included 2 8-16 12-20-2016 Omitted 2 9-16 12-20-2016 Included 2 1-17  2- 7-2017 Omitted 2 2-17  2- 7-2017 Included 2 Supp. No. 3 3-17  5-16-2017 Omitted 3 4-17  6- 6-2017 Omitted 3 5-17  6-20-2017 Included 3 6-17  6-20-2017 Omitted 3 7-17  7-10-2017 Included 3 Supp. No. 4 9-17  9- 5-2017 Included 4 10-17  9-19-2017 Included 4 11-17  9-19-2017 Omitted 4 1-18  1- 8-2018 Included 4 2-18  1-16-2018 Included 4 Supp. No. 5 3-18  2-20-2018 Omitted 5 4-18  3-20-2018 Include 5 5-18  4-17-2018 Omitted 5 6-18  5- 1-2018 Omitted 5 7-18  5- 1-2018 Included 5 8-18  6- 5-2018 Omitted 5 9-18  6-19-2018 Omitted 5 Supp. No. 6 8-18  1-15-2019 Omitted 6 10-18 10- 2-2018 Omitted 6 11-18 10-16-2018 Included 6 12-18 11-12-2018 Included 6 13-18 11-12-2018 Included 6 14-18 11-12-2018 Included 6 15-18 11-20-2018 Included 6 16-18 11-20-2018 Included 6 17-18 12- 4-2018 Included 6  
PART 1 - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in Part 1 is the City Charter, as adopted by the voters on September 1, 1995, effective on January 1, 1996. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Kentwood, by the grace of God, and pursuant to authority granted by the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, in order to secure the benefits of local self-government, and otherwise promote our common interests and welfare, ordain and establish this Charter. 
CHAPTER I. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Name. 
    The organized city now existing and designated as the "City of Kentwood" shall continue as a public body corporate under the same name. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities to be body corporate, MCL 117.1. 
Section 1.2. - Boundaries. 
    The city consists of the territory constituting the City of Kentwood on the effective date of this Charter, together with territory that is annexed to it and less territory that is detached from it. Upon annexation or detachment, the city's boundaries shall be deemed changed without amendment of this Charter. The clerk shall maintain and keep available for public inspection a current description of the city's boundaries. 
State Law reference- Annexation, MCL 117.6 et seq., 117.9, 123.1001 et seq. 
Section 1.3. - Wards. 
    The City of Kentwood shall consist of two wards, the boundaries of which shall provide for equal representation as required by law and shall be contiguous to the extent possible. 
    Within one year after the publication of the results of each federal census, and at such other times as the commission may request, the clerk shall present to the commission a plan for redefining ward boundaries in the city. This plan shall provide for equal representation of each ward as required by law, with the boundaries of the redefined ward contiguous to the extent possible. 
    If any plan for redefining ward boundaries is adopted by the commission, the wards in the city shall be as bounded by the plan without the necessity of amending this Charter. However, the number of wards in the city shall not be changed except by amendment of this Charter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory the charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e). 
CHAPTER II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 2.1. - Vested rights continued. 
    After the effective date of this Charter, the city shall be vested with all the property, funds, rights and credits as well as the records, files and documents belonging to it as formerly incorporated. No right, either in favor of or against the city existing at the time this Charter becomes effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall be affected by adoption of this Charter. All debts, liabilities and obligations of the city shall continue, and all fines, penalties, taxes and assessments levied prior to adoption shall remain due and be collected. 
Section 2.2. - City liability. 
    The city, its officers agents and employees shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities granted by law and the same may not be waived. 
State Law reference- Tort liability of municipalities, MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Section 2.3. - City records. 
    The city's records shall be kept, maintained and produced as required by law. All records pertaining to a city function, department or office shall be the property of the city. Officers of the city, whether elective or appointive, shall surrender such records in their possession or control to their successors or to the clerk upon leaving office. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; mandatory that charter provide for public records in accordance with law, MCL 117.3(l). 
Section 2.4. - No estoppel. 
    No estoppel may be created against the city. 
Section 2.5. - Processes against the city. 
    All processes against the city shall be maintained in its corporate name. 
Section 2.6. - Trusts. 
    All trusts established for a municipal purpose shall be used in accordance with the terms of the trust. The commission may receive and hold property in trust for a municipal purpose and apply the same for the execution of such trust. 
Section 2.7. - Quorum. 
    Except as otherwise required by law, a quorum of any city board, council or commission shall be a majority of the members of such board, council or commission in office at the time. 
Section 2.8. - Weekends and holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by law for the completion of an act falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the act shall be completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 2.9. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended as permitted by law. If two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Charter amendments, MCL 117.21 et seq. 
Section 2.10. - Chapter and section headings. 
    The chapter, section and subsection headings used in this Charter are for convenience only, and are not part of the Charter. 
Section 2.11. - Severability of Charter provisions. 
    If any portion of this Charter, or its application, is found to be unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not invalidate any remaining portion or application, and to this end, the Charter is declared to be severable. 
Section 2.12. - Publication, mailing of notices. 
    Charter requirements regarding the publication of notices, ordinances or proceedings shall be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper which disseminates news of a general character. The newspaper shall have been in general circulation in the city for at least one year preceding its utilization by the city. An affidavit of the newspaper's publisher or designee annexed to a printed copy of the notice, ordinance or proceeding taken from the paper and specifying the time of publication shall be prima facie evidence of publication. 
    In any case in which this Charter requires the mailing of a notice, an affidavit of mailing by the officer or employee responsible shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
Section 2.13. - Definitions and interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context: 
(a)  All words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall include the time of an event or requirement for which provision is applied. 
(b)  The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. Similarly, references to the masculine gender shall include, extend and apply to females as well as males. 
(c)  All references to statutes shall be considered to be references to such statutes as amended from time to time. 
(d)  All references to section numbers shall refer to sections of this Charter. 
(e)  The word "person" shall include governmental entities, corporations, partnerships, associations and individuals. 
(f)  The words "printed" or "printing" shall include reproductions of printing. 
(g)  The word "record" shall include, but not be limited to, tangible items such as notes, books, files, writings, papers, discs, tapes and documents. 
(h)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" or "in writing" shall mean tangible documentation, including, but not limited to, handwritten script, facsimile transcription, printing and typewriting. 
(i)  The word "officer" shall include, but not be limited to, elected officers, administrative officers, members of city boards, committees and commissions created by or pursuant to this Charter and their authorized deputies. 
(j)  The word "default" shall include being delinquent in taxes. 
(k)  Unless otherwise identified, the word "law" shall mean federal law, the Constitutions of the United States and State of Michigan, state law, common law, this Charter and any ordinances or other lawfully adopted acts of the city. 
(l)  The word "City" shall mean the City of Kentwood. 
(m)  The word "Commission" shall mean the City Commission of the City of Kentwood. 
(n)  "Assessed value" or "assessed valuation" shall mean the local assessment of real or personal property as approved and corrected through the process of county and state equalization and as required by law. 
Section 2.14. - Penalties for violations of Charter. 
    Any city officer found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of an act declared by law to constitute misconduct in office may be punished as permitted by law. The punishment provided for in this section shall be in addition to having the office declared vacant. 
    Any person, officer or employee found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of any term of this Charter shall be punished as permitted by law. 
CHAPTER III. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 3.1. - General powers. 
    The city, its officers, agents and employees shall be vested with all powers, privileges and immunities, express or implied, which cities are, or hereafter may be, granted by law. Those powers shall include, without limitation, powers which cities are permitted to provide for in their charters pursuant to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended, as fully as though those powers were specifically identified in this Charter. The city, its agents, officers and employees shall exercise all municipal powers permitted in the management and control of municipal property or government, whether such powers are expressly identified or not, and may perform any lawful act to advance the interests of the city. 
Section 3.2. - Further identification of powers. 
    In addition to the powers, privileges and immunities authorized by law, and those set forth in this Charter, the city shall have power to and may, by ordinance or other lawful act, provide for: 
(a)  The acquisition, by purchase, condemnation, lease or otherwise, of property, whether real or personal, which may be required for or incidental to the exercise of city powers; 
(b)  The maintenance, management, development, operation, leasing and disposal of city property; 
(c)  Refunding money advanced or paid on special assessments, borrowing money for such refunding, and issuing bonds; 
(d)  Installing and connecting conduits for the service of municipally owned utilities; 
(e)  Regulating, condemning or granting franchises and of the property used by companies or persons engaged in the cemetery, health, lighting, communication, gas, heat, water, sewer and power business; 
(f)  Establishing, using, vacating, improving and controlling the surface of its streets and other public places, and of the space above and below them; 
(g)  Use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets and other public places for the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of reasonable compensation; 
(h)  A plan of streets within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the city boundaries; 
(i)  The use and regulation of streams, waters and watercourses; 
(j)  Acquiring, constructing, operating and improving storage and parking facilities, including the fixing and collection of charges for services; 
(k)  Establishing districts or zones to regulate the use and dimensions of land and structures; 
(l)  Regulating trades, occupations, activities and amusements within the city and prohibiting trades, occupations, activities and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals or welfare of the city's inhabitants; 
(m)  Prescribing the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended or revoked; requiring payment for licenses; and requiring a bond for the faithful observance of conditions under which licenses are granted; 
(n)  Licensing, regulating and restricting the number and location of advertising signs, displays and billboards; 
(o)  Preventing injury or annoyance to the city's inhabitants from anything which is dangerous, offensive or unhealthful; preventing, abating and prosecuting nuisances and those neglecting or refusing to abate, discontinue or remove nuisances; 
(p)  Regulating transportation facilities; 
(q)  Regulating the use, occupancy, parking and location of house trailers, recreational vehicles or mobile homes as permitted by law; 
(r)  Requiring owners of real property to construct, repair and maintain sidewalks abutting upon such property and, if the owner fails to comply with such requirements or if the owner is unknown, constructing, repairing and maintaining such sidewalks and assessing the city's cost; 
(s)  Requiring an owner of property to abate nuisances after notice is given that such nuisance exists and, if the owner fails to comply with such notice or if the owner is unknown, to abate such nuisance and assess the city's cost; 
(t)  Regulating and maintaining trees, shrubs and other vegetation in and adjacent to public streets, parks and other public places, dead and diseased vegetation on private property and vegetation on private property overhanging streets or other public places; maintaining and removing such vegetation and assessing the city's cost; and regulating the planting of vegetation on property which interferes with public utilities, easements or rights-of-way; 
(u)  Requiring the platting of all subdivided land; 
(v)  Regulating the lighting of streets and other public places; and 
(w)  Owning, constructing, maintaining, repairing or operating any facility, structure, building, system, equipment, park or grounds. 
State Law reference- Permissible charter provisions, MCL 117.4c et seq. 
Section 3.3. - Intergovernmental relations. 
    The city may join with any governmental entity, or with any number or combination thereof, to perform, jointly or separately for the others, any lawful power or duty which is permitted to be performed. 
State Law reference- Intergovernmental contracts between municipal corporations, MCL 124.1 et seq. 
CHAPTER IV. - THE COMMISSION: PROCEDURES AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS 

Section 4.1. - Regular meetings. 
    The commission shall provide for the time and place of its regular meetings. An organizational meeting shall be held on the Monday following each general city election. 
Section 4.2. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called by the clerk at the request of the mayor, or at the request of any three members of the commission, on no fewer than eighteen hours' written notice to each member of the commission. The notice shall be served personally or left at the member's residence. A special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the commission are present or have waived notice in writing. 
State Law reference- Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 4.3. - Meetings to be public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the commission shall be noticed and conducted as provided by law, including the Open Meetings Act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), as amended. The commission may adopt procedural rules for the conduct of meetings. 
State Law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(l). 
Section 4.4. - Adjournment of meeting. 
    In the absence of a quorum, a lesser number of commissioners may adjourn a meeting to a later time or date. In the absence of all commissioners, the clerk may adjourn a meeting for not longer than one week. 
Section 4.5. - Compulsory attendance and conduct at meeting. 
(a)  Any four or more members of the commission may, by vote, compel the attendance of other members and other city officers at any meeting. Any member of the commission or other officer who, when notified of a request for his or her attendance, fails to attend such meeting for reasons other than those approved by the commission, shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
(b)  The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings. Any member of the commission or other city officer who fails to act in an orderly manner shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(c)  Any city police officer designated by the presiding officer shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
Section 4.6. - Organization and rules of the commission. 
    The commission shall determine its own organization, rules and agenda, subject to the following: 
(a)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the clerk, in the English language, which shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk. 
(b)  All ordinances and resolutions shall be acted upon by a roll call vote and entered in the minutes. Where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(c)  No member of the commission shall vote on a question in which he or she has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his or her own conduct. On all other questions each member who is present shall vote when called, unless otherwise required by law or excused by a majority of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote, except in accordance with this subsection, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(d)  In all roll call votes the names of the commissioners shall be called in alphabetical order, and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each succeeding vote. 
(e)  Proceedings of the commission, or a summary of the proceedings, shall be published after a meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. A record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the clerk and approved by the commission, and shall show the substance of each separate action of the commission. 
(f)  Records of each meeting shall be recorded, kept and made available to the public as required by the Open Meetings Act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), as amended, and the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as amended. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for public meetings, MCL 117.3(l); mandatory that charter provide for keeping of records of meeting in English, MCL 117.3(m). 
Section 4.7. - Investigations. 
    The commission, or any lawfully designated committee or board from its membership, may inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and make investigations as to matters in which the city has an interest. 
    Failure on the part of any officer to respond to such inquiries, to appear as directed or to produce records or other information as ordered shall constitute misconduct in office and a violation of this Charter. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to respond to such inquiries, to appear as directed or to produce records or other information as ordered shall constitute a violation of this Charter. 
CHAPTER V. - CITY LEGISLATION 

Section 5.1. - Prior city legislation. 
(a)  All valid ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city which are consistent with this Charter and which are in existence on the effective date of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect, until repealed or amended. As permitted by law, the mayor shall appoint all members of boards, committees or commissions, subject to commission approval. 
(b)  Upon the effective date of this chapter, any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, or part thereof, which is inconsistent with this Charter is repealed. 
State Law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 5.2. - Legislative power. 
    The legislative power of the city is vested exclusively in the commission. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for a legislative body, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 5.3. - Form of official action. 
    All official action of the commission shall be by ordinance, resolution, order or motion. All legislation shall be by ordinance. Action by resolution shall include all matters required or permitted by law to be so performed, as well as administrative matters. All action of the commission shall be by majority vote of those present and voting, provided that a quorum is present at the meeting. 
Section 5.4. - Introduction, consideration and style of ordinances. 
(a)  Each proposed ordinance shall be submitted in written form. The style of all ordinances shall be "The City of Kentwood ordains:". 
(b)  Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and title. 
(c)  An ordinance may be repealed or amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner provided in this section. An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only. 
(d)  If any portion of an ordinance is amended, it shall be reenacted and published as required by law. This requirement shall not apply to zoning ordinance amendments or the schedules of one-way streets, stop signs and parking limitations contained in any traffic ordinance. 
(e)  Each ordinance shall be recorded by the clerk in an ordinance book, and the enactment of such ordinance and its effective date shall be certified by the clerk. 
(f)  Ordinances of the city may be codified or otherwise organized. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for ordinance adoption procedures, MCL 117.3(k); codification of ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Section 5.5. - Publication of ordinances. 
    Each ordinance or summary shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within fifteen days of its enactment. The effective date of an ordinance shall be stated in the ordinance, but shall not be earlier than ten days after its publication, unless it is declared to be an emergency ordinance by the affirmative vote of 2/3's of the commission, in which case the effective date shall be the date of publication. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for publication of ordinances, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 5.6. - Enactment of Code by reference. 
    The commission may adopt, in whole or in part, a law, code or technical rules as permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 5.7. - Penalties. 
    The commission may provide in any ordinance for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. The commission may provide for punishment or sanctions in the manner and to the extent permitted by law. Each day on which a violation of an ordinance occurs is a separate violation. 
State Law reference- Penalties for ordinance violations, MCL 117.3(k), 117.4i(k), 117.4l. 
Section 5.8. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated and a referendum on an existing ordinance may be requested on all legislative matters by submission of a petition. 
Section 5.9. - Initiatory and referendary petitions. 
(a)  An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by not less than ten percent of the registered electors of the city, as of the date of the last general city election. 
(b)  An initiatory petition must fully set forth the ordinance proposed, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendary petition must identify the ordinance, or part thereof, it proposes be repealed. 
(c)  Petitions shall be signed and circulated as required by law. 
(d)  Petitions must be filed with the clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures to determine their sufficiency. Any signatures obtained more than sixty days before the filing of the petition with the clerk shall not be counted. If the petition contains an insufficient number of signatures or is improper as to form or compliance with this section, the clerk shall notify the person filing the petition and ten additional days from such notification shall be allowed to file supplemental petitions. When the petition is found to be sufficient and proper, the clerk shall present it to the commission at its next regular meeting. 
Section 5.10. - Commission procedure on initiatory or referendary petitions. 
    Upon receiving a petition from the clerk, the commission shall, within thirty days, either: 
(a)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted or determine to submit the proposal to the electors, if it is an initiatory petition; or 
(b)  Repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors, if it is a referendary petition. 
Section 5.11. - Submission to electors. 
    If the commission determines to submit a proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any purpose or, at the discretion of the commission, at a special election called for that purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if no election is to be held within 150 days from the time the petition is received by the commission, and the commission does not enact the ordinance, then the commission shall call for a special election within 90 days from the time the petition is received by the commission for submission of the proposal. The result of all elections held under this section shall be determined by majority vote of the electors voting on the question. 
Section 5.12. - Status of ordinance adopted. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the commission for two years after the date of the election. If two or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 5.13. - Ordinance suspended. 
    Receipt by the commission from the clerk of a sufficient and proper referendary petition, containing the signatures of fifteen percent of the registered electors of the city as of the date of the last general city election, which signatures were obtained within ninety days after passage of the ordinance to which the petition refers, shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question, pending repeal by the commission or final determination by the electors. 
CHAPTER VI. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 6.1. - City commission. 
    There shall be a city commission of seven members, consisting of six commissioners and the mayor. The commission is the legislative and governing body of the city and shall have the authority to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, except as otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for certain officers, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 6.2. - Qualifications of commissioners. 
    Members of the commission shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in this Charter. The commission shall be the sole judge of the election and qualification of its members and of the grounds for loss of office. 
Section 6.3. - Compensation of elected officers. 
    The commission shall maintain a local officers compensation commission which shall establish the compensation of each elected city official. The elected officers shall also receive payment for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
State Law reference- Local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 
Section 6.4. - Mayor pro tem. 
    At its first regular meeting following each general city election, the commission shall elect one of its members to serve as mayor pro tem for a term expiring at the first commission meeting following the next general city election. Such elections shall be by majority vote of the members of the commission. 
Section 6.5. - Duties of mayor. 
    In addition to any powers and duties otherwise provided by law, the mayor shall have powers and duties as follows: 
(a)  The mayor shall be the executive head of the city. The mayor shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the commission equal with that of other members of the commission, but shall have no veto power. The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the commission. 
(b)  The mayor shall be conservator of the peace and, in emergencies declared by the commission, may exercise all powers conferred by law and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of city ordinances. 
(c)  The mayor shall execute or authenticate by signature such records, acts and instruments as required by the commission or by law. 
(d)  The mayor shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all city affairs as authorized by the commission or by law. 
(e)  The mayor shall see that all laws are enforced. 
(f)  The mayor shall direct and supervise the administration of all city departments, offices and agencies, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(g)  The mayor shall give the city and department officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchise, license, contract or agreement. 
(h)  The mayor shall see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise or contract are faithfully kept and performed. 
(i)  The mayor shall supervise the preparation of, and recommend to the commission for approval, an annual budget. The mayor shall be responsible further to administer the budget as finally adopted, under policies formulated by the commission and law, and to keep the commission fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(j)  The mayor shall recommend to the commission for adoption measures as deemed necessary or expedient. 
(k)  The mayor shall be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts and records of the city in conformance with any uniform system required by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for a system of accounts that conforms to a uniform system of accounts as required by law, MCL 117.3(n). 
(l)  The mayor shall approve all rules and regulations of the several departments of the city. 
(m)  The mayor shall perform other administrative duties as may be established by this Charter, required by law or by the commission. 
In the event of the mayor's absence or disability, the mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor. During the absence or disability of both, the commission shall designate another of its members to serve as acting mayor. While in office, the acting mayor shall have all of the responsibility and authority of the mayor. 
Section 6.6. - Administrative services. 
(a)  The administrative officers of the city shall be the city attorney, assessor and additional administrative officers as may be established, from time to time, by ordinance. The commission may combine administrative offices for the proper and efficient operation of the city. 
(b)  All administrative officers of the city, except the city attorney, shall be appointed by the mayor for an indefinite period, subject to confirmation by the commission. All administrative officers, other than the city attorney, shall be responsible to the mayor, have their compensation fixed by the mayor in accordance with budget appropriations and may be discharged by the mayor in accordance with procedures adopted by the commission. 
(c)  The commission shall establish, by ordinance, such departments of the city as it deems necessary or advisable and shall prescribe the functions of each department and the duties and responsibilities of department personnel. The mayor may, consistent with the law, prescribe additional duties and responsibilities for the personnel of those departments which are responsible to the mayor. 
(d)  All city personnel, other than officers of the city, shall be city employees. The head of each department shall have the power to hire, suspend or discharge employees for that department, subject to approval by the mayor. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for an assessor, MCL 117.3(a); tax assessments generally, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 6.7. - Clerk: Functions and duties. 
(a)  The clerk shall be the clerk of the commission, attend all meetings of the commission, and keep a permanent journal in the English language of its proceedings. 
(b)  The clerk shall be custodian of the city seal, affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and attest the same. The clerk shall also be custodian of all records pertaining to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by law. 
(c)  The clerk shall certify by signature all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the commission. 
(d)  The clerk shall maintain and provide a supply of forms for petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of law. 
(e)  The clerk shall publish and post all notices, proceedings and other matters required by law. 
(f)  The clerk shall administer the oath of office. 
(g)  The clerk shall be the chief election officer of the city. 
(h)  The clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for clerk, MCL 117.3(a); mandatory that charter provide for keeping in the English language a written or printed journal of each session of the legislative body, MCL 117.3(m). 
Section 6.8. - Treasurer: Functions and duties. 
(a)  The treasurer shall have the custody of all funds of the city, any bond pertaining solely to the clerk and all evidence of indebtedness belonging to, or held in trust by, the city. 
(b)  The treasurer shall collect all moneys of the city the collection of which is not otherwise provided by law. The treasurer shall receive from other city officers and employees all money belonging to and receivable by the city that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines, fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All money shall be turned over to the treasurer after collection or receipt, and the treasurer shall in all cases give a receipt therefor. 
(c)  As permitted by law, the treasurer shall keep and deposit city funds in the manner and depositories prescribed by the commission, and shall report the same in detail to the mayor. 
(d)  The treasurer shall disburse all city funds as provided by law and in accordance with those procedures established by the commission. 
(e)  The treasurer shall have such powers and duties in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district and city taxes as are conferred by law. 
(f)  The treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for treasurer, MCL 117.3(a); depositories, MCL 129.11 et seq. 
Section 6.9. - Assessor: Functions and duties. 
    The assessor shall possess all powers vested in, and shall be charged with all duties imposed upon, assessing officers by law. The assessor shall prepare tax, special assessment and other rolls, and shall perform such other duties as prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- The general property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 6.10. - Attorney: Functions and duties. 
(a)  The attorney shall act as legal advisor and attorney to the commission and shall be responsible solely to the commission. The attorney shall advise any city officer or department head in matters relating to official duties, when requested. 
(b)  The attorney shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent the city in court and before other tribunals as the commission directs. The attorney shall file with the clerk copies of all records and files as the commission directs. 
(c)  The attorney shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments at the request of the commission and shall promptly provide an opinion as to the legality of such documents. 
(d)  The attorney shall call to the attention of the commission all matters of law, and changes or developments to the law, affecting the city. 
(e)  The attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the commission or by law. 
(f)  Upon the recommendation of the attorney, or upon its own initiative, the commission may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist the attorney. 
Section 6.11. - Compensation of attorney and special counsel. 
    The compensation of the attorney shall be set by the commission. No compensation to special legal counsel shall be paid, except in accordance with an agreement between the commission and the attorney or special counsel made prior to rendering services. 
Section 6.12. - Deputy administrative officers. 
    The clerk, treasurer and assessor may designate their own deputies, subject to the written confirmation of the mayor, and may terminate the status of their deputies at their discretion, with the written approval of the mayor. Such deputies shall possess all powers of their superior officers, except as limited by their superiors or the mayor. 
Section 6.13. - Independent boards and commissions. 
    The commission may create such boards, authorities, committees or commissions as permitted by law. Except as otherwise provided by law, members of such bodies shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the commission. 
Section 6.14. - Planning commission. 
(a)  The city shall maintain a planning commission in accordance with and having the powers and duties granted by law. 
(b)  The planning commission shall advise the commission in regard to the proper development of the city and shall annually recommend a schedule of public expenditures and improvements. 
(c)  The commission shall maintain a zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan. 
State Law reference- Michigan zoning enabling act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 
CHAPTER VII. - GENERAL FINANCE AND BUDGET[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq. 

Section 7.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1. 
Section 7.2. - Budget procedures. 
    The mayor shall submit to the commission, on or before the first regular meeting in April, a recommended budget covering the next fiscal year. The recommended budget shall include the following: 
(a)  Detailed estimates, with supporting explanations, of all proposed expenditures, including the corresponding expenditures for the last preceding fiscal year, the current fiscal year to March 1 and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing debt redemption and interest requirements, debt authorized and unissued, and the status of any sinking funds. 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of revenues received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year, the current fiscal year to March 1 and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
(d)  An estimate of the fund equity or deficit for the current fiscal year. 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be available to meet proposed expenditures. 
(f)  Such additional information as the commission may request or as required by law. 
Section 7.3. - Budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its final adoption at the time and place established by the commission. Notice of the public hearing and that the proposed budget is on file with the city shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing. The proposed budget shall be kept on file for public inspection during regular business hours at the clerk's office for a period of not less than one week prior to the hearing. 
Section 7.4. - Adoption of budget. 
    After the public hearing, and not later than the last regular meeting in May, the commission shall, by resolution, adopt a budget for the next fiscal year, adopt an appropriations act for the funds needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year and provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes, as required by law. 
Section 7.5. - Budget control. 
(a)  Except as permitted by law, no funds shall be expended, nor shall any obligation for an expenditure be incurred, except as authorized by the adopted appropriations act. The commission, by resolution, may transfer any unencumbered and uncommitted appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one account, department, fund or agency to another. 
(b)  As permitted by law, the commission may make additional appropriations during a fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the city. Additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues for the year exceed the revenues estimated in the budget. The commission may make additional appropriations from any available and unencumbered funds. 
(c)  Expenditures shall not be charged directly to a contingency fund; instead, the necessary part of a contingency fund shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditure then charged to such account. 
(d)  At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the commission, the mayor shall submit information to the commission, showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date. If it appears that the revenues are insufficient, the commission shall take necessary action to prevent expenditures from exceeding revenues. 
(e)  The balance in any budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of a fiscal year shall, subject to the provisions of this Charter, revert to fund equity. 
(f)  The balance in any budget appropriated for construction projects and capital expenditures approved by the commission may be automatically reappropriated. 
Section 7.6. - Depository. 
    The commission shall designate depositories for city funds and provide for the regular deposit of city funds as permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Depositories, MCL 129.11 et seq. 
Section 7.7. - Investment of city funds. 
    Funds may be invested by the city as permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Investment of surplus funds of political subdivisions, MCL 129.91 et seq.; Surplus Funds Investment Pool Act, MCL 129.111 et seq.; Local Government Investment Pool Act, MCL 129.141 et seq. 
Section 7.8. - Independent audit and report. 
(a)  An independent audit shall be made of all city financial records, accounts and procedures at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the commission. The audit shall be performed by certified public accountants selected by the commission. 
(b)  The mayor shall submit an annual report of the affairs of the city, including a financial report. Copies of the audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection and filed. 
State Law reference- Annual audits, MCL 141.425 et seq.; annual financial report, MCL 141.424. 
Section 7.9. - Schedule of capital improvements. 
    The mayor shall submit to the commission, simultaneously with the recommended budget, a schedule showing proposed capital improvement expenditures for the next six fiscal years. Only expenditures anticipated to exceed a commission determined amount need be included. The mayor shall prepare the schedule based on consultations with, and recommendations from, the planning commission and others as directed by the commission. The schedule shall separately identify proposed capital acquisitions and expenditures with estimates of cost and proposed methods of financing, as accurate as may be made without detailed plans and specifications. As required by law, the schedule shall be for the guidance of the commission in adoption of the regular annual budget and the commission may delete items or make revisions as it deems appropriate. After making any desired corrections, the commission shall adopt the capital improvement schedule at the same meeting as it adopts the regular annual budget. Adoption of the schedule shall not obligate the city to carry out the programs or improvements listed, nor obligate the city to include any items in future budgets or appropriate funds. 
Section 7.10. - Administration. 
    The commission may adopt ordinances or resolutions, consistent with this Charter, identifying procedures to be followed in administering the budget. 
CHAPTER VIII. - TAXATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

Section 8.1. - Power to tax; tax limit. 
    The city shall have the power to assess taxes and to levy and collect rents, rolls and excises. Exclusive of any levies authorized by law to be made beyond charter tax rates limitations, the annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed three-tenths of one percent of the taxable value of all real and personal property in the city, subject to the following: 
(a)  Up to an additional one one-hundredths of one percent of the taxable value of all real and personal property in the city may be levied for a period of twenty years, to wit: 1994 through 2013, for park site acquisitions and improvements; 
(b)  Up to an additional six and twenty-six hundredths twenty thousandths (6.2620) mills upon the taxable value of all real and personal property in the city may be levied to be used to provide police and fire protection in the city; 
(c)  Up to an additional thirty-five hundredths (0.35) mills upon the taxable value of all real and personal property in the city may be levied to be used to provide funds for the construction of a library building in the city and to maintain the library for all purposes authorized by law. 
(Election of 4-20-1999; Election of 8-8-2006; Election of 8-5-2008; Election of 5-4-2010) 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for levying of taxes, MCL 117.3(g); limitations on tax rate, Mich. Const. (1963), art. VII,  21, MCL 117.3(g), 117.5(a), 211.107a. 
Section 8.2. - Subjects of taxation. 
    The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned as provided by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(f). 
Section 8.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except as is expressly permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Real estate tax exemptions, MCL 211.7 et seq. 
Section 8.4. - Preparation of the assessment roll. 
(a)  Between tax day and the first meeting of the board of review, the assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll in the manner and form prescribed by law. 
(b)  Notice shall be given to the owner of any property, as shown by the taxable roll, of an increase from the previous year in the assessed value of the property or the addition of property to the roll. The failure to send or receive notice shall not invalidate any assessment roll or an assessment on property. 
State Law reference- Assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq. 
Section 8.5. - Board of review. 
(a)  As permitted by law, the board of review shall be composed of electors of the city selected based on their knowledge of property values, the subjects of assessment and property tax administration. No elective city officer shall be a member of the board. Filing, by a member of the board, of a nominating petition for elective city office shall constitute a resignation from the board. 
(b)  The commission may appoint three, six or nine members who shall constitute a board of review. Members shall be appointed for two-year terms to replace members whose terms expire. If six or nine members are appointed to the board, the membership shall be divided into board of review committees, consisting of three members each, for the purpose of hearing and deciding issues protested. Two of the three members of each committee will constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(c)  The commission shall fix the compensation of the members of the board of review. The board shall select its own chairperson for the ensuing year and each committee shall select its own chairperson. The assessor shall act as clerk for the board and any committees and be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote. 
State Law reference- Board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq. 
Section 8.6. - Duties and functions of board of review. 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the board of review shall have the same powers and perform like duties as conferred by law upon boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The board shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments and, if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. The board may establish reasonable regulations governing its hearings, require the submission of a written argument from those appealing to it and otherwise provide for expediting its work. No change in the status or value of any property after the pertinent tax day shall be considered by the board in its decisions. It shall be the duty of the assessor to keep a permanent record of all proceedings of the board and any committees and to record all decisions. 
State Law reference- Board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq. 
Section 8.7. - Meetings of the board of review. 
(a)  The board of review shall convene for its first meeting at the time and place designated by the commission, and shall remain in session as required by law for the purpose of examining and reviewing the assessment roll prepared by the assessor. In each case in which the board resolves to change the value of property from the amount shown on the assessment roll, adds property to such roll or changes the description of real property as reported on such roll, the assessor shall give notice of these actions to the taxpayer of record shown by such roll. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the second meeting of the board. Failure to send or receive this notice shall not invalidate any assessment roll. The assessment roll shall stand as approved and adopted by the board of review, except as changed by a vote of the board. 
(b)  The board of review shall convene for its second meeting as required by law, at the time and place designated by the commission, and shall continue in session until all interested persons have an opportunity to be heard. The board of review shall have full authority upon its own motion to change assessments or add to the rolls property omitted which is liable to assessment in the city, if the person who is assessed upon such altered valuation or for omitted property is promptly notified and granted an opportunity to file objections. 
(c)  The board of review shall meet as provided by law for the purpose of correcting clerical errors and mutual mistakes as to the correct assessment figures, the rate of taxation or mathematical computations relating to the assessing of taxes at meetings held solely for that purpose at the time and place as designated by the commission. 
State Law reference- Meeting of board of review, MCL 211.30, 211.107. 
Section 8.8. - Notice of meetings. 
    Notice including the time and place of the sessions of the board of review, shall be given by the assessor as required by law. 
State Law reference- Notice of meetings of board of review, MCL 211.29(6). 
Section 8.9. - Endorsement of roll. 
    After the board of review completes its review of the assessment roll, the majority of its members shall endorse the roll and sign a statement to the effect that it is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it was prepared. The omission of such endorsement or other formality shall not affect the validity of the roll. A summary of the assessment roll shall be delivered to the commission by the assessor following the board's endorsement. 
State Law reference- Completion of roll, MCL 211.30a. 
Section 8.10. - Clerk to certify tax levy. 
    After the commission has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the commission determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. The clerk shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the commission requires to be assessed, reassessed or charged upon the assessment roll as provided by law. 
Section 8.11. - City tax roll. 
    After the board of review completes its review of the assessment roll, the assessor shall prepare a copy of the roll, to be known as the "city tax roll," and upon receiving the certification of the amounts to be raised from the clerk, the assessor shall spread upon the tax roll the several amounts determined by the commission to be charged, assessed or reassessed against persons or property. The assessor shall also spread the amounts of the general ad valorem city tax according to and in proportion to the valuations identified in the roll. To avoid fractions in computation of any tax roll, the assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes the amount permitted by law. Any excess created on any tax roll shall belong to the city. 
Section 8.12. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
    After spreading the taxes, the assessor shall direct the treasurer to collect from the persons named in the roll the sums identified as a tax or assessment. The treasurer shall have all statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. The roll shall be delivered to the treasurer for collection on or before June 1. 
Section 8.13. - Lien and persons liable. 
    All taxes assessed shall become a debt due the city in the manner provided by law. Except as otherwise permitted by law, on July 1 of the year of assessment, the taxes and any applicable charges, fees or penalties shall become a lien, paramount to all other claims upon the property against which they are assessed. 
State Law reference- Lien for taxes, MCL 211.40 et seq. 
Section 8.14. - Statement to taxpayers. 
    Upon receipt of the city tax roll, the treasurer shall proceed to collect the taxes. The treasurer shall prepare and mail to each taxpayer, at his or her last known address on the roll, a statement including an identification of the property, the assessed valuation and the tax due. Failure to send or receive the statement shall not invalidate the tax or the right to collect or enforce payment. 
Section 8.15. - Collection of city taxes. 
    City taxes shall be assessed and levied prior to July 1 in each year, become payable on that date and collected on or before August 20 in each year. The commission may, by ordinance, establish a system for the installment payment of taxes extending not more than one year and provide for the collection of interest, administration fees and penalties. 
Section 8.16. - Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax. 
    If any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay any personal property tax assessed, the treasurer may collect the same by seizing the personal property of such person, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. The treasurer may sell the property seized for an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges authorized by law. If otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, the treasurer may sue the person to whom it is assessed. The treasurer may accelerate the date on which personal property taxes shall be due and collected as permitted by law. 
Section 8.17. - Delinquent tax roll to county treasurer. 
    All city taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the treasurer on March 1 following the date when said roll was received shall be returned to the county treasurer in the manner and with like effect as provided by law for returns by township treasurers of township, school, state and county taxes. Such returns shall include all authorized assessments, charges, fees and penalties which shall be added to the amount assessed. The taxes returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer, and shall remain a lien upon the property until paid. 
Section 8.18. - State, county and school taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county and school purposes, the treasurer and assessor shall be considered the same as township treasurers and supervisors or assessing officers, and all provisions of law relating to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. In the event school taxes are collected at the same time as city taxes, they shall be collected subject to the same privileges and conditions as city taxes under this Charter. 
CHAPTER IX. - BORROWING POWER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Revenue bond act of 1933, MCL 141.101 et seq.; revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.210 et seq.; city authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1); city authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(2). 

Section 9.1. - Grant of authority to borrow. 
    As permitted by law, the city may borrow money for any purpose within the scope of its powers and may authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness. 
Section 9.2. - Limitations on borrowing. 
(a)  The net indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed the limitations set by law. No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for a purpose other than that for which they were authorized. 
(b)  The total amount of special assessment bonds which are a general obligation of the city shall at no time, by reason of future issues other than issues of refunding bonds, exceed the limitations set by law. 
(c)  All collections on a special assessment roll (or combination of rolls), in anticipation of which bonds have been issued, shall be deposited in a separate fund and used for the purpose for which levied and for the payment of the principal and interest on such bonds. If there is a deficiency in a special assessment fund to meet the payment of the principal or interest, moneys shall be advanced from the general fund to meet such deficiency and replaced in the general fund when the special assessment fund is sufficient. 
State Law reference- Limitation of net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL 117.4a(2). 
Section 9.3. - Applicability of other statutory restrictions. 
    The issuance of any bonds not requiring the approval of the electors shall be subject to applicable requirements of law with reference to public notice, filing of petitions for a referendum, holding of a referendum and other procedural requirements. 
Section 9.4. - Preparation and record of bonds. 
(a)  Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall identify the purpose for which it is issued. It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to use the proceeds for any other purpose. Whenever the proceeds of any bond issue or part thereof remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which the bond issue was made, the commission may authorize the use of the funds as permitted by law. 
(b)  All bonds, interest coupons and other evidence of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk. The signatures may be made by facsimile, to the extent permitted by law. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the treasurer or other designated officer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, it shall be canceled. 
Section 9.5. - Deferred payment contracts. 
    The city may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or capital assets. All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
CHAPTER X. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Permissible charter provisions relative to special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Section 10.1. - General powers relative to special assessments. 
    The commission shall have the power to provide, with or without petition, for assessing and reassessing the costs, or any portion of the costs, of public improvements to a special assessment district and to determine that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement be defrayed by special assessment upon property especially benefitted. 
    The commission shall, in the exercise of its powers of financing the whole or a part of the costs of public improvements by special assessment, have authority to provide for the following, but this list shall not be exclusive: 
(a)  Street improvements and facilities, including constructing, grading, widening and the paving of streets, curbs and gutters, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, and constructing and maintaining sidewalks. 
(b)  The construction and extension of public parking facilities as a public improvement. 
(c)  The assessment of single lots when an expenditure is made on a single lot, parcel or premises, which the city is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment. 
(d)  The assessment of the cost of construction, removal or abatement of any condition which the commission determines to be a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(e)  Installing a lighting system on any street or other public place. In each case, the special assessment district for a street lighting system shall be limited to the frontage of the street or part of street upon which the system is placed. 
All real property shall be liable for the cost of public improvements benefiting such property, unless specifically exempted from special assessments by law. 
Section 10.2. - Detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance. 
(a)  The commission shall establish by ordinance the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, making and confirming special assessment rolls, correction of errors in special assessment rolls, collection of special assessments, refunds of excess funds, additional pro rata assessments and any other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by special assessment. 
(b)  Such ordinance shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  No final resolution determining to proceed with establishing a special assessment district shall be adopted until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing held on the advisability of proceeding. 
(2)  No special assessment roll shall be confirmed until after a meeting of the commission has been held to review the roll. 
(3)  Notice of hearings shall be given in the manner required by law. 
Section 10.3. - Additional assessments; correction of invalid special assessments. 
(a)  Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the commission, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings or if any tribunal of competent jurisdiction determines the assessment to be illegal, the commission may, whether the improvement has been made or not and whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, cause a new assessment to be made for the purpose for which the former assessment was made. 
(b)  No judgment or decree, nor any act of the commission vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed, as permitted by law. 
Section 10.4. - Contested assessment. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment or reassessment unless all conditions imposed by law have been complied with and: 
(a)  Within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the clerk of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal; and 
(b)  Such suit or action shall be commenced within thirty days after confirmation of the roll, or as otherwise required by law. 
State Law reference- Right of appeal, MCL 211.746. 
Section 10.5. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a separate account, whether in anticipation of bonds issued or not, and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and incidental expenses. 
Section 10.6. - Failure to receive notice. 
    Failure to receive any notice required by this Charter, or by law, shall not invalidate a special assessment or reassessment. 
CHAPTER XI. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS, LEASES 

Section 11.1. - Purchase, sale or lease of property. 
(a)  The mayor shall be responsible for administering the purchase, sale or lease of city property, except as otherwise provided by law. A system of centralized purchasing shall be maintained by the city. 
(b)  Comparative prices shall be obtained, prior to the purchase or sale of property, as prescribed by law. No sale or purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar limit set by law. 
(c)  Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications, unless the commission determines that the public interest will be better served by accepting a higher bid. Sales shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city. In any case where a bid, other than the lowest, is accepted, the commission shall publicly identify its reasons for acceptance. The commission may reject any and all bids for the furnishing of property or services to the city. 
(d)  All purchases, sales and leases shall be documented as prescribed by law. 
Section 11.2. - Contracts. 
(a)  The authority to contract on behalf of the city is vested in the commission, unless otherwise duly delegated by the commission. 
(b)  No contract shall be amended after it has been approved, except as authorized by the commission. 
Section 11.3. - Deferred payment contracts. 
    The city may enter into installment purchase or lease-purchase contracts as permitted by law. 
CHAPTER XII. - UTILITIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Charter provisions relative to utilities, MCL 117.4f, 117.5e. 

Section 12.1. - General powers respecting utilities. 
    The city shall possess all the powers granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, connect, expand, repair and maintain, either within or without its limits, public utilities, including, but not limited to, utilities for supplying water, light, heat, communication systems, power, gas, transportation, sewage or stormwater treatment and garbage disposal. The city may sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services beyond its corporate limits. 
Section 12.2. - Management of municipal utilities. 
    Any city owned or operated utility shall be administered as a regular department of the city, subject to the supervision of the mayor. 
Section 12.3. - Rates. 
    The commission shall have the power to fix, from time to time, reasonable rates and charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying public utility services. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users, nor shall free service be permitted. Rates may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the city as permitted by law. 
Section 12.4. - Utility rates and charges-Collection. 
    The commission shall provide by ordinance for the collection of public utility rates and charges. As permitted by law, such ordinance shall include provisions for: 
(a)  The city's security for the collection of utility rates and charges in the form of a lien upon the real property served by the public utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of utility service. 
(b)  Terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued. 
(c)  The city's authority to institute an action to collect rates or charges. 
(d)  The city's reservation of all powers granted to cities relative to the collection of rates and charges. 
Section 12.5. - Utility rates and charges. 
(a)  The rates and charges for any city public utility shall be fixed so as to minimally meet all the costs of the utility, including replacement. 
(b)  Transactions pertaining to the ownership or operation by the city of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts. These accounts shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial position of each utility. The report shall be kept available for inspection at the clerk's office. 
CHAPTER XIII. - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Franchises, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f, 117.5(i). 

Section 13.1. - Granting public utility franchises. 
(a)  Public utility franchises and renewals, extensions or amendments of public utility franchises may be granted by ordinance or as otherwise permitted by law. No exclusive franchise shall be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a period longer than thirty years. 
(b)  Unless a franchise is subject to revocation at the will of the commission, it shall not become effective until referred to the electors at a general or special election and receives the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting on the question. No franchise shall be approved by the commission for referral to the electorate unless thirty days have passed following submission of the application to the commission, a public hearing has been held and the grantee named in the application has filed with the clerk an unconditional acceptance of all terms of the franchise. No special election for a franchise shall be held unless the expense of holding the election is paid by the grantee. 
(c)  A franchise or a renewal, extension or amendment to a franchise, which is subject to revocation at the will of the commission, may be enacted without referral to the electors. Such franchise shall not be enacted unless the franchise is kept on file in the office of the clerk for at least thirty days following publication of notice of its availability for public inspection. 
State Law reference- Franchises limited to 30 years, Mich. Const. art. VII,  30; submittal to electors required if irrevocable, Mich. Const. art. VII,  25; expense of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i). 
Section 13.2. - Conditions of public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the commission to insert any provision within the power of the city to impose: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, nonuse or failure to comply with the provisions of the franchise; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant, service and maintenance at the highest practical level of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the period of the franchise; 
(e)  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them; and 
(f)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the commission to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
Section 13.3. - Regulation of rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall contain provision for fixing rates, fares and charges and may provide for readjustments at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Section 13.4. - Use of public places by utilities. 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets and other public places as may arise from its use of such public places and shall protect and hold the city harmless from all damages arising from such use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property located in the streets and other public places by the city or by other public utilities insofar as such joint use is reasonably practical and upon payment of reasonable rental. In the absence of an agreement, and upon application by any public utility, the commission shall provide for binding arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid. 
Section 13.5. - Existing franchises. 
    All franchises existing when this Charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their terms and conditions. 
CHAPTER XIV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY 

Section 14.1. - Eligibility for office and employment in city. 
(a)  Each person who holds an elective office of the city shall have been a resident of the city, or an area annexed to the city, for at least one year prior to the last date for filing nominating petitions for such office or prior to the day of appointment to fill a vacancy, and shall be a registered elector on such day. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive city office who is in default to the city. The holding of office by any person who is in default shall create a vacancy unless the default is eliminated within thirty days after written notice is mailed by the clerk upon the direction of the commission or unless the officer in good faith contests liability for the default in a tribunal of competent jurisdiction. 
State Law reference- City not to give official position to person in default to city, MCL 117.5(f). 
Section 14.2. - Vacancies in elective office. 
    Any elective office shall be declared vacant by the commission upon the occurrence of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of that office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by law as creating a vacancy in office. 
(b)  If no person is elected to, or qualified for, the office at an election at which such office is to be filled. 
(c)  If the officer resigns. 
(d)  If the officer is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of this Charter. 
(e)  If the officer ceases to have the qualifications for eligibility for the office required by law. 
(f)  In the case of commissioners, if the officer misses four consecutive regular meetings of the commission, unless such absences are excused by the commission and the reason for the absences entered in the proceedings of the commission at the time of each absence. 
(g)  If the officer is removed from office in accordance with section 14.4. 
Section 14.3. - Vacancies in boards, committees and commissions. 
    The office of any member of a board, committee or commission created by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be declared vacant by the commission: 
(a)  For any reason specified by law as creating a vacancy in office. 
(b)  If the officer is found guilty of any act constituting misconduct in office or another violation of this Charter. 
(c)  If the officer resigns. 
(d)  If the officer misses four consecutive regular meetings of the board, committee or commission, unless such absences are excused by the board, committee or commission and the reason entered into the proceedings of the body at the time of each absence. 
(e)  If the officer is removed from office in accordance with section 14.4. 
Section 14.4. - Removal from office. 
    The removal by the commission of elected officers or members of a city board, committee or commission appointed for definite terms shall be made for either of the following reasons: 
(a)  For any reason specified by law for removal of city officers, or 
(b)  For any act declared by this Charter to be misconduct in office. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this Charter, removal of such officers by the commission shall be made after a hearing, notice of which has been given to the officer by the clerk at least ten days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at the officer's residence according to the city's records. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against the officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by representative, to be heard in the officer's defense, to question witnesses and to present testimony. Formal procedural and evidentiary rules shall not be required at the hearing. Failure of the officer to appear at the hearing and answer such charges may be cause for removal. A majority vote of the members of the commission, exclusive of any member whose removal is being considered, shall be required for any removal. 
State Law reference- Removal of elected city officers, MCL 168.327. 
Section 14.5. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elected officers or members of a city board, committee or commission shall be made in writing and submitted to the clerk or appointing officer or body. 
Section 14.6. - Filling vacancies in appointive offices. 
    Vacancies on a city board, committee or commission shall be filled within ninety days in the manner provided for making the original appointment. In the case of members appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term. 
Section 14.7. - Filling vacancies in elective offices. 
(a)  If a vacancy occurs in an elected city office, the commission shall, within forty-five days after the vacancy occurs, by a majority vote of the commission, appoint a person to complete the term. 
(b)  If the commission does not fill a vacancy in an elected office within forty-five days after the vacancy occurs, or if the number of vacancies existing on the commission reduces the membership below a quorum, the clerk shall call a special election for the purpose of filling such vacancy or vacancies for the balance of the term(s). Candidates shall be nominated by petitions in a manner identical to that provided in section 15.8. All other provisions of this Charter not inconsistent with this section shall govern. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the filling of vacancies resulting from recall. 
Section 14.8. - Change in term of office. 
    Except as provided in this Charter, the terms of office for elective officers and members of city boards, committees and commissions appointed for definite terms shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers of the city shall not be extended beyond the period for which the officer was elected, except that an elective officer may continue to hold office until a successor is elected and qualified. 
Section 14.9. - Oath of office and bond. 
    Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take the oath of office and file the oath with the clerk, together with any bond required by law. In case of a failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date of election or appointment, an officer will be deemed to have declined the office and the office shall become vacant unless the commission, by resolution, extends the time in which the officer may qualify. 
State Law reference- Required oath of office, Mich. Const. (1963) art. XI,  1. 
Section 14.10. - Surety bonds. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all officers of the city whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement, and all other officers and employees so required by the commission shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective positions, file an official bond with the city in such form and amount as the commission directs. The official bond of every officer and employee shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of office and the delivery to his or her successor in office, or other proper officer or agent, all records, funds and property belonging to the city or pertaining to the office. The bonds may be further conditioned as the commission determines. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as noted above, shall be further conditioned so that he or she will, on demand, account for or pay over to the city, or any proper officer or agent, all moneys received. The requirements of this subsection may be met by the purchase of appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group, of city employees and officers. 
(b)  All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums shall be paid by the city. The clerk shall be custodian of all bonds of officers or employees, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Section 14.11. - Delivery of office. 
    Whenever an officer or employee ceases to hold such office or employment for any reason, he or she shall, within five days or sooner on demand, deliver to his or her successor or superior all the records, funds and property in his or her custody by virtue of such office or employment. 
Section 14.12. - Pecuniary interest prohibited. 
    Except as permitted by law, no officers, full-time employee or member of his or her family shall, directly or indirectly, be a party to a contract with the city. This section shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with Public Act No. 317 of 1968 (MCL 15.321 et seq.), as amended, and ordinances adopted by the city. 
Section 14.13. - Compensation of officers and employees. 
(a)  The compensation of all officers and employees of the city whose compensation is not otherwise provided for in this Charter shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any plan adopted by the commission. 
(b)  The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees as fixed by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be in full for all services to the city and shall be in lieu of any fees, commissions and other compensation received by such officers or employees for those services. Such fees, commissions and compensations shall belong to the city and shall be collected and accounted for by city officers or employees, paid into the city treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the mayor. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses actually incurred in service on behalf of the city as permitted by law. 
Section 14.14. - Employee benefits. 
    The commission shall have authority to make available to the officers and employees of the city any recognized standard plan of group life, medical, disability or accident insurance either independently of, or as a supplement to, any retirement plan provided for officers and employees. 
Section 14.15. - Merit system. 
    The commission may provide for a merit system for city employees as permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Firefighter and police civil service system, MCL 38.501 et seq. 
Section 14.16. - Antinepotism. 
    Unless the commission shall determine, by majority vote of all members, that the best interests of the city will be served, the following relatives of elected or appointed officers are disqualified from holding any appointed office or employment during the term of the elected or appointed officer: spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister or the spouses of any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall not disqualify relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointed officers or employees of the city at the time of the election or appointment of said officials. 
CHAPTER XV. - ELECTIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Elections generally, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Section 15.1. - Qualifications. 
    City residents qualified as electors in the State of Michigan are qualified electors in the city. 
State Law reference- Qualifications of electors, MCL 168.492. 
Section 15.2. - Election procedure. 
    The election of any city officer shall be on a nonpartisan basis. State election statutes shall apply to and control, to the extent possible, all procedures relating to registration and city elections, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Section 15.3. - Elective officers and terms of office. 
    The elected officials of the city shall be a mayor, clerk, treasurer, two commissioners at large and two commissioners from each ward. The commissioners representing wards shall live in the wards they represent and be nominated and elected from their respective wards. At each general city election there shall be elected one commissioner at large for a term of four years and one commissioner from each ward for a term of four years. Beginning with the general city election in November 1997, a mayor, clerk and treasurer shall be elected at large for four-year terms at alternate general city elections. 
    All terms of office of elected officials shall commence at 7:30 p.m. on the Monday following the election at which they are elected. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for certain elected officials, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 15.4. - Primary elections. 
(a)  Primary elections shall be held on the first Tuesday following the second Monday in September in each year in which a general city election is to be held. If, at the close of time for filing nominating petitions, the clerk finds that valid petitions have been filed by no more than two candidates for each of the respective offices, then no primary shall be held for such offices. 
(b)  The two candidates who receive the highest number of votes at a primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the respective office for which they are candidates. The names of such candidates, together with the names of candidates who filed valid nominating petitions for any office for which no primary election was held, shall be certified by the clerk as nominees for the next general city election. 
(c)  If any candidate receives more than half the total number of votes cast for an office in the primary election, that candidate shall be declared elected and the clerk shall give notice of this fact. 
Section 15.5. - General city elections. 
    A general city election shall be held the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in each odd-numbered year. 
Section 15.6. - Special elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the commission at least ninety days in advance of such election, when required by this Charter or as otherwise permitted by law. Any resolution calling a special election shall state the purpose of the election. 
Section 15.7. - Notice of elections. 
    Notice of the time and place of holding any city election, of the officers to be nominated or elected and the questions to be voted upon shall be given by the clerk in the manner and time provided by law. 
State Law reference- Notice of elections, MCL 168.647 et seq. 
Section 15.8. - Nominations. 
(a)  The method of nomination for all candidates for city elections shall be by petition. Petitions for each candidate shall be signed by at least 40 registered electors of the city. No person shall sign his or her name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to that office at the following general city election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than he or she is permitted to sign, the signatures bearing the most recent date shall be invalidated. Nominating petitions shall be filed with the clerk. 
(b)  The clerk shall publish notice of the last day permitted for filing nominating petitions and of the number of persons to be elected to each office in the manner and time provided by law. 
State Law reference- Nominating petitions, MCL 168.322. 
Section 15.9. - Form of petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially as that required by law for the nomination of nonpartisan officers. The clerk shall maintain and provide a supply of petition forms. 
State Law reference- Form of petitions, MCL 168.544a, 168.544c. 
Section 15.10. - Approval of petition. 
(a)  The clerk shall accept only nominating petitions which conform with the forms maintained by the city and which, considered together, contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required by this Charter for the respective elective city offices. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears as the candidate, it shall only be accepted if accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. The clerk shall notify, in writing, any candidate whose petition does not meet Charter requirements. A failure to so notify any candidate shall not preclude a final determination that the petition does not meet these requirements. 
(b)  Within three days after the last date for filing petitions, the clerk shall determine the sufficiency and propriety of each nominating petition and whether or not the candidate has the qualifications required for the respective elective city office and shall write his or her determinations on the face of the petition and notify, in writing, the candidate of his or her determination. 
(c)  The names of candidates for the respective elective city offices who file sufficient and proper nominating petitions shall be certified by the clerk to be placed upon the ballot for the primary election. 
State Law reference- Certification of nominating petitions, MCL 168.552. 
Section 15.11. - Candidate to run for only one office. 
    The clerk shall not accept nominating petitions for the election of any candidate for more than one office. However, if a candidate withdraws petitions for any elective office within the time provided for in this Charter, the candidate may thereafter file petitions for another office within the original time for filing nominating petitions. 
State Law reference- Incompatible offices, MCL 15.181 et seq. 
Section 15.12. - City offices; withdrawal of proposed candidate, time. 
    After the filing of a nominating petition for city office, a candidate shall not be permitted to withdraw unless a written notice of withdrawal is served on the clerk, not later than 4:00 p.m. of the third business day after the last day for filing petitions. 
State Law reference- Withdrawal of nominations, MCL 168.322a. 
Section 15.13. - Public inspection of petitions. 
    All nominating petitions filed with the clerk shall be open to public inspection during regular business hours. 
Section 15.14. - Election commission. 
    The commission shall maintain an election commission consisting of the city clerk and two qualified and registered electors of the city who shall be appointed by the commission. The members shall serve without compensation. The election commission shall appoint the board of election inspectors for each precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by law relating to the conduct of elections. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the commission. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the election commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
State Law reference- Duties of election commission generally, MCL 168.719. 
Section 15.15. - Form of ballot. 
(a)  The form, printing and numbering of ballots and the preparation of voting equipment shall conform to applicable law. In all city elections, the names of qualified candidates shall be listed under a separate heading for each office and rotated systematically in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  If two or more candidates or nominees for the same office have the same or similar surnames, the election commission shall print the residence address under the respective names of each candidate. A candidate who presently occupies such office shall be designated as "incumbent." 
(c)  Except as provided in this section, there shall be no supplementary identification of candidates or nominees on the ballot. 
State Law reference- Preparation, printing and delivery of official ballots, MCL 168.684 et seq. 
Section 15.16. - Canvass of votes. 
    The county board of canvassers shall perform the functions and duties of boards of canvassers. 
State Law reference- Board of canvassers, MCL 168.323. 
Section 15.17. - Tie vote. 
    If, at any city election, two or more persons receive an equal number of votes, then the election shall be determined by lot. 
State Law reference- Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851 et seq. 
Section 15.18. - Recount. 
    A recount of votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any proposition may be conducted as permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq. 
CHAPTER XVI. - SCHEDULE 

Section 16.1. - Status of schedule chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly transition of city government from the existing Charter to this Charter. The provisions of this chapter shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent, and for the time, required to accomplish this transition. 
Section 16.2. - Adoption of Charter. 
    This Charter and any separate propositions shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the City of Kentwood, Michigan, at a primary and special election to be held on September 12, 1995. 
Section 16.3. - Effective date. 
    If, at such election, a majority of electors vote in favor of this Charter, it shall be become effective on January 1, 1996, except as provided in section 16.7. 
Section 16.4. - Form of ballot. 
    The form for the submission of this Charter to the electors shall appear on the ballots as follows: 
Instructions to voters-To vote in favor of a proposal, connect the arrow to the right of the word "yes." To vote against a proposal, connect the arrow to the right of the word "no." To vote on the alternate proposals, connect the arrow to the right of the small "a" or small "b." 
PROPOSAL 
Shall the charter prepared by the Kentwood Charter Commission, together with the alternate proposal approved by the voters, be adopted? 
Yes _____ No _____ 
ALTERNATE PROPOSALS 
If the new charter is adopted, shall it provide for (choose only one): 
(a)  a clerk and treasurer appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Commission; 
or 
(b)  a clerk and treasurer elected at large. 
(a) _____ (b) _____ 
Section 16.5. - Canvassed by County. 
    The Board of Canvassers shall meet no later than the second day following the election to canvass the votes cast at the election. 
Section 16.6. - Continuation of Office and Employment. 
    The adoption of this Charter shall not affect the status or term of any city employee or officer serving at the time of adoption. 
Section 16.7. - Status of Specific Officers. 
    Elected officers serving when this Charter becomes effective shall continue in their respective offices until the term to which they were elected or appointed ends. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Charter Election of 4-20-1999 4-20-1999 8.1 Election of 8-8-2006 8-8-2006 8.1 Election of 8-5-2008 8-5-2008 8.1 Election of 5-4-2010 5-4-2010 8.1  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Kentwood, Michigan," and may be so cited. The ordinances may also be cited as the "Kentwood Code." 
(Code 2004,  1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances authorized,  5.4(f). 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. The rule that a penal ordinance is to be strictly construed shall be inapplicable to this Code. All provisions of this Code shall be construed according to their fair import and so as to promote justice and the objects of the Code. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city commission may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Agencies, officers. Any reference to any local, state or federal agency or officer shall include any successor agency or officer. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Kentwood, Michigan. 
    City commission. The term "city commission" means the city commission of the City of Kentwood Michigan. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Kentwood, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the term "and," "or" or "either ... or," the term shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Kent County, Michigan. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates to the extent permitted by law. 
    Gender. Terms of one gender include both genders. 
    Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended or revised, and any successor statute. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath and sworn. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person who appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
    Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes lands and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 168 of 1959 is a reference to Act No. 158 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1959.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to such act, as amended from time to time. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes land and fixtures. 
    Road, street, highway and alley. The terms "road," "street" and "highway" mean the entire width subject to an easement for a public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from property. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any constructed surface located in the roadway's cross-section between the back-of-curb or the longitudinal line of the roadway edge and the adjacent line that is distinguished by a minimum six-inch vertical separation and/or a designed horizontal separation that is intended for pedestrian use. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
    Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tense. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
    Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 2004,  1-2; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.302; Ord. No. 9-06,  1, 4-30-2006) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines and other headings. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, the catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate general legislative history. Editor's notes, charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are editorial additions provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references in this Code to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 2004,  1-3) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
(Code 2004,  1-4) 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4, 8.4a. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kentwood, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kentwood, Michigan, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 2004,  1-5) 
Charter reference- City legislation, ch. 5. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, as necessary to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, sections and subsections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the term "this ordinance" or similar terms to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section, " "this subsection" or "sections _____ to _____ (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
(Code 2004,  1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act, if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" includes: 
(1)  Causing, securing, aiding, abetting, concealing, counseling, procuring, facilitating, commanding, assisting in or soliciting a violation of this Code as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Attempting to commit a violation of this Code as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Conspiring with one or more persons to commit a violation of this Code as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code that substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be responsible for costs. This subsection does not apply to any municipal civil infraction. 
(e)  The following provisions apply to municipal civil infractions: 
(1)  Violations of this Code that are municipal civil infractions shall only be those declared to be municipal civil infractions. 
(2)  The sanction for a violation that is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in an amount as set forth in this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions as authorized by law. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for with respect to a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a: 
a.  First violation shall be $65.00, plus costs and other sanctions. 
b.  Second violation shall be $130.00, plus costs and other sanctions. 
c.  Third or subsequent violation shall be $250.00, plus costs and other sanctions. 
(4)  The fines for specific violations are as follows: 
Ordinance Fine for First 
Violation Fine for Second 
Violation Fine for Third or 
Subsequent Violation Soil erosion 
(article 2 of chapter 78) $2,500.00 $2,500.00 $2,500.00 Stormwater management 
(article 3 of chapter 78)  2,500.00  2,500.00  2,500.00 Installation of key box 
(section 22-104 (506))    500.00    500.00    500.00 Licensing 
(chapter 26, article 2)    200.00    500.00  1,000.00  
(5)  In addition to the provisions of subsections (e)(3) and (4) of this section, any person determined responsible or responsible with explanation for a municipal civil infraction shall be liable for the payment of the costs of prosecution in an amount of not less than $9.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance with respect to: 
(1)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  Other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise, or other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief, or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 2004,  1-7, 2-315; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.908, 12.910, 20.303; Ord. No. 5-03, 4-1-2003) 
Charter reference- Penalty for ordinance violations,  5.7. 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.3(k), 117.4l; municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l, 600.8701 et seq. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided to the contrary, if any portion of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, if such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and, to this end, this Code is declared to be severable. 
(Code 2004,  1-8) 
State Law reference- Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2004,  1-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 2004,  1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following ordinances or portion of such ordinances, and all such provisions continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Detaching property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Affecting any urban renewal project not codified in this Code. 
(9)  Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any road, street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat. 
(14)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(15)  Granting a tax exemption for specific property not codified in this Code. 
(16)  Not codified in this Code: 
a.  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations; or 
b.  Ordering, requiring or authorizing the erection or installation of traffic control signs, signals, devices or markings, or parking meters. 
(17)  Pertaining to zoning, including, but not limited to, the basic zoning ordinance and ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map. 
(18)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(19)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(20)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Code 2004,  1-11) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home rule city act, MCL 117.1 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Issuance of permits, approvals or contracts to persons indebted to the city. 
    The city shall not review or act on a request for the approval of plans, plats, permits, contracts or similar matters if the applicant is in default of real or personal property taxes due to the city or if the applicant is otherwise financially indebted to the city. Pending appeals filed in good faith in a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction shall not prohibit the city from acting as requested. 
(Code 2004,  2-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.841) 
State Law reference- Contracts with persons in default to city prohibited, MCL 117.5(f). 
Secs. 2-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City Commission,  4.1 et seq., 6.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-31. - Committee structure. 
    All references in this Code to "service committee," "ordinance committee," "finance committee" or "safety committee," or any derivative of the same, shall be interpreted to mean the city commission committee of the whole and all authorities, powers, assignments and delegations to the aforesaid committees shall be transferred to and vested in the city commission committee of the whole. 
(Code 2004,  1-12; Ord. No. 2-13,  1, 1-13-2013) 
Editor's note- This section was moved here from section 1-12. 
Secs. 2-32-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Officers and employees,  14.1 et seq.; organization of government,  6.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Appearance tickets. 
    Unless prohibited by law, all city officers and city employees may issue and serve appearance tickets for violations of ordinances. 
(Code 2004,  2-61; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.861) 
State Law reference- Appearance tickets, MCL 764.9c. 
Secs. 2-62-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-81. - Established. 
    Pursuant to section 6.6 of the City Charter, the city hereby creates and establishes the following positions and administrative offices: 
(1)  Finance director. 
(2)  Public works director. 
(3)  Engineering and inspections director. 
(4)  Parks and recreation director. 
(5)  Community development director. 
(6)  Police chief. 
(7)  Fire chief. 
(8)  Human resources director. 
(9)  Information technology director. 
(Code 2004,  2-81; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.001; Ord. No. 14-02,  1, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 11-18,  1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 2-82. - Appointment; compensation. 
    All officials designated in this division shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city commission, and the compensation of such officials shall be set in accordance with the city Charter and all such officials shall serve at the will of the mayor in accordance with the Charter. 
(Code 2004,  2-82; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.003; Ord. No. 13-08, 10-31-2008) 
Sec. 2-83. - Present officials. 
    All officials now serving the city under any of the classifications set forth in section 2-81 shall be deemed to have been duly appointed as provided by this chapter, and all such officials shall serve at the will of the mayor in accordance with the Charter. 
(Code 2004,  2-83; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.006; Ord. No. 14-02,  2, 7-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-84. - Fiscal responsibilities. 
(a)  Each director serving the city under this chapter will furnish the mayor with a proposed budget for the department with which he is connected for the ensuing fiscal year of the city in sufficient time for the city commission to take such budget into account in establishing the city budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(b)  No official serving the city under this chapter is authorized to incur any indebtedness against the city, except with the prior approval of the city commission and except per the approved budget for the department with which such official is associated. 
(Code 2004,  2-84; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.004) 
Sec. 2-85. - Hiring and removal of department employees. 
    All employees of the city serving under any official under this chapter shall be hired and removed, if necessary, by the mayor in the same manner as all other city employees are hired or removed. 
(Code 2004,  2-85; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.005) 
Secs. 2-86-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Boards generally,  6.13; board of review,  8.5 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-121-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Local officers compensation commission required,  6.3. 
State Law reference- Local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 

Sec. 2-151. - Created; membership. 
    A local officers compensation commission is hereby created which shall determine the salaries of each local elected official. The local officers compensation commission shall consist of seven members who are registered electors of the city, appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city commission. The terms of office shall be seven years. All first members shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and, thereafter, members shall be appointed at the first regular meeting of the city commission in each calendar year. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the local officers compensation commission. 
(Code 2004,  2-151; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.011) 
State Law reference- Mandatory provisions, MCL 117.5c(a). 
Sec. 2-152. - Salary determinations. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salary of each local elected official. The determination shall be the salary unless the city commission, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the legislative body, rejects it. The determination of the local officers compensation commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city commission. If the determination is rejected, the existing salary shall prevail. The expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Code 2004,  2-152; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.012) 
State Law reference- Mandatory provisions, MCL 117.5c(b). 
Sec. 2-153. - Meetings; quorum; chairman; compensation; conference with elected officials required. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in every odd-numbered year, and shall make its determination within 45 days of its first meeting. Such determination shall be presented to the city on or before June 1 for its consideration in any year in which the local officers compensation commission files a determination. To the extent permitted by law, the city commission need not act on the determination at the meeting at which it is presented. A majority of the members of the local officers compensation commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of such commission. The local officers compensation commission shall take no action or make any determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on such commission. The local officers compensation commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. For the purposes of this division, the term "session days" means any calendar day on which the local officers compensation commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the local officers compensation commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The local officers compensation commission shall confer with elected officials prior to making a determination. 
(Code 2004,  2-153; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.013) 
State Law reference- Mandatory provisions, MCL 117.5c(c). 
Secs. 2-154-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this division pertaining to library board were deleted. They derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.271--12.277 and Code 2004,  2-181--2-187. 

Secs. 2-181-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Economic development corporations act, MCL 125.1601 et seq. 

Sec. 2-211. - Created and authorized. 
    There is hereby created and authorized the incorporation of the economic development corporation of the city, pursuant to and in accordance with Public Act No. 338 of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  2-211; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.381) 
State Law reference- Authority to incorporate, MCL 125.1604. 
Sec. 2-212. - Application approved. 
    That the application dated April 24, 1975, and filed by William B. Murphy, Gerald F. Burns and Gary J. McInerney, is hereby approved. 
(Code 2004,  2-212; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.382) 
Sec. 2-213. - Articles approved. 
    That the articles of incorporation for the economic development corporation of the city are hereby approved and adopted in the following form: 
AMENDED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION OF THE CITY OF KENTWOOD A PUBLIC CORPORATION 
    These amended articles of incorporation are for the purpose of forming a public economic development corporation pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended (the "Economic Development Corporations Act of 1974," hereinafter called "the act"). 
ARTICLE I NAME 
    The name of the economic development corporation is the Economic Development Corporation of the City of Kentwood. 
ARTICLE II INCORPORATING MUNICIPALITY 
    The incorporation of the Economic Development Corporation of the City of Kentwood was accomplished by the approval of the articles of incorporation by ordinance of the City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan. 
ARTICLE III PURPOSE 
    The corporation is organized and incorporated as authorized by and pursuant to the Economic Development Corporations Act of 1974 (Act 338, Public Acts of 1974), as amended. The purpose for which the corporation is created is to alleviate and prevent conditions of unemployment; to assist and retain local industries and commercial enterprises; to strengthen and revitalize the economy of the City of Kentwood and of the State of Michigan; to provide means and methods for the encouragement and assistance of industrial and commercial enterprises in locating, purchasing, constructing, reconstructing, modernizing, improving, maintaining, repairing, furnishing, equipping, and expanding in the City of Kentwood; to encourage the location and expansion of commercial enterprises to more conveniently provide needed services and facilities of the commercial enterprises to the city and the residents thereof. To accomplish the foregoing essential public purposes, the corporation, pursuant to the Act, may do the following: 
a)  Construct, acquire by gift or purchase, reconstruct, improve, maintain, or repair projects (as the word "project" is defined in the Act) and acquire the necessary land, or an interest in land or portions of the land for the site therefor; 
b)  Acquire by gift or purchase the necessary machinery, furnishings, and equipment for a project; 
c)  Borrow money and issue its revenue bonds or revenue notes to finance or refinance part or all of the cost of the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, or improvement of a project or any part thereof, the cost of the acquisition and improvement of the necessary sites therefor, the acquisition of machinery, furnishings, and equipment therefor, and the costs necessary or incidental to the borrowing of money and issuing of bonds or notes for such purpose; 
d)  Enter into leases, lease purchase agreements, installment sales contracts, or loan agreements with any person, firm, corporation, or public authority for the use or sale of a project, or any part thereof; 
e)  Mortgage or create security interests in the project, or any part thereof, in favor of any lender of money to or holders of bonds or notes issued by the corporation; 
f)  Sell and convey the project or any part thereof for a price and at a time as the corporation determines; 
g)  Lend, grant, transfer, or convey funds, as described in the Act, as permitted by law, but subject to applicable restrictions affecting the use of such funds; 
h)  Assist and participate in the designation of the land area which will be acquired in the implementation of a project; 
i)  Prepare, assist and aid in the preparation of plans, services, studies and recommendations relative to the public purposes of the corporation; 
j)  Aid, assist and participate in clearing, rebuilding and rehabilitating blighted, deteriorated areas or structures; 
k)  Encourage citizen participation and assistance in industrial and commercial enterprises, housing and community improvements and to disseminate information to the general public concerning the purposes and objectives of the corporation; 
l)  Aid, assist and participate in the acquisition, rehabilitation or construction of industrial and commercial improvements, dwelling units or other structures or matters incidental thereto; 
m)  Hold, demolish, repair, alter and improve or otherwise develop, clear and dispose of real property; 
n)  Enter into agreements and contracts with any state agency or department, its political subdivisions and agency or department thereof, or any other official public body and any individual, corporation or other organization in connection with the purpose of the corporation; 
o)  Accept, hold, own, and acquire by bequest, devise, gift, purchase, or lease any property, real or mixed, whether tangible or intangible, without limitation as to kind, amount or value; 
p)  Sell, convey, lease, rent, mortgage, or make loans, grants or pledges of any such property, or any interest therein or proceeds therefrom, and to invest or reinvest the principal thereof and receipts therefrom, if any; 
q)  Carry on any activity for the purposes above stated, either directly or as agent, for or with public authorities, individuals, corporations or other organizations, or in whole or in part through or by means of public authorities, individuals, corporations or other organizations; 
r)  In general, and subject to such limitations and conditions as are or may be prescribed by law, to exercise such other powers which now are or hereafter may be conferred by law upon a corporation organized pursuant to the Act and for the foregoing purposes; 
s)  Make secured or unsecured loans, participate in the making of secured or unsecured loans, undertake commitments to make secured or unsecured loans and mortgages, sell loans and mortgages at public or private sale, rewrite loans and mortgages, discharge loans and mortgages, foreclose on a mortgage, or commence an action to protect or enforce a right conferred upon it by a law, mortgage, loan, contract, or other agreement. 
ARTICLE IV BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
1.  Directors: The board of directors of the corporation shall consist of a maximum of thirteen (13) persons. Through expiration of terms of office, resignation, retirement, death or removal, membership shall be reduced to nine (9) persons, not more than three (3) of whom shall be an officer or employee of the city. The board of directors of the corporation shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of Kentwood, with the advice and consent of the city commission, as provided in the Act. The directors shall be appointed for terms of six (6) years, except of the directors first appointed, 4 shall be appointed for 6 years, 1 for 5 years, 1 for 4 years, 1 for 3 years, 1 for 2 years and up to 5 for 1 year. 
2.  Additional directors: In accordance with the Act, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city commission, shall appoint two (2) additional directors to the board of directors of the corporation for each project (as the word "project" is defined in the Act) proposed by the corporation. Each of said additional directors appointed pursuant to this paragraph 2, article IV, shall serve as directors of the corporation until the project for which they are appointed is either abandoned or, if undertaken, is completed in accordance with the project plan, at which time each such director shall cease to serve. 
ARTICLE V OFFICERS 
    The board of directors of the corporation, by an affirmative vote of the majority of its members (not counting additional directors appointed pursuant to paragraph 2 of article IV, hereof), shall elect as the officers of the corporation a president, a secretary and a treasurer, and from time to time may elect one or more vice-presidents and such assistant secretaries, assistant treasurers and such other officers, agents and employees as the board of directors may deem proper. Any two offices, other than the office of president, secretary, and treasurer, may be held by the same person. 
    The officers of the corporation shall serve for a term of one (1) year and thereafter until his/her successor is elected and qualified, or until death, resignation or removal. 
ARTICLE VI POWERS AND DUTIES 
    The powers and duties of the corporation and its officers are to assist in alleviating and preventing conditions of unemployment; to assist and retain local industries and commercial enterprises; to assist industrial and commercial enterprises in locating, purchasing, constructing, reconstructing, modernizing, improving, maintaining, repairing, furnishing, equipping, and expanding in the city; and to construct, acquire by gift or purchase, reconstruct, improve, maintain, modernize, repair, furnish, equip and expand projects (as the word "project" is defined in the Act), and acquire the necessary lands for the site therefor; to acquire by gift or purchase the necessary machinery, furnishings, and equipment for a project; to borrow money and issue revenue bonds or revenue notes to finance all or part of the cost of a project, including machinery, furnishings and equipment and the necessary site or sites therefor; to enter into, execute and carry out leases, lease purchase agreements, installment sales contracts with any person, firm or corporation for the use or sale of the project; to lease, mortgage, sell, and convey the project or any part thereof for a price and at a time as the corporation determines; to lend, grant, transfer, or convey funds as permitted by law, and in general to do and have such powers not prohibited by law and to this extent all powers provided and conferred by law upon corporations created and incorporated pursuant to the Act, are hereby incorporated herein as powers of the corporation and its officers, in addition to all other powers conferred thereupon by law. It shall be the power and the duty of the officers of the corporation to implement, carry out, and execute the above described powers and duties of the corporation. 
ARTICLE VII BODY CORPORATE 
    The corporation shall be a body corporate with power to sue and be sued in any court of this state. It shall possess all the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation and those incidental thereto. The enumeration of any powers in these articles of incorporation shall not be construed as a limitation upon such general powers of the corporation. 
ARTICLE VIII LOCATION 
    Location of the offices of the Economic Development Corporation of the City of Kentwood is Kentwood City Hall, 4900 Breton SE, Kentwood, Michigan. 
ARTICLE IX REGISTERED AGENT 
    The name of the resident agent at the registered office is the Kentwood City Clerk. 
ARTICLE X NON-STOCK; ASSETS 
    The corporation is organized upon a non-stock basis. The amount of assets which said corporation possesses is: 
1.  Real property: None. 
2.  Personal property: None. 
The corporation will be financed from donations, gifts, grants, and devises, either solicited or unsolicited, obtained from public authorities, individuals, corporations and other organizations, by earnings from its activities, borrowings, and issuance of bonds and notes. 
ARTICLE XI INCORPORATORS 
    The names and addresses of each of the incorporators are as follows: 
William B. Murphy, 545 Trust Building, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49502 
Gerald F. Burns, 545 Trust Building, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49502 
Gary J. McInerney, 545 Trust Building, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49502 
ARTICLE XII TERM 
    The term of existence of the corporation is perpetual or until dissolved in accordance with the Act. 
ARTICLE XIII BYLAWS AND REGULATION OF AFFAIRS 
    The board of directors, by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members (not counting additional directors appointed pursuant to paragraph 2 of article IV, hereof), shall adopt bylaws for the operation of affairs of the corporation. 
    The regulation of the internal affairs of the corporation, including the distribution of assets on dissolution or final liquidation, is placed entirely with the board of directors or their successors, as provided in the bylaws of this corporation, subject, however, to the provisions of the Act. 
ARTICLE XIV PUBLICATION OF AMENDED ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION 
    The name of the newspaper in which the amended articles of incorporation shall be published is The East Press portion of The Grand Rapids Press, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Kentwood. The director elected as secretary of the corporation shall also act as recording officer of the corporation. The clerk of the City of Kentwood shall cause a copy of the articles of incorporation to be published once in said newspaper. 
ARTICLE XV NET EARNINGS 
    No part of the net earnings of the corporation, beyond that necessary for the retirement of indebtedness or to implement the public purposes or program of the city, shall inure to the benefit of any person, firm or corporation, other than the city (except that reasonable compensation may be paid for services rendered to or for the corporation affecting one or more of its purposes) and no member, trustee, officer or director of the corporation or any private individual shall be entitled to share in the distribution of any of the corporate assets on dissolution of the corporation. No substantial part of the activities of the corporation shall be the carrying on of propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to influence legislation, and the corporation shall not participate in, or intervene in (including the publication or distribution of statements) any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. 
    Upon the termination or dissolution of the corporation, after adequate provision has been made for all obligations of the corporation, surplus earnings, and all property and assets of the corporation shall belong to and be paid only to the City of Kentwood, Michigan, or its successor. 
(Code 2004,  2-213; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.383-12.398) 
Secs. 2-214-2-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HOUSING COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Housing commissions, MCL 125.651 et seq. 

Sec. 2-241. - Created. 
    Pursuant to Public Act No. 18 of 1933 (Ex. Sess.), MCL 125.651 et seq., the City of Kentwood Housing Commission is hereby established. 
(Code 2004,  2-241; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.201-18.205, 18.207-18.215) 
State Law reference- Authority to create housing commission, MCL 125.653. 
Sec. 2-242. - Membership. 
(a)  The housing commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the mayor. The term of office of members of the housing commission shall be five years. 
(b)  Upon recommendation of the mayor to the city commission, the city commission may remove a member of the housing commission from office before the expiration of such member's term. A vacancy in office shall be filled by the mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "vacancy" means a seat for which the current appointee discontinues membership by death, resignation or removal from office; by not seeking reappointment in writing prior to the expiration of his term; or by not being reappointed by the mayor within five days following the expiration of his term. 
(Code 2004,  2-242; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.202) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.654(1), (3), (6). 
Sec. 2-243. - Meetings; officers. 
(a)  The business that the housing commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by such act. The housing commission shall meet at regular intervals. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Three members constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(b)  A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by the housing commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
(c)  A president and vice-president and other officers designated by the housing commission shall be elected by the commission. The housing commission may employ and fix the compensation of a director, who may also serve as secretary, and other employees as necessary. Upon the recommendation of the mayor, the city commission may adopt a resolution either conditioning the establishment of any compensation of an officer or employee of the housing commission upon the approval of the city commission or establishing compensation ranges and classifications to be used by the housing commission in fixing the compensation of its officers and employees. The housing commission shall prescribe the duties of its officers and employees and shall transfer to its officers and director those functions and the authority which the housing commission has prescribed. The housing commission may employ engineers, architects, attorneys, accountants and other professional consultants, when necessary. 
(Code 2004,  2-243; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.203) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.655. 
Sec. 2-244. - Operating funds. 
    Funds for the operation of the housing commission may be loaned or granted by the city commission. The city commission may condition the provision of funds to the housing commission upon an agreement that the housing commission shall, as soon as possible, reimburse the incorporating unit for all money expended by it for the housing commission from revenues received from the sale of bonds. 
(Code 2004,  2-244; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.204) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.656. 
Sec. 2-245. - Powers and duties. 
    The housing commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Determine in what areas of the city it is necessary to provide proper sanitary housing facilities for families of low income and for the elimination of housing conditions which are detrimental to the public peace, health, safety morals and/or welfare. 
(2)  Purchase, lease, sell, exchange, transfer, assign and mortgage any property, real or personal, or any interest therein, or acquire such property by gift, bequest or under the power of eminent domain; own, hold, clear and improve property; engage in or contract for the design and construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, extension and/or repair of any housing project or part thereof; or lease and/or operate any housing project that the housing commission may own or lease. 
(3)  Control and supervise all parks and playgrounds forming a part of such housing development; provided, however, that the housing commission may contract with the city for operation or maintenance of either or both. 
(4)  Establish and revise rents of any housing project that the housing commission may own or lease; provided, however, that the commission shall rent all property for such sums as will make such project self-supporting, including all charges for maintenance and operation for principal and interest on loans and bonds and for taxes. 
(5)  Rent only to such tenants as are unable to pay for more expensive housing accommodations. 
(6)  Call upon such departments of the city for assistance in the performance of its duties; provided, however, that any costs rendered by any departments of the city shall be reimbursed for any added expense incurred for such assistance. 
(7)  Have such other powers relating to such housing facilities project as may be prescribed by the city commission by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 2004,  2-245; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.205) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.657. 
Sec. 2-246. - Annual report. 
    The housing commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city commission by filing such report with the city clerk, who shall furnish a copy of the report to the city commission. The housing commission shall make such other reports to the city commission through the city clerk as may from time to time be deemed necessary. 
(Code 2004,  2-246; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.207) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.659. 
Sec. 2-247. - Power of eminent domain. 
    The housing commission may recommend to the city commission the institution and prosecution of proceedings under the power of eminent domain in accordance with the laws of the state and/or provisions of the city Charter relative to condemnation. Housing projects contemplated by such act are declared to be public purposes within the meaning of the constitution, state laws and the city Charter relative to the power of eminent domain. 
(Code 2004,  2-247; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.208) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.660, 125.657. 
Sec. 2-248. - Deeds, mortgages, contracts, leases and purchases. 
    All deeds, mortgages, contracts, leases, purchases or other agreements regarding real property, including agreements to acquire or dispose of real property, shall be approved and executed in the name of the city by the city commission. For purposes of this section, the term "contracts or leases regarding real property" means contracts to purchase or lease from a third party or other transactions under which rights or possession of real property are acquired, but do not include contracts, management agreements or leases of that property with tenants or facility managers. 
(Code 2004,  2-248; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.209) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.661(1), (2). 
Sec. 2-249. - Control of housing projects. 
    The housing commission shall have complete control of the entire housing project, including the construction, maintenance and operation, as fully and completely as if such commission represented private owners. 
(Code 2004,  2-249; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.210) 
State Law reference- Contracts generally, MCL 125.661. 
Sec. 2-250. - Claims in connection with housing projects. 
    All claims that may arise in connection with a housing project shall be presented as ordinary claims against the city; provided, however, that written notice of all claims based upon injury to persons or property must be served upon the city clerk within 60 days from the occurrence of the injury, but the disposition thereof shall rest in the discretion of the housing commission and the cost of investigation, attorneys' fees, all claims that may be allowed and final judgments obtained from such claims shall be paid only from the operating revenue of the housing project. 
(Code 2004,  2-250; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.211) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.663. 
Sec. 2-251. - Liability for claims. 
    The notes, bonds or other obligations of any claims of whatever nature against a housing project shall neither be debts or charges against the city nor against any member of the housing commission, and no individual liability shall attach for any official act done by any member of such commission. 
(Code 2004,  2-251; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.212) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.664. 
Sec. 2-252. - Purchase, construction and repair of housing facilities; estimates required. 
    Whenever the housing commission shall determine to purchase, acquire, construct, improve, enlarge, extend, operate and/or repair any housing facility under the provisions of this division or under the provisions of the act, it shall first cause an estimate to be made of the cost thereof, and the fact that such estimate has been made and the amount thereof shall appear on any ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance of any bonds. 
(Code 2004,  2-252; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.213) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.665. 
Sec. 2-253. - Enacting ordinances for the issuance and sale of revenue bonds. 
    For the purposes of this division and the act, the city is authorized to adopt or enact an ordinance providing for the issuance and sale of revenue bonds as provided in such act and any and all other appropriate ordinances or resolutions deemed necessary and desirable to effectuate the full intent and purposes of such act, provided that the manner and procedure of enacting any such ordinances or resolutions shall be as provided by law, except as may be expressly provided for in such act. 
(Code 2004,  2-253; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.214) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.666. 
Sec. 2-254. - Borrowing money and issuing revenue bonds for housing projects. 
    For the purposes of defraying the cost of purchasing, acquiring, constructing, improving, enlarging, extending or repairing of a housing project or combined projects, the city may borrow money and issue revenue bonds therefor in the manner and under the conditions as provided for in the act. 
(Code 2004,  2-254; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.215) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.667. 
Secs. 2-255-2-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l, 600.8701 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-281. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
    Authorized city official means the mayor, any department head, all code enforcement officers and their designees, and such other officers of the city authorized by resolution or ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil violation notices. 
    Bureau means the city's municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by this article. 
    Municipal civil infraction means an act or omission that is prohibited by any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under an ordinance of the city, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice, prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice, prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the act (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)). 
    Subsequent violation means a repeat municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of an ordinance committed by a person and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible within a two-year period of a prior admission or finding of responsibility of the prior offense. 
(Code 2004,  2-281; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.901) 
Sec. 2-282. - Commencement of a municipal civil infraction action. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance, by an authorized city official, of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court, or a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the bureau. If a municipal civil infraction notice is served and an admission of responsibility is not made or the civil fine and cost prescribed by the ordinance for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at his last known address. 
(Code 2004,  2-282; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.902) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 600.8703, 600.8707. 
Sec. 2-283. - Municipal civil infraction notices and citations. 
    Unless prohibited by law, all city officers and city employees shall be deemed authorized local officials for purposes of issuing and serving municipal civil infraction notices and municipal civil infraction citations for violations of ordinances. 
(Code 2004,  2-62; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.921) 
Editor's note- This section was moved here from section 2-62. 
Secs. 2-284-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 2-311. - Established. 
    The municipal ordinance violations bureau is hereby established to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by the act. The bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. 
(Code 2004,  2-311; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.903) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish municipal ordinance violations bureau, MCL 600.8396. 
Sec. 2-312. - Location; employees; rules and regulations. 
    The city treasurer shall, subject to the approval of the city commission, establish a convenient location for the bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for its operations. 
(Code 2004,  2-312; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.904) 
Sec. 2-313. - Disposition of violations. 
    The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been established and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed as provided by the Act. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice a person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded to that person by law. 
(Code 2004,  2-313; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.905) 
Sec. 2-314. - Limitation of authority. 
    The scope of the bureau's authority is limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of such admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation. 
(Code 2004,  2-314; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.906) 
Sec. 2-315. - Schedule of fines established. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal civil infraction notices is hereby established in section 1-7. 
(b)  Copies of the schedule of fines shall be posted as required by law. 
(Code 2004,  2-315; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.908; Ord. No. 5-03, 4-1-2003) 
Secs. 2-316-2-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICES 

Sec. 2-341. - Contents. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall specify the: 
(1)  Time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau; 
(2)  Methods by which an appearance may be made; 
(3)  Address and telephone number of the bureau; 
(4)  Hours during which the bureau is open; 
(5)  Amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation; and 
(6)  Consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(Code 2004,  2-341; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.907) 
Sec. 2-342. - Procedure where admission of responsibility is not made or fine is not paid. 
    If an alleged violator served with a municipal civil infraction violation notice does not appear at the bureau and admit responsibility and pay the civil fine and costs prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation within the time specified in the notice, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the defendant at the defendant's last known address. The citation need not comply with all form and content requirements of sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil infraction violation notice and shall fairly inform the defendant how to respond to the citation. 
(Code 2004,  2-342; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.909) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 600.8707. 
Secs. 2-343-2-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - FINANCE[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- General finance and budget,  7.1 et seq.; borrowing of money,  9.1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-371. - Acquisition of real property absent agreement on purchase price. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall apply in all cases where the city needs to acquire real property interests for public purposes and the city and owners of the affected property are unable to agree upon a purchase price. 
(b)  Appraisals. Whenever required to do so by the state or federal government in any project, the city shall obtain an appraisal or written statement and summary in the manner required. In all other cases where the city and property owners cannot agree upon a price, the city shall obtain an appraisal or written statement and summary from either an independent appraiser or the city assessor. 
(c)  Refusal of property owner to accept appraisal. In each case where the city secures an appraisal or written statement and summary, and the property owner refuses to accept the amount indicated therein as the sale price, the city shall not negotiate further with the subject property owner until and unless such property owner provides adequate written information to justify a higher price for the purchase of the subject property. The city may, however, initiate eminent domain proceedings. 
(Code 2004,  2-371; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.241-12.243) 
Sec. 2-372. - Recovery of expenses related to emergency responses to hazardous materials incidents. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to enable the city to require reimbursement from those responsible for the leaking, spilling or otherwise allowing certain dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to escape containment, thereby requiring cleanup and disposal by the city or its agents. 
(b)  The term "dangerous or hazardous substance or material" means any substance which is spilled, leaked or otherwise released from its source, which, in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized representative, is dangerous or harmful to the environment, or human or animal life, health or safety, or is obnoxious by reason of odor, or is determined by the city to constitute a danger or threat to the public health, safety or welfare, and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as chemicals and gases, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person who causes or controls leakage, spillage or any other dissemination of dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to immediately remove such substances or materials and clean up the area of such spillage in such a manner that the area involved is fully restored to its condition before such spillage. 
(d)  Any such person who fails to comply with subsection (c) of this section shall, to the extent permitted by law, be liable to and shall pay the city for its costs and expenses, including the costs incurred by the city to any party whom it engages for the complete abatement, cleanup and restoration of the affected area. Costs incurred by the city shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, actual labor costs of city personnel, including worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits and administrative overhead; the cost of equipment operation; the cost of materials obtained directly by the city; and the cost of any contract labor and materials. Costs under this subsection shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the city. 
(Code 2004,  2-372; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.131-35.134) 
State Law reference- Expenses for reimbursement for emergency response, MCL 769.1f; environmental remediation, MCL 324.20101 et seq. 
Sec. 2-373. - Recovery of expenses related to emergency responses to incidents involving motor vehicles and alcohol or drugs. 
(a)  Findings. The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or controlled substances. In addition, the city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or controlled substances there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police, firefighting and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or controlled substances. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency response means: 
(1)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, emergency medical and rescue services by the city or by a private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city to an incident resulting in an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic liquor and controlled substance; or 
(2)  An incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when a driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor and/or controlled substance. 
    Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city, or to a private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, when making an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue services at the scene of the incident. These costs further include: 
(1)  The scene of the incident; 
(2)  All of the salaries and wages of the city personnel responding to the incident; 
(3)  All salaries and wages of the city personnel or contractors engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation; 
(4)  All costs connected with the administration and provision of all chemical or other tests of the blood, breath or urine of the person causing the incident; and 
(5)  All costs related to any prosecution of the person causing the incident. 
(c)  Liability for expense of an emergency response. 
(1)  Person responsible. Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response if, while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor and controlled substance, such person's operation of a motor vehicle proximately caused any incident resulting in an emergency response. 
(2)  Presumptions. For the purpose of this section, a person is under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, when his physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor if a chemical analysis of his blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his blood was in excess of 0.08 percent. 
(3)  Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for incurring the costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(4)  Cost recovery schedule. The city commission shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of an emergency response. The schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the police department. 
(5)  Billing. The chief of police or his designee may, within ten days of receiving itemized costs or any part thereof incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for such costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this section. The bill shall require full payment in 30 days from the date of service. 
(6)  Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any person described in this section as liable for the expense of an emergency response who fails to pay the bill within 30 days of service shall be considered in default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover the expense and any costs allowed by law. 
(Code 2004,  2-373; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.051-12.053) 
State Law reference- Reimbursement of expenses for emergency responses to certain incidents, MCL 769.1f. 
Sec. 2-374. - Recovery of expenses related to certain fire department responses. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is adopted to provide authority and a mechanism for the reimbursement of costs for certain fire and emergency services rendered by the city fire department. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Assessable costs means those charges and fees incurred by the city as a result of assistance provided by the fire department or by a third party on behalf of the city in connection with a fire department response to an incident including, but not limited to, the actual labor and material costs (including without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation, costs of material disposal and costs of contracted labor, legal fees, collection costs, etc.) provided. 
    Fire department response means appearing at the scene of a utility line failure or railroad fire. 
    Hazardous condition means an occurrence resulting in a risk to the physical welfare of persons in the immediate area of the situation (such as downed utility lines or gas leaks not in an occupied structure), requiring a fire department response. 
    Person means a natural person, corporation, utility, railroad, partnership or any other entity with legal capacity. 
    Railroad means any person, partnership, association, or corporation, their respective lessees, trustees, or receivers, appointed by a court, or other legal entity operating in this state either as a common carrier for hire or for private use as a carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary rails and includes any person, partnership, association, corporation, trustee, or receiver appointed by a court or any other legal entity owning railroad tracks. 
    Railroad fire means a burning rail car or contents, or burning vegetation (e.g., grass, brush) adjacent to the railroad rails, track, or roadbed originating from railroads/trains passing over the rails, track or roadbed after the fire department is on scene for one hour. 
    Release means any actual or threatened leaking, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment (including air, soil, groundwater and surface water). 
    Utility means all persons, firms, corporations, partnerships, organizations, municipal or other public authority that provides gas, electric, water, steam, sewer, energy, telecommunications, cable television or other services of a similar nature. 
    Utility line failure means downed power lines, gas pipeline breaks (including ruptures and punctures), the disabling of any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect or transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals, water, or sanitary or storm sewage, or other mishaps occurring in connection with the activities of utilities or their suppliers after the fire department is on scene for one hour. 
(c)  Responsibility. Persons owning, maintaining or operating a public or private railroad or utility shall be responsible for and pay the assessable costs incurred by the city to respond to, assist, manage, monitor, or remediate any emergency concerning or involving a railroad fire or utility line failure. 
(d)  Payment for services. The fire chief or his designee shall determine the total assessable costs and submit the city's bill to the responsible railroad or utility. Bills shall be sent by first class mail. All bills rendered for charges shall be payable within 30 days of the mailing of the billing. 
(e)  Collection of charges. Bills not paid within 30 days shall be considered in default. The city may file suit in district court to collect any monies remaining unpaid and any costs allowed by law and shall have any and all other remedies provided by law for the collection of the charges. 
(f)  Other remedies. The recovery of assessable costs imposed under this section shall not relieve or limit the liability of any responsible parties under any other local ordinance, state or federal law, rule or regulation. The remedies provided shall apply in all circumstances except as pursuant to sections 2-372 and 2-373 where billing has already occurred. 
(g)  Appeal procedure. A person who receives a bill under this section may request a meeting with the fire chief or his designee to appeal all or part of the assessable costs. The person shall request a meeting in writing within 14 calendar days of the date of the invoice. The fire chief or his designee shall have authority to affirm, modify or waive the assessable costs if he finds that: 
(1)  An error was made with respect to the nature of the incident; 
(2)  An error was made in calculating the assessable costs; or 
(3)  The person to which the bill was sent is not liable under the terms of this section. 
a.  The fire chief or his designee shall mail his determination regarding the appeal within 14 days of the meeting with the appellant, which determination shall identify the basis for the decision. 
b.  If, after receiving the fire chief or his designee's determination, the person is not satisfied, it may request an opportunity to appear before the safety committee of the city commission to seek relief from the assessable costs charged. Such an appeal must be made in writing within 14 calendar days of the mailing of the fire chief or his designee's determination and must specifically identify why the billing should be modified or overturned. In its review, the safety committee shall consider the grounds for relief stated herein as well as the following factors: 
1.  The degree to which the imposition of assessable costs presents a unique situation unlikely to be repeated; and 
2.  Whether granting the appeal would do harm to the intent and purpose of this section. 
Failure to file a timely written request of appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to relief and further constitutes an agreement to pay the costs involved. The safety committee is authorized to affirm, modify or overturn the fire chief or his designee's determination with respect to the imposition of assessable costs in the event of an appeal. 
(Code 2004,  2-374; Ord. No. 14-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 15-08,  1, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 2-375. - Fees and escrow fund. 
    The city commission may by resolution establish fees for the administration of this Code. Such fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city commission. An applicant shall pay all applicable fees upon the filing of any application, plan, or other request or application to which a fee is prescribed by ordinance or resolution. In addition to regularly established fees, the city commission in its discretion may require an applicant to submit to the city (prior to city review of an application, document, or plan) an amount of money determined by the city to be a reasonable estimate of the fees and costs that may be incurred by the city in reviewing and acting upon any such application or related matters. The costs and expenses to be charged or assessed to the applicant, for reimbursement of the city's reasonable costs and expenses, may include, but are not limited to, city attorney fees, consulting engineering fees, services fees of other outside consultants or professionals who may assist the city, costs and fees for studies and reports pertaining to the matters in question, special meeting costs and other reasonable costs and expenses. Such monies shall be retained by the city for reimbursement of such costs and expense. Any monies paid or deposited by an applicant which are not used or spent by the city shall be refunded without interest. 
(Code 2004,  2-2; Ord. No. 02-07,  1, 5-15-2007) 
Secs. 2-376-2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES AND SALES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Purchase, sale or lease of property,  11.1. 

Sec. 2-401. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish standards for the purchase and sale of city property and services in a manner that provides for the efficient operation of the city and involves the exercise of responsible stewardship of city funds. 
(Code 2004,  2-401; Ord. No. 17-03,  1, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-402. - Purchasing and sales functions. 
    All purchasing and sales functions for the city shall be coordinated through the city's finance department. The finance director, with the prior approval of the mayor, will appoint a purchasing agent and may delegate to that individual the authority to: 
(1)  Develop and recommend for adoption by the mayor policies and procedures to implement those ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city commission; 
(2)  Purchase and dispose of city property and assets; 
(3)  Operate the city's purchasing and sales activities within the limits established by the city commission through its ordinances and resolutions; and 
(4)  Delegate to others the authority to make specific purchases, to sell or otherwise dispose of assets, or to take other related actions on behalf of the city. 
(Code 2004,  2-402; Ord. No. 17-03,  2, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-403. - Approval levels. 
    Purchases and sales of city goods and services shall be approved by the city commission or the mayor within those limits established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  2-403; Ord. No. 17-03,  3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-404. - Purchasing principles. 
    The following principles shall govern the city in all of its purchasing decisions: 
(1)  Purchases shall reflect a comparison of available prices to facilitate the city obtaining the most competitive price and best value in its expenditures, and shall represent equal opportunities for competing vendors. 
(2)  Where the interest of the city and the public good are best served, the city may elect to purchase from other than the lowest bidder. The approving authority for each purchase shall reflect in the official purchasing record the basis for any procurement not made from the lowest bidder. 
(3)  The city may reject any or all bids on a proposed purchase as determined to be in the best interest of the city. 
(4)  The city may elect, at its sole discretion, not to proceed with any proposed purchase for which it has sought bids, whether through public advertisement or otherwise. 
(5)  All purchases must be approved by a designated city authority before the city becomes obligated to a vendor by purchase order or by other contractual arrangement. 
(Code 2004,  2-404; Ord. No. 17-03,  4, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-405. - Execution of documents. 
    The purchasing agent or his designees may sign all purchase orders to be issued on behalf of the city. The mayor must sign all other written contracts on behalf of the city, except where the city commission has expressly authorized another party to sign written contracts on behalf of the city. 
(Code 2004,  2-405; Ord. No. 17-03,  5, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 2-08,  1, 2-29-2008) 
Sec. 2-406. - Prohibited purchases. 
    The city shall not purchase goods or services from: 
(1)  Any person or entity that is at the time of the proposed purchase in arrears to the city for the payment of taxes, fees, or other obligations. 
(2)  Any person or entity representing a conflict of interest with any city official without the express consent of the city commission, consistent with all legal requirements. 
(3)  Any person or entity which the city is otherwise prohibited from contracting with by law. 
(Code 2004,  2-406; Ord. No. 17-03,  6, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-407. - Sale of city property. 
    The purchasing agent will be responsible to administer the disposal of city assets subject to the following: 
(1)  The conveyance of real property may only occur with the prior approval of the city commission. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, the sale of assets other than real property must be by publicly advertised sale and shall be awarded to the bidder whose bid is deemed most advantageous to the city. 
(3)  The purchasing agent may establish the minimum price for which an asset other than real property may be sold and may, with the prior approval of the mayor, delegate authority for the sale of assets other than real property to other city employees. 
(4)  Assets or property with a de minimis value may, with the prior approval of mayor and city commission, be conveyed to one or more nonprofit organizations or other noncommercial entities approved by the city commission where no buyer can be found or in cases where the city commission determines that the conveyance is in the public's best interest. 
(5)  The city may not sell assets directly to city employees. At the discretion of the purchasing agent, assets may be sold to city employees provided that such sales are conducted on the open market and the assets are sold at fair market value. 
(Code 2004,  2-407; Ord. No. 17-03,  7, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 2-08,  2, 2-29-2008; Ord. No. 6-09,  1, 9-25-2009) 
Sec. 2-408. - Purchase arrangements. 
(a)  The purchasing agent, with the approval of the mayor, shall be authorized to establish arrangements to make the purchase of goods and services more efficient including, without limitation: 
(1)  Establishing contractual arrangements and/or multiyear contracts with vendors by which items or services can be purchased for a fixed period of time at an established price. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, such contractual arrangements shall not be effective for more than three years without the express consent of the city commission's finance committee, and shall not in any case be effective for more than five years. In the event that the contractual arrangement shall run for more than three years, the contractual arrangement may not be continued beyond three years without new and additional determination by the purchasing department to affirm that the prices contained in the contractual arrangement continue to represent the overall best value and/or otherwise best meet the needs of the city. 
(2)  Establishing open accounts with vendors by which authorized city personnel can procure goods needed for city operations. 
(3)  Using electronic "purchase cards" or similar means through which authorized city personnel can procure goods needed for city operations. 
(b)  The use of these or similar means of procurement must otherwise comply with all of the city's purchasing requirements. 
(Code 2004,  2-408; Ord. No. 17-03,  8, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 2-409. - Mayoral policies. 
    The mayor may, from time to time, establish specific procurement policies and procedures designed to enhance the operation of the city's procurement programs. Such policies and procedures may include, without limitation: 
(1)  Creation of a purchasing calendar establishing schedules for the bidding and purchase of certain repetitive needs. 
(2)  Standardization of certain goods and services required by more than one department. 
(3)  Policies to establish requirements for vendors authorized to bid on procurement needs or sell to the city. 
(Code 2004,  2-409; Ord. No. 17-03,  9, 12-2-2003) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Adoption of Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out in this chapter the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  6-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.651-21.655, 21.657(A), 21.660, 21.662(F)(1), 21.665-21.667, 21.669-21.671, 21.675; Ord. No. 8-08,  1-3, 7-25-2008; Ord. No. 2-12,  1, 6-11-2012; Memo of 8-2-2012; Ord. No. 2-14,  1-6, 5-14-2014) 
Secs. 6-2-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - SALE FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall generally have the same meaning provided in the Michigan Liquor Control Code where not in conflict with the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol service area means the portion of an establishment which is licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises where persons are permitted to consume alcoholic liquor. 
    Applicant means any person who seeks approval from the city commission to sell alcoholic liquor. 
    Conference center means a building or any portion which, in the judgment of the city commission, is a bona fide conference center and meets the following requirements and such other requirements as the city commission deems appropriate: 
(1)  The conference center is used solely pursuant to a rental agreement signed in advance by a member of the organization, institution, entity or group desiring to use the conference center or any portion thereof; 
(2)  More than 50 percent of the gross receipts of the conference center are derived from rents, charges, fees and sales of food and beverages, not including sales of alcoholic liquor; 
(3)  The conference center is rented predominantly for functions, such as meetings, conferences, lectures, seminars, live speaking engagements, weddings, receptions and banquets; 
(4)  If a bar or counter space is provided in the conference center for the dispensing and sale of alcoholic liquor, such bar or counter space occupies not more than ten percent of the seating capacity of the conference center; 
(5)  The conference center contains a business office which maintains regular and normal business hours of operation; 
(6)  The seating and/or table configuration in each room of the conference center is transitory; 
(7)  The conference center provides a minimum approved occupancy of at least 500 persons; 
(8)  The conference center provides a minimum approved table seating capacity of at least 300 persons; 
(9)  The conference center provides at least one approved occupancy area of 5,000 square feet or more; and 
(10)  In addition to the area required by subsection (9) of this definition, the conference center provides at least one separate approved occupancy area of 250 square feet or more. 
    Grocer/market means a retail establishment of which not less than a majority of its sales consist of staple foodstuffs, meats, produce and dairy products, but which is also licensed by the State of Michigan to sell beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises. A grocer/market must have: a retail/service area of at least 25,000 square feet of enclosed building area; annual sales volume in excess of $7.5 million; at least 75 percent of the gross receipts of the business are derived from the sale of items other than alcoholic liquor; and, no more than ten percent of the establishment's gross receipts shall be for beer or wine sales for consumption on the premises. 
    Licensee means any person who has been granted a license to sell alcoholic liquor in the city by the state liquor control commission. 
    Motel and hotel mean buildings which, in the judgment of the city commission, are to be regularly used and kept open as such in a bona fide manner for the feeding and lodging of guests, where all who conduct themselves properly and are able and ready to pay for such services are received, if there be any accommodations for them. 
    Movie theater complex means a motion-picture theater complex comprised of not less than six screens, total seating for not less than 800 patrons and a minimum of 40,000 square feet of space. 
    Premises includes all of the areas used in carrying out the primary normal functions of the business of the licensee, except such areas as are specifically excluded in other provisions of this article. 
    Restaurant means either of the following: 
(1)  Full menu restaurant means a sit down establishment that prepares food on the premises and serves meals selected by the patron from a menu which includes choices of appetizer, salad, entree (featuring a variety of meat, poultry, vegetarian or fish dishes) vegetable, bread, dessert and beverage; all meals and beverages are served by wait staff; and its food service is available to the public not less than ten hours per day/five days per week. 
(2)  Limited menu restaurant means a sit down establishment serving short order type foods from a menu, such as pizzas, chicken, hamburgers or tacos. Foods must be available and prepared on site. A limited menu restaurant shall make its food service available to the public at all times that alcoholic liquor is available for purchase. 
(Code 2004,  6-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.651; Ord. No. 8-08,  1, 7-25-2008; Ord. No. 2-14,  1, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 3-16,  1, 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 6-32. - Authority of city commission. 
    This article shall not operate to limit any power or authority vested in the city or the city commission by virtue of any existing constitutional or statutory provision, and shall be considered to be only supplementary to the exercise or use of such vested authority. 
(Code 2004,  6-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.671) 
Sec. 6-33. - Special restricted licenses. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any and all other provisions of this article, the city commission may, at its discretion, authorize various classes of restricted licenses for the use of private clubs and other organizations which operate on a membership basis. Such special restricted licenses may be revoked by the city commission if the restrictions are violated. 
(b)  The restrictions imposed by the city commission shall be listed on the face of the license. 
(c)  The city commission may waive the requirement for food service and the related sections in this article, as amended; however, it shall not waive the other requirements of this article. 
(Code 2004,  6-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.675) 
Sec. 6-34. - Inspections. 
(a)  Authority. Inspections shall be made of all premises licensed under this article in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city officials conducting such inspections may enter any licensed premises during any hours in which the premises are open to the public for the purpose of conducting an inspection, and shall be entitled to inspect all portions of the premises, including, but not limited to, those portions used for storage, or food or beverage preparation. The licensee, as well as every employee or agent of the licensee, shall give the city official conducting such inspection free access to all areas of the licensed premises. 
(b)  Basis. An inspection shall be conducted in the manner best calculated to secure compliance with this Code. Inspections may be on any one or more of the following basis: 
(1)  When any inspecting city official has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of any city ordinance has occurred or is occurring. 
(2)  Periodically and at such times deemed reasonable and appropriate by the city. 
(c)  Administrative search warrant. If any person shall deny access to a city official performing an inspection pursuant to this section, the city shall be entitled to the issuance of an administrative search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The city attorney or county prosecutor shall prepare the warrant application, which shall include the name of the business; the address of the building to be inspected; the nature of the inspection; and the facts attesting that access to the premises has been denied in contravention to this section. Upon a finding by the court that the warrant application is in proper form and in accord with this section, an administrative search warrant shall be issued forthwith. In the event of an emergency, or where probable cause exists to believe that evidence of criminal activity is present within the licensed premises, no such warrant shall be required. 
(Code 2004,  6-34; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.669) 
Sec. 6-35. - Conduct on the premises. 
    No licensee or agent, servant or employee of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Either directly or indirectly sell, furnish or deliver any alcoholic liquor, beer or wine to any person unless such person shall have attained the age of 21 years; nor shall any licensee, either directly or indirectly by himself or by any agent, servant or employee, at any time, sell, furnish or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person who is under the influence of alcoholic liquor. 
(2)  Refuse, fail or neglect to cooperate with any law enforcement officer in the performance of such officer's duties. 
(3)  Allow in or upon his licensed premises any improper conduct, disturbances, lewdness, indecent, profane or obscene language, songs, entertainment, literature, pictures or advertising materials; or cause to have printed or distributed any lewd, immoral, indecent or obscene literature, pictures or advertising materials. 
(4)  Suffer or allow in or upon the licensed premises the annoying or molesting of patrons or employees by other patrons or employees. 
(5)  Permit the licensed premises to be frequented by or become the meeting place, hangout or rendezvous for known prostitutes, vagrants or those who are known to engage in the use, sale or distribution of narcotics or any other illegal activity or business. 
(6)  Allow upon the licensed premises slot machines, punch or pull cards, dice games, card games, or any gambling or gambling devices, machines or apparatus, or gambling or gaming of any kind whatsoever. The presence of any such device, machine or apparatus upon the premises of any licensed establishment shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(7)  Serve to or permit any patron to consume an alcoholic liquor unless such patron is either seated or standing at a bar or seated at a table or counter; provided, however, that the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor is permitted in hotels and motels in such areas as meeting rooms, patios, swimming pool areas and guests rooms. The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor in such area as a hallway, lobby, driveway or parking lot is expressly prohibited. 
(8)  Permit the sale of alcoholic liquor upon any portion of the premises which shall have been leased, sold or the right to possession of which shall have been transferred to another person who is not licensed. 
(Code 2004,  6-35; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.665) 
Sec. 6-36. - Menus. 
    Every licensee shall present, upon request, a plainly printed list or menu showing the various types and prices of alcoholic liquor which he offers for sale. 
(Code 2004,  6-36; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.666) 
Sec. 6-37. - Persons under 21 years of age. 
    Any person under the age of 21 years purchasing or offering to purchase beer or wine, or any alcoholic liquor, who falsely represents himself to be over the age of 21 years, or who gives false information regarding his age to any police officer, licensee, agent, servant or employee in charge of any place where beer, wine and other alcoholic liquor is sold, or any other person who makes false representation in order to procure the sale or furnishing of beer, wine or other alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 2004,  6-37; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.667) 
State Law reference- Purchases, etc., of alcohol by underage persons, MCL 436.1703. 
Secs. 6-38-6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local license issuance and revocation recommendations, MCL 436.1501. 

Sec. 6-61. - Applications; administrative review; determination; transferability; term; reservation. 
(a)  Applications. Applications for licenses to sell alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption shall be made in writing to the city clerk. The city clerk shall not accept applications if no licenses are presently available. The application shall be made in the manner and on such forms as may be required by the state liquor control commission and city clerk, and shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent of the applicant, if the applicant is other than an individual, and verified by oath or affidavit. The application shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age, address and e-mail address of the applicant in the case of an individual, or the name and address of the applicant in the case of a copartnership, plus the names and addresses of each partner; or the name and address of the applicant in the case of a corporation, plus the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and address of such person, plus the name and address of all managers and assistant managers. The social security number and driver's license number shall be provided for each individual, partner, officer, director and stockholder listed. 
(2)  In the case of an individual, the citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the date and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The length of time the applicant has been in a business of that nature, or, in the case of a corporation or other entity, the date of its incorporation or formation. 
(4)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(5)  A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other license on a premises other than described in the application, and the disposition of such application. 
(6)  A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this Code, or state or federal law. 
(7)  The application shall be accompanied by building and site plans showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control, as well as compliance with all other city ordinance and code requirements. 
(b)  Administrative review. Upon receipt of the application, and if the type of license sought is available for issuance, the city clerk shall forthwith refer the application to the police chief, fire chief and necessary departments. The police chief, fire chief and necessary departments shall each cause a thorough investigation to be made of all of the persons and the premises identified in the application, and shall prepare and forward a report detailing the results of that investigation to the city clerk. In cases where the applicant's premises are not completely built, the applicant shall also file a complete set of plans and specifications as may be necessary to enable the building inspector and fire inspector to determine whether or not such premises, when completed, will meet all the requirements of this article. The city clerk shall assemble the completed reports and forward them to the city commission committee of the whole. The city commission committee of the whole shall review the application and reports, and shall forward them to the city commission with a recommendation or return the application to the city clerk for further investigation. Approval of the city commission shall require a majority vote. 
(c)  Determination. Upon receipt of the administrative investigation reports, the city commission shall make its determination with respect to the license application. The city commission's determination shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this article as well as Liquor License policy established by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(d)  Transferability. The approval given an applicant is not transferable without the prior consent of the city commission. Once approved, the applicant may not transfer the location of the establishment for which approval was given without the prior consent of the city commission. 
(e)  Term. Approval of a license shall be for a period of one year, subject to annual renewal by the city commission upon continued compliance with the regulations of this article. Approval of a license shall be conditioned on commencement of any necessary remodeling or new construction for the use of the license within six months of the action of the city commission or state liquor control commission approving such license, whichever occurs last. Failure to complete such remodeling or construction within one year may subject the license to revocation. 
(f)  Reservation. Nothing in this division shall be construed to require the city or city commission to issue or approve the issuance of a license that may be available. The decision of whether a license should be issued shall be determined in the sole discretion of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  6-61; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.652; Ord. No. 2-12,  1, 6-11-2012; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 6-62. - Reasons for denial. 
    A license application shall be denied: 
(1)  For any person, partnership or corporation whose license under this division has been revoked for cause. 
(2)  For a partnership, unless each partner would qualify to obtain a license. 
(3)  For a corporation or other entity, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholder owning, in the aggregate, more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license under this division for any reason. 
(4)  For any person, partnership or corporation whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of the licensee. 
(5)  For a person who has been convicted in a court of law of a felony. 
(6)  For any person, partnership or corporation who has been convicted or found responsible for three or more liquor license violations by any administrative tribunal, such as the state liquor control commission, at any one licensed establishment. 
(7)  For a person who does not own or have an option to purchase the location for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license is issued. 
(8)  For a location where there exists an uncorrected violation of the applicable construction, building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, applicable public health regulations or any violation of any ordinance or other applicable law, rule, regulation, order or directive. 
(9)  For a location where it is determined by a majority vote of the city commission that the premises does not or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, or noise or nuisance control. 
(10)  Where the city commission determines, by majority vote, that the proposed location is inappropriate considering the desirability of establishing a location in developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated, undeveloped areas; the attitude of adjacent residents and property owners; traffic safety; accessibility to the site from abutting roads; capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity; distance from public or private schools for minors; proximity of an inconsistent zoning classification; and accessibility from primary roads or state highways. 
(11)  For any person, partnership or corporation in default of any financial or contractual obligation to the city, including, but not limited to, the payment of any administrative fee, civil or criminal fine, real or personal property tax, special assessment or any city administered utility fee or the breach of any contract, pledge or similar binding commitment to which the city is a party. 
(Code 2004,  6-62; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.653; Ord. No. 2-14,  2, 5-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-63. - Classifications. 
    Licenses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  "Class A" license, which shall mean a hotel or motel licensed to sell beer and wine at retail for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  "Class B" license, which shall mean a hotel or motel licensed to sell beer, wine and spirits at retail for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  "Class C" license, which shall mean any place, other than a hotel or motel, licensed to sell beer, wine and spirits at retail for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  "Microbrewery" license, which shall mean a micro brewer licensed to sell only beer that it produces, at retail for consumption on or off the licensed brewery premises. 
(5)  "Small distiller" license, which means a small distiller licensed to sell only spirits it produces, at retail for consumption on or off the licensed small distiller premises. 
(6)  "Small wine maker" license, which shall mean a small wine maker licensed to sell only wine it produces, at retail for consumption on or off the licensed small wine maker premises. 
(7)  "Tavern" license, which shall mean any place, other than a hotel or motel, licensed to sell beer and wine at retail for consumption on the premises only. 
(Code 2004,  6-63; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.654; Ord. No. 8-08,  2, 7-25-2008; Ord. No. 2-14,  3, 5-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-64. - Renewal and revocation. 
(a)  Authority of city commission. The city commission may, by resolution, recommend to the state liquor control commission the nonrenewal or revocation of an existing license governed by this division upon its determination, based upon evidence presented at a public hearing, that the licensee has violated any standard or prohibition contained within this article. 
(b)  Hearing notice; statement of findings. 
(1)  Before filing an objection to a renewal or a request for revocation of a license with the state liquor control commission, the city commission shall hold a public hearing. The city clerk shall cause a notice of hearing to be sent to the license holder, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to the hearing, which notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  A description of the proposed action. 
b.  The reasons for the proposed action. 
c.  The date, time and place of the hearing. 
d.  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony. 
(2)  Following the hearing, the city commission may file with the state liquor control commission a written statement of its findings and determination. The city commission shall cause a copy of any such statement to be sent to the license holder by first class mail. 
(c)  Standards for recommendations. The city commission may recommend to the state liquor control commission that a license not be renewed or that a license be revoked upon its determination, based upon evidence presented at a public hearing, any one or more of the following has been engaged in or has been permitted to occur on the licensed premises: 
(1)  A violation of any of the restrictions on licenses provided in this division. 
(2)  Maintenance of a public nuisance. 
(3)  The licensee has provided false, fraudulent or misleading information in an original license application or in an application for a license renewal. 
(4)  The licensee has permitted the consumption of spirits on the premises during a period in which the licensee is not licensed to sell or allow the consumption of spirits. 
(5)  The licensee has permitted dancing or live entertainment, open to the public, with or without an admission charge, without first obtaining a valid dance or entertainment permit. 
(6)  The licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, has, on any portion of the licensed premises, sold, given or delivered an alcoholic liquor to any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
(7)  The licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, has, on any portion of the licensed premises, sold, given or delivered alcoholic liquor to any person who is visibly intoxicated because of the consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance. 
(8)  Any disorderly conduct, or any conduct or activity which disturbs the peace, tranquility and good order of the surrounding neighborhood, within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(9)  Any incident of prostitution or solicitation for prostitution within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(10)  Any incident of larceny or fraud involving the licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(11)  Any incident of gambling activity, including the placing of a gambling apparatus or gambling paraphernalia within or upon any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. The presence of any such apparatus or paraphernalia upon the premises of any licensed establishment shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(12)  Any unlawful possession or use of any substance regulated by the Michigan Controlled Substance Act within or upon any portion of the premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
(13)  The licensee has utilized interior lighting which is insufficient to enable a person with average vision to clearly see all persons within the premises. 
(14)  Any violation of any other provision of this Code, or any violation of any statute or governmental code, regulation, standard or directive, or any violation of any order of any court, commission or tribunal having jurisdiction of the premises of the licensee. 
(15)  Any nonpayment or repeated delinquent payment of any local personal property or real property tax or special assessment. 
(16)  Any nonpayment or repeated delinquent payment of any civil or criminal fine, or any city administered utility bill or administrative service fee provided by or through the city. 
(17)  Any failure by the licensee to obtain, or maintain as current, any license or permit required by the city or any unit of federal, state, county or city government. 
(18)  Any failure by the licensee to keep in good repair or maintain any portion of the licensed premises, including that portion of the premises used for the parking of motor vehicles, in full compliance with any law or standard promulgated by the city or any unit of federal, state or county government. 
(19)  Any failure by the licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to cooperate with any federal, state, county or city official acting in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(20)  Any failure by the licensee, or the licensee's agent or employee, to cooperate with any law enforcement officer in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(21)  Any breach by the licensee, or the licensee's agent or officer, of a contract to which the city is a party, or any partial breach of such a contract or similar obligation. 
(Code 2004,  6-64; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.670; Ord. No. 2-14,  4, 5-14-2014) 
Secs. 6-65-6-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PREMISES 

Sec. 6-91. - Generally. 
(a)  Every establishment dispensing alcoholic liquor shall be maintained in good safe repair. Any establishment which is structurally unsafe or is not provided with adequate ingress and egress or which constitutes a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life or constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance shall not be approved as a licensed establishment. 
(b)  All licensees shall be governed by, and shall observe all regulations pertaining to, sanitation and health as promulgated by the city and/or the County. 
(c)  A grocer/market shall provide a report of its sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises as well as the overall gross receipts for the prior calendar year on or before March 15 to the city commission. Such report shall be prepared and certified as being accurate by the tax accountant for the licensee. The sales report information will be exempted from disclosure to the extent authorized by state law. 
(Code 2004,  6-91; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.657(A), 21.662(F)(1); Ord. No. 2-14,  5, 5-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-92. - Seating, food and operational matters. 
(a)  All hotels and/or motels selling alcohol liquor for consumption on the premises under a "Class A" or "Class B" license must have 25 or more guest rooms and a restaurant with existing dining table seating for not less than 75 persons. If a counter or bar space is provided for dispensing and selling alcoholic liquor, such counter or bar space shall be limited in size so that it does not comprise more than 20 percent of the total seating availability of the entire dining room. 
(b)  All establishments which are not a part of a hotel, motel, or conference center and which are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises must have a full menu restaurant with existing dining table seating for not less than 100 persons. If a counter or bar space is provided for dispensing and selling alcoholic beverages, such counter or bar space shall be limited in size so that it does not comprise more than 20 percent of the total seating availability of the entire dining room. This subsection does not apply to establishments selling beer for consumption on the premises under a microbrewery license, wine for consumption on the premises under a small winemaker license, spirits for consumption on the premises under a small distiller license, a grocer/market establishment selling beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises under a tavern license, or a movie theater complex selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises under a tavern or other license, which establishments are regulated in accordance with subsections (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) herein. 
(c)  Any establishment selling beer for consumption on the premises under a "microbrewery" license shall have a restaurant on the premises as defined herein under section 6-31. If the microbrewery does not serve food it shall offer a limited menu or provide for delivery to and consumption of off-premise prepared food on-site. The total building capacity shall not exceed 99 seats unless in full compliance with the current Fire Code as adopted by the City Commission and there shall be not less than one seat for every 15 square feet of usable floor area and not less than one table for every four seats. When the microbrewer exceeds 99 seats it must meet the restaurant requirements set forth in subsection (b). If a counter or bar space is provided for dispensing and selling alcoholic liquor, such counter or bar space shall be limited in size so that it does not comprise more than 20 percent of the total seating availability. 
(d)  Any establishment selling wine for consumption on the premises under a "small wine maker" license shall have a restaurant on the premises as defined herein under section 6-31. If the small wine maker does not serve food it shall offer a limited menu or provide for delivery to and consumption of off-premise prepared food on-site. The total building capacity shall not exceed 99 seats unless in full compliance with the current Fire Code as adopted by the City Commission and there shall be not less than one seat for every 15 square feet of usable floor area and not less than one table for every four seats. When the small wine maker exceeds 99 seats it must meet the restaurant requirements as set forth in subsection (b). If a counter or bar space is provided for dispensing and selling alcoholic liquor, such counter or bar space shall be limited in size so that it does not comprise more than 20 percent of the total seating availability. 
(e)  Any grocer/market establishment selling beer or wine for consumption on the premises under a "tavern" license must have a full menu or limited menu restaurant. If the grocer/market has a full menu restaurant on the premises, the grocer/market shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in subsection (b). If the grocer/market has a limited menu restaurant on the premises the total alcoholic service area shall not exceed 99 seats. If a counter or bar space is provided for dispensing and selling alcoholic liquor, such counter or bar space shall be limited in size so that it does not comprise more than five percent of the total seating availability of the alcoholic service area. Hours of alcohol service shall be only during grocer-market hours. 
(f)  Any distiller establishment selling spirits for consumption on the premises under a "small distiller" license shall have a restaurant on the premises as defined herein under section 6-31. If the small distiller does not serve food it shall offer a limited menu or provide for delivery to and consumption of off-premise prepared food on-site. The total building capacity shall not exceed 99 seats unless in full compliance with the current Fire Code as adopted by the City Commission and there shall be not less than one seat for every 15 square feet of usable floor area and not less than one table for every four seats. When the small distiller exceeds 99 seats it must meet the restaurant requirements as set forth in subsection (b). If a counter or bar space is provided for dispensing and selling alcoholic liquor, such counter or bar space shall be limited in size so that it does not comprise more than 20 percent of the total seating availability. 
(g)  Any movie theater complex selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises under a tavern or other license must have a full menu or limited menu restaurant. If the movie theater complex has a full menu restaurant on the premises it shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in subsection (b). If the movie theater complex has a limited menu restaurant on the premises no tables or table service is required. The licensee must utilize distinct and identifiable cups or other containers to distinguish between non-alcoholic and alcoholic beverages. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may not comprise more than ten percent of the movie theater complex's gross sales. 
(h)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine up to $500.00. 
(i)  All businesses with a liquor license for microbrewery, small wine maker, small distiller, class B, C or tavern are required to provide updated information regarding their business in terms of food service provisions, seating and operating hours to the City Clerk's office on request or annually on January of each year. Failure to submit such a report is a violation under subsection (h). 
(Code 2004,  6-92; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.655; Ord. No. 8-08,  3, 7-25-2008; Ord. No. 2-14,  6, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 3-16,  2, 5-17-2016; Ord. No. 9-17,  1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 6-93. - Illumination. 
    The minimum intensity of illumination prevailing in all parts of licensed establishments providing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, at tabletop level, shall be one footcandle. 
(Code 2004,  6-93; Comp. Ords. 1987,  61.660(D)) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287.261 et seq.; dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq.; wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means a dog, cat, bird, reptile, mammal, fish or any other similar creature. 
    Animal control officer means the agent of the county department of animal control and any other person designated for such duties by the mayor. 
    Animal shelter means the county animal shelter or another facility designated by the city commission. 
    Department means the county health department, division of animal control. 
    Director means the director of the county health department, division of animal control. 
    Impounded means any animal received into the custody of any animal shelter pursuant to this chapter or any state statute. 
    Kennel means any lot or premises on which more than three dogs, six months of age or older are kept. 
    Owner means, when applied to the proprietorship of an animal, every person having a right of property in the animal, and every person who keeps or harbors the animal or has it in his care, and every person who permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. For the purposes of this chapter, any person keeping or harboring any animal for seven consecutive days shall be deemed the owner thereof within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Code 2004,  10-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.321-35.332) 
Sec. 10-2. - Construction. 
    It is deemed by the city that the ownership of an animal carries with it responsibilities to the city and its residents with regard to the care and custody of such animal. In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to impose a primary responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter on the owner of such animal. 
(Code 2004,  10-2; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.311) 
Sec. 10-3. - Enforcement responsibility. 
    Responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the county sheriff's department, city police department, state police and the county health department, division of animal control, its agents and employees. Primary responsibility for enforcement is vested in the on duty agent or employee of the county health department, division of animal control. 
(Code 2004,  10-3; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.313) 
Sec. 10-4. - Care guidelines. 
    Every animal and pet owner, and every person who owns, conducts, manages or operates any animal establishment for which a license is required shall comply with each of the following conditions: 
(1)  Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, contain the animals and restrict the entrance of other animals. 
(2)  All animals shall be supplied with sufficient, good, wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require. 
(3)  All animals and animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(4)  No animal shall be without attention more than 24 consecutive hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at a commercial animal facility, the name, address and telephone number of the responsible person shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property. 
(5)  Every reasonable precaution shall be used to ensure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any person or means. 
(6)  No condition shall be maintained or permitted that is or could be injurious to the animals. 
(7)  All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and animals from the public. 
(8)  Every animal establishment shall sufficiently isolate sick animals so as not to endanger the health of other animals. 
(9)  Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be constructed of easily cleaned materials, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition. The building shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals and sanitation. 
(10)  The owner or custodian shall take any animal to a veterinarian for examination and treatment if the director or his agent finds it necessary in order to maintain the health of the animal and orders such action. 
(11)  All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for the animals kept therein. 
(12)  Every violation of an applicable regulation shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the director. 
(13)  Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall be provided at all times. This shall mean a minimum of a roofed, three-sided shelter of suitable size. 
(14)  No person shall give an animal any alcoholic liquor, unless prescribed by a veterinarian. 
(15)  No person shall allow animals which are natural enemies, temperamentally unsuited or otherwise incompatible to be quartered together or so near each other as to cause injury, fear or torment. If two or more animals are so trained that they can be placed together and do not attack each other or perform or attempt any hostile act to each other, such animals shall be deemed not to be natural enemies. 
(16)  No person shall allow the use of any tack, equipment, device, substance or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to any animal. 
(17)  Working animals shall be given rest periods. Confined or restrained animals shall be given exercise proper for the individual animal under the particular conditions. 
(18)  No person shall work, use or rent any animal which is overheated, weakened, exhausted, sick, injured, diseased, lame or otherwise unfit. 
(19)  No person shall allow any animal which the animal shelter has suspended from use to be worked or used until such animal is released by the animal shelter. 
(20)  No person shall allow any animal to constitute or cause a hazard or be a menace to the health, peace or safety of the community. 
(21)  No person who has injured or killed any domestic animal or pet in a motor vehicle shall fail to notify the director or owner of the animal or the city police department. 
(22)  No person having a female domestic animal or pet in heat shall permit such animal to be contained in such a fashion that stray animals have access to such animal, or that permits the animal to escape. 
(23)  No person shall confine an animal on a chain for more than four hours unless the chain permits movement over at least 30 square feet and allows the animal free access to a suitable shelter. 
(24)  No person shall keep any animal in a manner which creates a nuisance because of odor. 
(Code 2004,  10-4; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.371) 
State Law reference- Crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq. 
Sec. 10-5. - Abuse. 
    A person shall not: 
(1)  Sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as pets, toys, premiums or novelties any baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three months of age, or rabbits under two months of age. 
(2)  Color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of the fowl or rabbits described in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Bring or transport the fowl or rabbits described in subsection (1) of this section into the city. 
(4)  Molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest, or the contents thereof, on either public or private property, with the exception of the legal hunting of game birds as permitted under state law. 
(5)  Tease, abuse, mistreat, annoy, torment or in any manner make any animal suffer, except in the lawful hunting of such animal, or as otherwise provided under state or federal law. 
(Code 2004,  10-5; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.372) 
State Law reference- Crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; dying fowl or game, MCL 752.91. 
Sec. 10-6. - Defecation on public and private property. 
    No person owning or having custody or control of an animal shall intentionally, or through failure to exercise due care, permit the animal to defecate on any public or private property, other than the property of such person, unless such person immediately collects and properly disposes of all such fecal matter. This section shall not apply to a person with a leader, guide or service animal where the person is unable to comply due to their disability. 
(Code 2004,  10-6; Comp. Ords. 1987,  36.373) 
Sec. 10-7. - Violations, penalties. 
    A violation or refusal to comply with any provision of sections 10-1 through 10-4, inclusive, or section 10-6, or a violation or refusal to comply with any provision of sections 10-41 through 10-104, inclusive, shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  10-7; Ord. No. 14-05,  1, 7-28-2005) 
Secs. 10-8-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-41. - Representative investigations. 
    Representatives of the county animal shelter, police department or other duly designated representatives may enter any premises where animals are maintained, for the purpose of investigation or inspection as to whether or not any portion of such premises, building, structure, enclosure, pen or cage is being used, kept or maintained in violation of this article or any other county ordinance. No person shall deny, prevent or obstruct, or attempt to deny, prevent or obstruct such access. This article does not permit any person to enter a private dwelling, except where necessary to rescue an animal. A search warrant shall be used, where required. 
(Code 2004,  10-41; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.374) 
Secs. 10-42-10-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-61. - Generally. 
    Any animal which is in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to being impounded, and any animal which is so impounded shall be held at the county animal shelter and shall be cared for, released or disposed of as provided in the county animal control health regulations and the rules and regulations of the county for the operation of the county animal shelter. 
(Code 2004,  10-61; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.361) 
Sec. 10-62. - Animals found by individuals. 
    Persons, other than animal control officers or police officers, taking up and impounding any animal, shall, within 12 working hours thereafter, give notice to the county animal shelter of the: 
(1)  Fact that he has such animal in his possession. 
(2)  Complete description of such animal. 
(3)  License number of such animal, if any, and the name of the county or municipal corporation which issued such license. If such animal has no license, he shall so state. 
(4)  Place where such animal is confined and shall surrender such animal to the division of animal control, upon demand. 
(Code 2004,  10-62; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.362) 
Sec. 10-63. - Fees for reclaiming animal. 
    If any person appears and reclaims any animal prior to the time disposition has been made of the animal, the animal shelter shall collect the fees set forth by the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 2004,  10-63; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.363) 
Sec. 10-64. - Notification of owners. 
    When an animal wearing a current valid license tag issued by the county or any municipality within the county is impounded pursuant to this division, the director shall, within 12 working hours after receiving such animal, give written notice of the location of such animal to the person to whom the current license for such animal was issued. 
(Code 2004,  10-64; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.364) 
Secs. 10-65-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287.261 et seq. 

Sec. 10-101. - Licenses; tags. 
(a)  All dogs within the city six months of age or older shall at all times be currently licensed in accordance with the requirements of state law and the county animal control health regulations. 
(b)  A license tag issued by the county shall be securely affixed to a collar, harness or other device which shall be worn by the dog at all times unless the dog is within the confines of the residence of the owner or of a dog run or other secure enclosure on the owner's premises. 
(Code 2004,  10-101; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.341) 
State Law reference- Dog licensing, MCL 287.262 et seq. 
Sec. 10-102. - Kennel license. 
    Kennels may be permitted as governed by the city zoning ordinance (see appendix A) and by the requirements of the director of animal control of the county. Only under these circumstances will more than three dogs six months of age or over be permitted in one person's care, custody or control in the city. 
(Code 2004,  10-102; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.345) 
State Law reference- Kennel licenses, MCL 287.270b. 
Sec. 10-103. - Barking, yelping and howling. 
    No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of a dog shall permit such dog at any time, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, to cause a nuisance or annoyance to the neighborhood. 
(Code 2004,  10-103; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.343) 
Sec. 10-104. - Running at large. 
    No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall cause, permit or allow the dog to run at large or be upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court or other public place, or upon any private property or premises, except for hunters with the consent of the owner of such property and persons owning or having charge, care, custody or control of such dog within the city, unless such dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length and is in the charge, care, custody or control of a person with the ability to restrain such dog. Operational underground electric fences may be used for nonvicious dogs. 
(Code 2004,  10-104; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.344) 
Secs. 10-105-10-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this article pertaining to cats were deleted. They derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.351 et seq., and Code 2004,  10-141 et seq. 

Secs. 10-141-10-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - VICIOUS ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq.; dogs attacking or biting persons, MCL 287.279, 287.288, 287.351. 

Sec. 10-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vicious animal means any: 
(1)  Animal that, when unprovoked, approaches, in a dangerous or terrorizing manner, any person in an apparent attitude of attack in any public place or upon any private property not occupied by the animal's owner; 
(2)  Animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(3)  Animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation, on public or private property; or 
(4)  Dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for animal fighting. 
(Code 2004,  10-171; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.381) 
Sec. 10-172. - Exceptions. 
    No animal shall be declared vicious pursuant to this article if the threat, injury or damage caused by such animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing an assault, a criminal trespass or other crime upon the property occupied by the owner, harborer or keeper of the animal, or was physically abusing or assaulting the animal; nor shall any animal be declared vicious if it was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennels or its offspring. 
(Code 2004,  10-172; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.385) 
Sec. 10-173. - Responsibility of parents and legal guardians. 
    If the owner or keeper of a vicious animal is a minor, any parent or legal guardian of such minor shall be liable for all injuries and property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by such vicious animal. 
(Code 2004,  10-173; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.386) 
Sec. 10-174. - Enforcement responsibility. 
(a)  If any law enforcement officer, animal control officer or county health department employee has probable cause to believe that a vicious animal is being harbored in violation of this article, the officer or employee may: 
(1)  Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner, keeper or harborer to appear in court for the violation; 
(2)  If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the animal is posing an imminent and serious threat to the safety of human beings or other domestic animals, the vicious animal may be seized and impounded at the owner's expense. The owner, harborer or keeper will be cited to appear in court for the violation. 
(b)  The animal may be released to the owner only after payment of any fees and penalties, and upon presentation of proof that either the animal will now be kept in accordance with the restrictions of this article or will be permanently removed from the city. 
(c)  If the owner, harborer or keeper of an alleged vicious animal fails to appear or to either provide proof that the animal will now be kept in compliance with this article and if the animal cannot be adopted by a person providing proof that the animal will be kept restrained or confined as specified in this article, the animal will be humanely euthanized. 
(d)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(e)  In addition, any person who violates this article shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony, necessitated by the enforcement of this article. Court costs, and legal and administrative expenses of the city for such action shall be taxed against the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal against whom the complaint was issued. 
(Code 2004,  10-174; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.384) 
Sec. 10-175. - Determination of a vicious animal. 
(a)  Written complaint. The mayor shall have the authority to make a determination that an animal is vicious upon the written complaint of any person. 
(b)  Informal hearing/notice. Prior to such a determination, the mayor shall conduct an informal hearing, written notice of which shall be given to the complainant and the owner of the animal, where the owner's address can be reasonably ascertained by the city. The hearing shall be held no less than ten days, nor more than 20 days after such notice is mailed, by first class mail, to the owner of the animal. At such hearing, all interested persons shall have the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of the animal's viciousness. 
(c)  Immediate impoundment. If the animal in question has caused severe injury to any person, the mayor or his designee, prior to the hearing, may order the immediate impoundment of the animal, at the owner's expense, pending the determination. 
(d)  Mandatory compliance or removal from city. If, as a result of the hearing, the mayor determines that the animal is vicious, the owner, at his expense, must, within ten calendar days, either comply with the requirements in section 10-176 or remove the animal from the city. 
(Code 2004,  10-175; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.382) 
Sec. 10-176. - Leash and muzzle. 
(a)  No person shall permit a vicious animal to go outside the owner's home, or its kennel or pen unless such animal is securely leashed with a leash that is of sufficient strength that the animal cannot break or tear it, and that is no more than four feet in length. 
(b)  No person shall permit a vicious animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash unless a competent person, of adequate size and strength, is in physical control of the leash. 
(c)  Vicious animals may not be chained, tethered, tied or otherwise leashed to inanimate objects, such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. 
(d)  While outside the owner's home or the animal's kennel or pen, all vicious animals must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from biting persons or other animals. 
(Code 2004,  10-176; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.383(a)) 
Sec. 10-177. - Confinement outdoors. 
(a)  Owners of vicious animals who maintain their animal out of doors must, within ten days of the effective date of a determination that such animal is a vicious animal, fence a portion of their property with a perimeter or area fence. Within the perimeter fence, the vicious animal must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel, which shall be a minimum of five feet wide, ten feet long and five feet in height above grade. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides, which shall all be at least nine gauge chainlink fencing, with necessary steel supporting posts. The sides must be either buried two feet into the ground, sunken into a concrete pad or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the pen or kennel must be of the same material as the fencing, fit closely and be securely locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. 
(b)  All pens or kennels erected to house such animals must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city and must be adequately lighted, appropriately ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 2004,  10-177; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.383(b)) 
Sec. 10-178. - Confinement indoors. 
    Owners of vicious animals may maintain their animal indoors, provided that no vicious animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition. 
(Code 2004,  10-178; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.383(c)) 
Sec. 10-179. - Signs. 
    All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious animals within the city shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign, easily readable by the public, using the following words: 
"Beware of Vicious Animal" 
In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal if the dog will not be confined exclusively indoors. 
(Code 2004,  10-179; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.383(d)) 
Sec. 10-180. - Insurance. 
    All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious animals must provide proof to the city of public liability insurance for a single incident amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to, or death of, any person which may result from such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless 30 days' written notice is first given to the city clerk. 
(Code 2004,  10-180; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.383(e)) 
Sec. 10-181. - Identification photographs. 
    All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious animals must provide the city clerk with two color photographs, clearly showing the color and approximate size of the animal. 
(Code 2004,  10-181; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.383(f)) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to acquire and maintain cemeteries, MCL 128.1 et seq.; cemetery regulations act, MCL 456.521 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PINE HILL CEMETERY 

Sec. 14-31. - Conveyance; receipts; recording. 
    All graves in the Pine Hill Cemetery are conveyed as rights to the purchaser by receipt and proper recording thereof on the cemetery records and are for the purpose of human burial only. 
(Code 2004,  14-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.261(1)) 
Sec. 14-32. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to enforce the rules and regulations relating to the Pine Hill Cemetery. 
(Code 2004,  14-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.261(2)) 
Sec. 14-33. - Establishment of operating rules, regulations, fees, charges and restrictions. 
    The city commission shall from time to time by resolution establish the rules and regulations, fees and charges and further restrictions applicable to the Pine Hill Cemetery. 
(Code 2004,  14-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.262) 
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, MCL 30.401 et seq. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the responsible head of the city office of emergency services, appointed as prescribed in this article. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or human-made cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snow storm, ice storm, tornado, wind storm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots or civil disorders. 
    Emergency proclamation means a proclamation issued by the governor, that a state of emergency exists under the provisions of Public Act No. 302 of 1945 (MCL 10.31 et seq.). 
    Emergency services has a broad meaning to include preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and manmade disasters as defined in this section. 
    Emergency services forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to, participation in emergency services activities as designated by the mayor, with the approval of the city commission; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons and agencies. 
    Emergency services volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the director and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
    Emergency situation means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined in this section, including, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and buildup activities prior to an actual disaster. 
(Code 2004,  18-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.421) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 30.402. 
Sec. 18-32. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an organization that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency. 
(Code 2004,  18-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.401) 
Sec. 18-33. - Coordinating agency. 
    The city's emergency services will be the coordinating agency responsible for city-wide emergency preparedness. It will provide the means through which the city commission and mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this article and Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  18-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.402) 
Sec. 18-34. - Relief of responsibilities of elected officials and departments. 
    This article will not relieve any elected or administrative officials of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 
(Code 2004,  18-34; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.403) 
Sec. 18-35. - Emergency services. 
(a)  Authority to create. The mayor, with the approval of the city commission, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters, utilizing, to the fullest extent, existing agencies within the municipality. The mayor, as executive head of city government, shall be the head of the emergency services forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the director. 
(b)  Organization. The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An office of emergency services established within the city government. The office of emergency services shall have an administrative head appointed, who will be known as the director, office of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to, emergency service activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be by the mayor, with the approval of the city commission. 
(c)  Officers and employees. All officers and employees of the city shall assist in the formulation of the emergency operations plan, and they shall assist the director in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  18-35; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.431-20.433) 
Sec. 18-36. - Emergency services director; assistant directors. 
(a)  The mayor, with the approval of the city commission, shall appoint an emergency services director to coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments and individuals within the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
(b)  Assistant directors shall be designated to work with the director on emergency planning matters. Assistant directors shall assume the duties of the director whenever he is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations in the order of designation by the mayor, acting upon the recommendation of the director. 
(Code 2004,  18-36; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.441, 20.442) 
Sec. 18-37. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
(a)  Emergency power. The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this subsection. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the mayor invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the city commission to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to the city commission relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the city commission unless specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  Assembly and utilization of emergency services forces. Under the following circumstances, the mayor may assemble and utilize the emergency services forces, and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such forces: 
(1)  Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation in the city or state is imminent. 
(2)  During any period of disaster in the city or state and thereafter as long as he shall deem is necessary. 
(c)  Major disasters; mutual aid agreements. 
(1)  Whenever the mayor finds that any condition in the city has attained, or threatens to attain, the proportions of a major disaster, he may assemble and utilize emergency services forces and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such forces. The mayor, with the approval of the city commission, is hereby empowered to enter into mutual aid agreements with other public and private agencies for reciprocal aid and assistance during disasters which are beyond local capabilities and resources. 
(2)  The mayor may, when he deems it in the public interest, send emergency services forces of the city to the aid of other communities stricken by disaster as provided by mutual aid agreements, provided, that after the city commission convenes, the future continuance of any such disaster relief and the period thereof shall be subject to the action of the city commission. 
(d)  Regulations to assemble and utilize emergency services forces. The mayor, with the approval of the city commission, may make regulations permitting the director to assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Waiver of procedures and formalities. When obtaining formal approvals that would result in delay of relief activity, the mayor may, until the city commission convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities, and the expenditure of existing funds, and the city commission is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(f)  Establishment of procedures for succession of government. The mayor, with the approval of the city commission, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during times where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(Code 2004,  18-37; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.451-20.456) 
Sec. 18-38. - Powers and duties of emergency services director. 
(a)  The emergency services director shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the city. He shall maintain liaison with county, state and federal authorities and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. 
(b)  The duties of the emergency services director shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Development of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency purposes. 
(3)  Through public information programs, educating the civilian population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster. 
(4)  Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the city's emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the city with emergency regulations, procedures and operations. 
(5)  Coordinating the activities of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs. 
(6)  Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
(7)  Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters. 
(8)  Establishing property accountability procedures for federal surplus property acquired by the city, federal excess property on loan to the city, or any other property or equipment loaned to the city for use in disasters or emergency situations. 
(9)  Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at the county level and adjacent municipalities. 
(Code 2004,  18-38; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.461, 20.462) 
State Law reference- Emergency management coordinators, MCL 30.409, 30.410. 
Sec. 18-39. - Volunteers. 
    The director may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service, or to temporarily augment personnel of an emergency service, or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in emergency activities. The director shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for workmen's compensation purposes. 
(Code 2004,  18-39; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.471) 
Sec. 18-40. - City employees assigned to duty. 
    City employees assigned to duty as a part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the provisions of this article shall receive the compensation incidental to their employment. 
(Code 2004,  18-40; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.481) 
Sec. 18-41. - Governmental and private liability. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. As such, neither the city, agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, acting in good faith, carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of such activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or authorized practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 2004,  18-41; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.491, 20.492) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 30.411(2). 
Sec. 18-42. - Federal surplus property. 
(a)  The emergency services director is hereby designated as the person responsible for accepting federal surplus property, with the power and full authority to sign for such surplus property. The mayor shall provide a written statement to appropriate federal officials designating the current name of the director as being responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The director is responsible for the accountability and will maintain the necessary records for all surplus property obtained for emergency purposes until relieved from such accountability by state and federal authorities. 
(c)  The director is further authorized to direct payment of service charges for surplus property to complete all transactions. 
(d)  Misappropriation or unauthorized private use of such public property while being still accountable is subject to prosecution under federal and state statute. 
(Code 2004,  18-42; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.501-20.504) 
Sec. 18-43. - Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 2004,  18-43; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.511) 
Sec. 18-44. - Obstructing, hindering or delaying emergency services forces; false identification. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any emergency services forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency services forces of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. 
(Code 2004,  18-44; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.521) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of a police or government officer, MCL 750.479; falsely personating public offices, MCL 750.215. 
Secs. 18-45-18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fire alarm system licensing, MCL 338.881 et seq.; private security business and security alarm act, MCL 338.1051 et seq. 

Sec. 18-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm business means the business of any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system, or causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed in or on any building, structure or facility. 
    Alarm system means any device or piece of equipment, or any assembly of equipment and devices designed or arranged to signal, visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any combination of these methods, the presence of a hazard to which the police and/or fire departments are expected to respond. 
    Alarm user means any person, whether owner, occupant or tenant, upon whose premises an alarm system is maintained or operated within the city. 
    Enforcing authority means the city police department or fire department which is or would be expected to respond to any alarm system within the city. 
    False alarm means any activation of an alarm system eliciting a response by police and/or fire personnel where an emergency situation does not in fact exist. A false alarm includes, but is not limited to, activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the user of an alarm system or of his employee or agent; but does not include an alarm caused by violent conditions of nature, interruption of electrical or telephone service to the alarm user, visible signs of attempted break-ins or false activation by a third party not within the control of the alarm user. For the purposes of this section, the term "third party not within the control of the alarm user" shall not include any employee, agent, licensee or invitee of the alarm user. Neither shall it include any independent contractor while that independent contractor is working for the alarm user. 
(Code 2004,  18-81; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.571) 
Sec. 18-82. - Maintaining alarm system which signals repeated false alarms. 
    No alarm user shall maintain, use or allow the use of an alarm system which signals repeated false alarms. 
(Code 2004,  18-82; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.572) 
Sec. 18-83. - Repeated false alarms. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, different businesses within the same building or with the same street address shall be considered separate establishments. Also, if a business has more than one building located at a single street address, then each such building shall be considered a separate establishment for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  If the enforcing authority records two false alarms at one establishment within a 365-day period which commences on the date of the first false alarm, the enforcing authority shall send a notice of violation to the alarm user, or the alarm user and the alarm business providing service or inspection to the user, by first class mail. Such notice shall direct that the user submit a written report to the enforcing authority within 15 calendar days of receipt of the notice, describing actions taken or to be taken to discover the cause of the false alarms, and specifying the time limit within which the necessary work will be completed. Failure of the alarm user, or the alarm user and the alarm business to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall cause an automatic billing by the enforcing authority to the alarm user of a fee established by resolution of the city commission. The notice of violation shall also advise that if there is a third false alarm at that establishment within the remainder of the 365-day period, a fee shall be charged in accordance with the schedule that shall be adopted by resolution of the city commission. The enforcing authority shall attempt to send the notice in a timely manner. Failure of the enforcing authority to send, or the alarm user to receive, a notice of violation does not nullify the penalty provisions of this article. 
(c)  The alarm user may request that an alarm incident at issue not be considered a "false alarm" pursuant to the definition of such term as set forth in section 18-81. Any explanation for, or reasoning behind, such a request shall be in writing and shall accompany the request. The enforcing authority shall determine whether the alarm incident at issue shall be considered a false alarm and notify the alarm user in writing of its decision in a timely manner. 
(d)  Upon the third and each subsequent false alarm within the 365-day period, the enforcing authority shall bill the alarm user the fee set forth in the resolution establishing the fee schedule. If the alarm user fails to pay the city's costs within 30 days after billing by the enforcing authority, such costs shall be added to and made a part of the next city tax bill against the subject premises and collected in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of city taxes. 
(Code 2004,  18-83; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.573) 
Sec. 18-84. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals of any provision of this article shall be by written notice of appeal, filed with the chief of the enforcing authority, within five days of receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Appeals shall be heard by the committee of the whole of the city commission within 30 days after the filing of the appeal or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city commission committee of the whole. 
(Code 2004,  18-84; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.574; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Secs. 18-85-18-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - AMBULANCE SERVICES 

Sec. 18-90. - Ambulance service agreement. 
(a)  Findings. The city commission finds the following: 
(1)  There is a need to ensure that residents and recipients of emergency medical services receive enhanced care in an efficient manner. 
(2)  The City of Kentwood along with other municipalities in Kent County ("participating municipalities") have joined together pursuant to the Municipal Partnership Act, Public Act No. 258 of 2011, and Part 209 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.20901 et seq.), to develop and enter into an agreement with three emergency ground ambulance providers, American Medical Response, Life EMS, and Rockford Ambulance (collectively, the "EMS providers"), for ambulance pre-hospital life support services, to regulate ambulance pre-hospital life support operations by providing standards, and to defray costs through the collection of fees for services or by the creation and levy of special assessments. 
(3)  The participating municipalities and the EMS providers have entered into a formal agreement originally dated January 14, 2016, to designate primary emergency operating rights in certain areas, to improve patient and system outcomes by ensuring continuity of services, to establish transparency in operations, to develop data reporting standards and to establish ambulance pre-hospital life support operational standards ("agreement"). 
(b)  Designation of primary service area. Pursuant to the agreement, the city has designated a primary emergency ground ambulance service area to the provider or providers listed in the agreement. The agreement contemplates periodic review of emergency ground ambulance service providers and the service areas to which they are primarily assigned. During this review process, it is possible for other emergency ground ambulance service providers to be authorized to act and to be assigned a primary service area. Unless and until such assignment is made, only a currently authorized emergency ground ambulance service provider as designated in the agreement may operate within the city. 
(c)  Agreement terms. Any EMS provider operating within the city shall at all times comply with the terms, conditions and standards contained in the agreement. 
(d)  Penalties. Any violation of subsection (b) or (c) of this section is a municipal civil infraction. Each and every time a violation occurs is a separate offense. In addition to seeking civil fines and the costs of prosecution for a violation of this section, the city may also seek injunctive relief to bar future violations. 
(Ord. No. 1-16,  1, 3-1-2016) 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; explosives act of 1970, MCL 29.41 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Penalties. 
    Except as provided with respect to violations of articles 4 and 5 of this chapter, a property owner or person in lawful possession of the premises that violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  22-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.126) 
Secs. 22-2-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Firefighter training, MCL 29.361 et seq. 

Sec. 22-31. - Eligibility requirements for part-paid memberships and firefighters. 
(a)  Area residents must live within the city or within 3.1 road miles of the city fire station to which they are assigned to be eligible for part-paid membership in the city fire department. 
(b)  Nonresidents must work within 3.1 road miles of the city fire station to which they are assigned to be eligible for part-paid membership in the city fire department. 
(c)  The 3.1-mile limitation shall not apply to a part-paid firefighter who is a member on June 13, 1997, unless he moves from his current residence. 
(Code 2004,  22-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.752, 12.753) 
Secs. 22-32-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - FIRE SAFETY INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 22-61. - Annual fire inspections. 
    Annual fire inspections shall be accomplished by a: 
(1)  Physical inspection conducted by the fire department; or 
(2)  Self-inspection conducted by the property owner or person in lawful possession of the premises itself. For purposes of this section, the term "person in lawful possession" means, in addition to the owner, a tenant or lessee of the property or any portion thereof. 
(Code 2004,  22-61; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.121) 
Sec. 22-62. - Selection and eligibility for participation. 
    The fire chief or his designee shall select certain facilities to participate in the self-inspection program. Only specific low-hazard facilities in the assembly, business, mercantile, and utility and miscellaneous state construction code use group classifications shall be eligible for participation. Other classifications are of such nature that they must be inspected by trained fire inspectors. 
(Code 2004,  22-62; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.122) 
Sec. 22-63. - Participation mandatory; rotation inspection. 
    Participation in the self-inspection program shall be mandatory for the selected facilities. The property owner or person in lawful possession of the premises shall conduct an inspection one year and receive a fire department site inspection the following year. Such two-year rotation shall continue in subsequent years. 
(Code 2004,  22-63; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.123) 
Sec. 22-64. - Random spot checks. 
    The fire department may make a random spot check (site inspection) of the self-inspected facilities each year to determine compliance. 
(Code 2004,  22-64; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.124) 
Sec. 22-65. - Violations. 
    The following shall be violations of article 3: 
(1)  Failure to return the completed self-inspection worksheet prior to the due date. 
(2)  Falsification, knowing or deliberate misrepresentation of responses on the self-inspection worksheet. 
(3)  Failure to correct unsatisfactory conditions. 
(Code 2004,  22-65; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.125) 
Sec. 22-66. - Responsibility for damages. 
    The city or any of its officers, agents, employees or subdivisions shall not be held as assuming responsibility for any damages to persons or property by reason of the enforcement or lack of enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  22-66; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.127) 
Secs. 22-67-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-101. - Adoption by reference. 
    The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices B, E, F, G, and I, published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the Kentwood Fire Prevention Code for the purpose of providing effective and continuing safeguards against the hazards of fire and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such code shall be in full force and effect in the city as if set out in full in this section, subject to the modifications prescribed in section 22-104. 
(Code 2004,  22-101; Ord. No. 18-05,  1, 10-23-2005; Ord. No. 16-08,  1, 12-26-2008; Ord. No. 7-12,  1, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 7-14,  1, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 5-17,  1, 6-20-2017, eff. 6-30-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 22-102. - Codes on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, and supplements, are available for public use and inspection through the city clerk in compliance with state law. 
(Code 2004,  22-102; Ord. No. 18-05,  2, 10-23-2005; Ord. No. 16-08,  2, 12-26-2008; Ord. No. 7-12,  2, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 7-14,  2, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 5-17,  2, 6-20-2017, eff. 6-30-2017) 
Sec. 22-103. - Conflicts/appeals. 
    Should any ordinances, or portions thereof, of the city be in conflict with the Kentwood Fire Prevention Code the more stringent ordinance, or portion thereof, shall prevail. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the fire code official shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application, in writing, by the owner or lessee of the affected property, or a duly authorized agent of the same, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this code, provided that the spirit of this code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of any such variance, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire code official, shall be entered upon the record of the fire department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 2004,  22-103; Ord. No. 18-05,  3, 10-23-2005) 
Sec. 22-104. - Modifications. 
    The following sections and subsections of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, are hereby amended or deleted, and additional sections, subsections and items are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like numbered sections of the International Fire Code. 
[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Kentwood Fire Prevention Code, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
[A] 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80 and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Section 102.7.1. References in this code to the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International/National Electrical Code, International Existing Building Code, International Mechanical Code, and International Plumbing Code shall be interpreted as the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Residential Code, Michigan Energy Code, Michigan Electrical Code, Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings, Michigan Mechanical Code, and Michigan Plumbing Code respectively. References to National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes and standards shall mean the current edition. 
[A] 102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the more restrictive shall apply. 
[A] 103.1 General. The Kentwood Fire Department shall be responsible for fire prevention inspection activities and code enforcement of buildings and occupancies as related to the risk of fire or explosion within the City of Kentwood. The bureau of fire prevention is established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official. The function of the bureau shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code. 
[A] 103.2 Appointment. The fire code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. 
103.3 Deputies. Deleted. 
104.11.4 Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency equipment. Without proper authorization from the fire chief or officer of the fire department in charge of emergency equipment, no person shall cling to, attach to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department vehicle, operate any emergency warning equipment, or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with, any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department vehicle. 
104.11.5 Damage/injury to fire department equipment/personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface, any fire department vehicle or equipment at any time; or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
[A] 105.1 General. Permits shall be processed in accordance with Section 105. Where reference is made for permits in this section or elsewhere in this code, the fire code official is authorized to waive the particular permit requirement. In the event of conflict between permitting provisions of this section and other city ordinances, the provisions of the other city ordinances shall control. 
105.1.1 Permits required. Any property owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to conduct an operation or business, or install or modify systems and equipment that are regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. Unless noted otherwise, permits required by this code shall be approved by the fire code official and obtained from the building official. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire code official. 
[A] 109.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity that violates or refuses to comply with any provisions of this code or erects, installs, alters, repairs or does work in violation of the approved construction documents or directives of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided for in Section 1-7 of the Kentwood Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
109.4.2 Correction of violations. The imposition of one penalty for a violation of or noncompliance with any of the provisions of this code shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and a person who violates or fails to comply is required to correct or remedy the violation or noncompliance within a reasonable time as determined by the fire code official. 
110.5 Posting of official fire department notices. Whenever it is determined by the fire code official that a building is unsafe for public occupancy or public safety personnel, the fire code official may evacuate and/or post a notice, placard or sign on the building indicating the building's unsafe condition. 
[A] 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as provided for in Section 1-7 of the Kentwood Code. 
SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS. 
[A] BUILDING. A combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, forming a structure affording a facility or shelter for use or occupancy by persons, animals, or property. The term does not include a building incidental to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which the building is located if it is not used in the business of retail trade. The term shall be construed as though followed by the words "or part or parts of the building and all equipment in the building" unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. R 408.30415a 
[A] BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person who is appointed and employed by a governmental subdivision, who is charged with the administration and enforcement of the state codes specified in R 408.30499 and who is registered in accordance with the requirements of 1986 PA 54, as amended. A building official may also be an employee of a private organization. R 408.30415a 
CANOPY. A permanent structure or architectural projection of rigid construction over which a covering is attached that provides weather protection, identity or decoration. A canopy is permitted to be structurally independent or supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides. 
FALSE ALARM. Any activation of an alarm system eliciting a response by police and/or fire personnel where an emergency situation does not in fact exist. A false alarm includes, but is not limited to, activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the user of an alarm system or of his employee or agent. 
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The fire chief, fire marshal, or other designated authority charged by the applicable governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative. The terms "fire code official" and "fire official" may be used interchangeably with "code official." 
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department by method(s) approved or recommended by the fire code official. 
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects. 
Fireworks, 1.4G (Consumer Fireworks). Fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFP parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low impact fireworks. 
Low-impact fireworks. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
Articles pyrotechnic. Pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
Fireworks, 1.3G (Display Fireworks). Large fireworks devices, which are explosive materials, intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
Special effects. A combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical, or opera production or live entertainment. 
[B] HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
HOUSEHOLDER. Any occupant of a residential building in the City. 
KEY BOX/LOCK BOX. A secure device with a lock operable only by a fire department master key, and containing building entry keys and other keys that may be required for access in an emergency. The terms key box and lock box may be used interchangeably. 
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET (MSDS)/SAFETY DATA SHEET (SDS). Information concerning a hazardous material which is prepared in accordance with the provisions of DOL 29 CFR Part 1910.1200 or in accordance with the provisions of a federally approved state OSHA plan. The terms Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) and Safety Data Sheet (SDS) may be used interchangeably. 
NONCOMPLIANT. Refers to alterations, modifications, or other such changes to fire suppression, protection, detection, alarm, or other related systems, affecting the design, installation, or proper or intended operation of said system. Does not comply with the applicable standard or criteria set forth when originally installed, tested, and approved. 
[OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION] 
Residential Group R-3. Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, including any of the following: 
(a)  Adult foster care family homes or adult foster care small group homes licensed per the adult foster care facility licensing act, 1979 PA 218, as amended, that provide accommodations for 6 or fewer persons receiving care. 
(b)  Buildings that do not contain more than 2 dwelling units. 
(c)  Boarding houses (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants. 
(d)  Boarding houses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants. 
(e)  Congregate living facilities (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants. 
(f)  Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants. 
(g)  Foster family homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for not more than 4 minor children. 
(h)  Foster care family group homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for more than 4 but fewer than 7 minor children. 
Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities that are located within a single-family dwelling may comply with the Michigan residential code if 1 of the following conditions is met: 
(a)  Adult foster care family homes or adult foster care small group homes for 6 or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling and licensed in accordance with the adult foster care facility licensing act, 1979 PA 218, as amended. 
(b)  Family child care homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for fewer than 7 minor children. 
(c)  Group child care homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for more than 6 but not more than 12 minor children. 
(d)  Foster family homes licensed per the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for not more than 4 minor children. 
(e)  Foster care family group homes licensed per the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for more than 4 but fewer than 7 minor children. 
R 408.30403 
OPEN BURNING. The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudgepots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames, or use of portable outdoor fireplaces when used in accordance with this Code. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open. 
PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE. A purchased portable, outdoor solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other noncombustible material and is listed or certified by an acceptable listing agency for outdoor use. A portable outdoor fireplace shall be fully enclosed other than a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in the top. 
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is licensed under 1980 PA 299, as amended. 
SKY LANTERN. An airborne lantern typically constructed from paper or similar lightweight material on a wood or wire frame, and containing a candle or fuel cell composed of a waxy flammable material or other open flame. When lit, the flame heats the air inside the lantern, thus lowering its density and causing the device to rise into the air. Sky lanterns do not include hot air balloons piloted by human beings, devices designed to loft scientific or other payloads (such as weather balloons or similar devices) or any lantern that is tethered so as not to become free floating. Other common names include, but are not limited to aerial luminaria, Chinese Sky Lantern, Hawaii Sky Lantern, Kongming Lantern, Flying Lantern, Floating Lantern, Sky Candle, Wish Candle, Wish lantern, and fire balloon. 
302.1 Definitions. The following terms are defined in Chapter 2: 
BONFIRE. 
HI-BOY. 
HIGH-VOLTAGE TRANSMISSION LINE. 
HOUSEHOLDER. 
OPEN BURNING. 
PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE. 
POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCK. 
RECREATIONAL FIRE. 
SKY LANTERN. 
304.1 Waste accumulation prohibited. Combustible material creating a fire hazard shall not be allowed to accumulate in buildings or structures or upon premises. No combustible rubbish shall accumulate on a construction site. All combustible rubbish must be removed daily, and shall not be disposed of by burning. 
SECTION 307 OPEN BURNING AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES 
307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in accordance with this section. 
307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. 
1.  No burning outside of a building or structure shall be permitted, except as follows: 
A.  For the preparation of food in conventional charcoal and gas grills in accordance with Sec. 308.1.4. 
B.  In R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D and non-residential zones (as established in the current zoning ordinance; see appendix A to the Kentwood Code), the burning of wood, charcoal or other acceptable fuel in a fire department approved container or utensil, while being used in a safe and sanitary manner. 
C.  The use of approved gaseous or liquid fired salamanders commonly employed in conjunction with building and construction operations when being used in accordance with accepted safety standards and this Code. 
D.  Roofers, plumbers, or other mechanics pursuing a business requiring the use of fire, or for the purpose of boiling tar, pitch or oil used in the course of an appropriate business or trade and while being used in a safe and sanitary manner and in accordance with this Code. 
E.  Open burning specifically permitted in writing by the Fire Chief or his designee for fire department and civil defense or emergency management purposes, after a determination by the Fire Chief or his designee that such open burning will occur under the following circumstances: 
a.  The area is adequately protected by fire fighters. 
b.  The fire will be of short duration. 
c.  The atmosphere is relatively free of pollutants. 
F.  For the purpose of training fire fighters or the public, including workers or employees, or demonstration by the fire official or other trained fire personnel, when such burning is done in accordance with accepted practice. 
2.  Burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
3.  Burning of garbage and leaves within the City is not permitted under any circumstances. 
307.2 Permit required. Deleted. 
307.2.1 Authorization. Deleted. 
307.3. Extinguishment authority. The fire code official or a police officer is authorized to order the extinguishment by a person responsible or the fire department of any burning that creates or adds to a hazardous, offensive or objectionable situation. 
307.4 Location. Deleted. 
307.4.1 Bonfires . Deleted. 
307.4.2 Recreational fires. Deleted. 
307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated on or within 15 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material or surface. Only fire wood is permitted to be burned. 
307.5 Attendance. Open burning and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended by a responsible adult until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose, or water truck shall be available for immediate utilization. 
307.6 Approved incinerators. A householder may burn waste material, refuse, paper or other combustible debris within any building or structure only if such burning is done in a stove, furnace, fireplace or incinerator approved by the Building Inspector as being in conformity with the construction and installation requirements of the City's building and fire codes, provided that such householder burns only his own waste materials and not those of others. 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
3.  LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than 20 pounds (4.7 gal. LP-gas capacity). 
308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. The lighting of, and the release of, sky lanterns are prohibited. 
312.4 Maintenance. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to provide and maintain required guard posts. 
407.1 General. The provisions of Sections 407.2 through 407.7 shall be applicable where hazardous materials are located on the premises or where required by the fire code official. 
407.3 Identification. Individual containers of hazardous materials, cartons or packages shall be marked or labeled in accordance with applicable federal regulations. Buildings, rooms and spaces containing hazardous materials shall be identified by hazard warning signs in accordance with Section 5003.5. Individual containers, cartons or packages shall be identified on at least one side. The side of the container, carton or package marked shall be clearly visible when stored. 
407.4 Training. Persons responsible for the operation of areas in which hazardous materials are produced, stored, dispensed, handled or used shall be familiar with the chemical nature of the materials and the appropriate mitigating actions necessary in the event of a fire, leak or spill. Responsible persons shall be designated and trained to be liaison personnel for the fire department. These persons shall aid the fire department in preplanning emergency responses and identification of the locations where hazardous materials are located, and shall have access to Material Safety Data Sheets and be knowledgeable in the site emergency response procedure. 
407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each facility that uses, produces, stores, or handles hazardous materials shall provide a Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) in accordance with Section 5001.5.2. 
407.6 Hazardous Materials Management Plan. Where required by the fire code official, each facility that uses, produces, stores, or handles hazardous materials shall provide a Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) in accordance with Section 5001.5.1. The fire code official is authorized to accept a similar plan required by other regulations. 
407.7 Facility closure plans. Each facility that uses, produces, stores, or handles hazardous materials shall submit to the fire code official a facility closure plan in accordance with Section 5001.6.3 to terminate storage, dispensing, handling or use of hazardous materials. 
502.1 Definitions. The following terms are defined in Chapter 2: 
AGENCY. 
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD. 
FIRE COMMAND CENTER. 
FIRE DEPARTMENT MASTER KEY. 
FIRE LANE. 
KEY BOX/LOCK BOX. 
TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES. 
503.1.1. Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads/fire lanes shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road/fire lane shall comply with the requirements of this section. Paved fire lanes not less than 20 feet in width and capable of supporting 20 ton vehicles on a single axle with dual wheels and standard road tires must be constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
NUMBER OF SIDES OF A BUILDING THAT MUST HAVE UNOBSTRUCTED FIRE LANES 
Building Size Required Sides With longest side up to 150 feet 1 With longest side up to 300 feet 2 With longest side up to 400 feet 3 With longest side over 400 feet See below  
1.  The fire lane may be a parking lot or driveway. 
2.  If the longest side is longer than 400 feet, or if the building is of an unusual shape or configuration, the fire code official shall have the authority to require additional fire lanes. 
3.  All buildings must have a fire lane on the longest side. Where fire lanes are required on three sides, two of them must have long sides. 
4.  If the building is less than 12,000 square feet and fully sprinklered, only one fire lane, on the longest side, shall be required. 
5.  Each side of the building where a fire lane is required must have an entrance as close to the middle as possible. 
6.  Parking against a building with proper fire lanes may be permitted without the need for "No Parking-Fire Lane" signs under certain circumstances, at the discretion of the fire code official. The following is a sample lot configuration. 

Fire Lanes 
a.  Ten feet of green area 
b.  Five feet of sidewalk 
c.  Twenty feet of parking space (no parking blocks allowed) 
d.  An island the width and length of one parking space must be constructed at each entrance/exit door. 
7.  There must be a minimum of ten feet, and a maximum of 30 feet of distance from the building. 
8.  A fire lane must be within 100 feet of all fire department connections (FDCs). 
9.  All fire lanes must be maintained and unobstructed at all times. 
10.  "No Parking-Fire Lane" signs shall be placed at the discretion of the fire code official, but in no event shall they be placed closer than 25 feet apart or further than 75 feet apart. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The fire code official is authorized to increase the distance of the fire apparatus access road from a building or facility where: 
1.1  The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3. 
1.2  Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of location on property, topography, waterways, non-negotiable grades or other similar conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is provided. 
503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be paved, and designed and maintained to support 20-ton vehicles on a single axle with dual wheels and standard road tires. 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Sections 503.2.1 and 503.2.2 shall be maintained at all times. Snow removal must be maintained the same as the parking lot. 
503.6 Security gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire code official. Where security gates are installed, they shall have a means of emergency operation approved by the fire code official. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200. 
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers, or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address numbers shall be maintained. 
505.1.1 The number assigned in accordance with the regulations of the United States Postal Service and pertaining to any building in the City shall be the number to which reference is made in this section. 
505.1.2 The placement of numbers shall be accomplished in the following manner: 
505.1.2.1 Every residential building located at a distance less than 90 feet from the closest public road shall have Arabic numerals displayed at, on or above the front door, which Arabic numerals shall be readily visible to occupants of fire department vehicles on the public road. 
505.1.2.2 Every residential building located at a distance greater than 90 feet from the closest public road right-of-way shall have Arabic numerals displayed at, on or above the front door, and shall have Arabic numerals displayed on a post or on a regulation United States Postal Service mailbox located on the same side of the public road as, and directly in front of, the building and directly adjacent to, and in no event a distance greater than ten feet from, the public road right-of-way, which Arabic numerals shall be readily visible to occupants of fire department vehicles on the public road. 
505.1.2.3 Every building occupied, used or intended for use as assembly, business, educational, high hazard, industrial, institutional, mercantile or storage occupancy shall have Arabic numerals displayed in such a manner as to be readily visible to the occupants of fire department vehicles on the public road in front of such building. 
505.1.2.4 This section shall be construed to mean that if the Arabic numerals as provided for in this section shall be hidden by an awning, overhang or other appurtenance, or if the building is not clearly visible to occupants of fire department vehicles on the public road, then the owner of such building, or the person in possession and control thereof, shall have supplementary Arabic numerals located in such a manner or place as the fire code official shall determine to be in compliance with the intent of this section. 
505.1. 3 The size of the Arabic numerals on all buildings shall be at least four inches in height. An additional one inch shall be added to the size of the numerals required for each 20 feet from the roadway greater than 50 feet or such numerals shall be displayed at the roadway, as determined by the fire code official. 
505.1.4 The color of the Arabic numerals on all buildings shall be in contrast with the immediate background on which the numerals are mounted. The Arabic numerals shall be displayed in a manner that will permit them to be readily visible during all hours of normal daylight. 
505.1.5 All existing developed property shall be identified as required in sections 505.1.1 through 505.1.4. 
505.1.6 All applicants for building permits for new construction or alterations of existing structures shall be given a copy of the requirements for numbering the buildings and shall agree to comply with the requirements of sections 505.1.1 through 505.1.4 before any building permit shall be issued. 
505.1.7 Building numbers may be spelled out on the building for decorative purposes; however, Arabic numerals will be required also in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
SECTION 506 LOCK BOXES/KEY BOXES 
506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is difficult or restricted because of secured openings or an obstructed entry, or where immediate access is necessary for fire suppression, property/environmental protection or emergency medical purposes, or to verify the existence of a fire or other emergency, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of a type approved by the fire code official, and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official. 
506.3 Applicability. Lock boxes shall be installed on the outside of the following facilities, in a location approved by the fire code official: 
1.  All commercial and industrial facilities over 5,000 square feet. 
2.  All places of assembly. 
3.  All facilities that use, store, handle or manufacture hazardous materials. 
4.  Any facility the fire code official deems necessary. 
506.4 Contents . The lock box shall contain: 
1.  Keys to the facility, including interior and exterior doors; 
2.  Keys to mechanical and equipment rooms; 
3.  Keys to elevator controls; 
4.  Keys to specific areas as required by the City fire department; 
5.  Keys to the fire alarm system; 
6.  Facility emergency plan. 
506.5 Hazardous materials classifications. Lock boxes in hazardous materials classifications shall also include all items required by the Fire Prevention Code adopted by the City, including, but not limited to, Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), emergency contact numbers of key facility personnel knowledgeable about safety procedures of materials on the site, current emergency and hazardous material inventory statement, and current facility site and emergency response plans. 
506.6 Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee or other party in control of a structure or area to: 
1.  Assume all costs involved in the installation of the lock box; 
2.  Keep the lock box in good repair; 
3.  Ensure that all keys contained therein are those currently in use in the structure or area; and 
4.  Ensure that all information is up-to-date. 
506.7 Installation. 
a.  Lock boxes shall be installed in all new facilities, where required. 
b.  Where required in existing facilities, the owner, lessee, tenant or other party in control of a structure or area shall install a lock box when such facilities are substantially remodeled (50 percent or more in total area) or when the owner, occupant or use changes. 
507.5 Fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.9. 
507.5.1 Location. All buildings in the City, except one-family and two-family dwellings, shall be situated not more than 800 feet (244 m) from a public fire hydrant by direct public road access or by direct private road access. Any private road must be improved according to the minimum requirements of the City, and the public fire hydrant shall be situated immediately adjacent to, and not more than 20 feet (6 m) from, such public or private road. 
507.5.2 Supplemental fire protection (hydrants). 
1.  With the exception of one-family and two-family dwellings, supplemental fire protection (hydrants) shall be provided for all buildings that are: 
a.  Over 100 feet (30 m) in length and/or width; and/or 
b.  Situated at a distance greater than 100 feet (30 m) from a public road; or 
c.  Of such size, construction, location or occupancy use in relationship to public roads and public fire hydrants as may be deemed by the fire code official to constitute a condition hazardous to life and property due to fire or explosion and when related to the ability of the fire department to serve the premises. 
2.  Supplemental fire protection (hydrants) shall consist of water mains not less than six inches in diameter and dedicated to the public use of the City of Kentwood or the City of Grand Rapids and the water system. The fire code official shall determine the number and size of hydrants, gates and gate walls, and location thereof, as he deems reasonable and necessary in order to provide sufficient supplemental fire protection to the premises. 
3.  In no event shall such hydrants be located at a distance greater than 500 feet (152 m) from the furthest point of the building by direct public road access or by direct private road access, provided such private road is improved according to the minimum requirements of the City. Such fire hydrants shall be situated immediately adjacent to, and not greater than 20 feet (6 m) from, such public or private road. 
Exceptions. The fire code official shall have the authority to vary the distance requirements set forth in Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.2 above on a sprinklered building under 12,000 square feet as he shall deem reasonable and necessary; however, in no event shall hydrants be located more than 800 feet (244 m) from the furthest point of the building. 
4.  Permit for use. 
a.  Wyoming district. Any person, other than members of the fire department or water department of the City, desiring to make use of any fire hydrant in the City's Wyoming District, shall apply to the water department of the City for permission to do so. Applications for a permit shall be submitted on a form provided by the City and any use of the hydrants shall be subject to all terms and conditions contained on the permit. All applicants shall deposit a fee with the City, as established by resolution of the City Commission from time to time, the return of which sum shall be conditioned upon the applicant, his agents and employees using the designated fire hydrant only and in a manner according to the directions printed on the reverse side of the permit issued to the applicant and to the use of tools as the directions and tools may be approved by the water department and without causing damage to the fire hydrant. Any damage resulting from the use of the fire hydrant in excess of the deposit sum shall be a charge due and owing immediately to the City from the applicant. Further, the deposit sum shall not be returned to the applicant unless and until the fire hydrant is inspected by the City, for which inspection the applicant shall pay an inspection fee. Any fee imposed by the provisions of this section shall be in addition to any fee or service charge of the water department of the City for water use. Permits shall not be issued until approved by the fire code official or designated representative and shall be effective for a period of four hours only. 
b.  Grand Rapids district. Any person, other than members of the Kentwood Fire Department or the City of Grand Rapids Water Department, desiring to make use of any fire hydrant in the City of Kentwood's Grand Rapids District, shall apply to the water department of the City of Grand Rapids for permission to do so. 
507.5.3 Inspection, testing and maintenance. Fire hydrant systems shall be subject to periodic tests as required by the fire code official. Fire hydrant systems shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be repaired where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing shall comply with approved standards. Records of tests and required maintenance shall be maintained. 
507.5.4 Private fire service mains and water tanks. Private fire service mains and water tanks shall be periodically inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with NFPA 25 at the following intervals: 
1.  Private fire hydrants (all types): Inspection annually and after each operation; flow test and maintenance annually. 
2.  Fire service main piping: Inspection of exposed, annually; fire flow test every 5 years. 
3.  Fire service main piping strainers: Inspection and maintenance after each use. 
Records of inspections, testing and maintenance shall be maintained. 
507.5.5 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
507.5.6 Clear space around hydrants. A 3-foot (914 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise required or approved. 
507.5.7 Removal of obstructions. If obstructions or encroachments to a fire hydrant or to other fire protection equipment are not removed, the fire code official or designee shall remove or have them removed. The expense incurred shall be a debt to the City from the responsible person, firm or corporation and shall be collected as any other debt to the City. 
507.5.8 Physical protection. Where fire hydrants are subject to impact by a motor vehicle, guard posts or other approved means shall comply with Section 312. 
507.5.9 Tampering with fire hydrants, fire extinguishers and fire apparatus. It shall be unlawful for any person to, without authority of the fire code official, open any fire hydrant, or wantonly, maliciously, willfully or in a negligent manner tamper with, injure, destroy, damage, break, disturb or impair any fire hydrant, firefighting appliance or alarm, including, but not limited to, a supplemental fire protection system, and the constituent parts and equipment thereof, or any firefighting equipment or apparatus, or anything pertaining to the firefighting system. 
607.1.1 Fire-fighters' emergency operation. Elevators shall be provided with phase I emergency recall operation and phase II emergency in-car operation in accordance with the requirements of the Michigan elevator code (R 408.7001 through R 408.8695). 
[M] 609.1. General. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with the requirements of the Michigan Mechanical Code and NFPA 96. 
609.1.1 Exhaust Fans. Exhaust fans for commercial cooking hoods shall be installed so that the fans are operational at all times cooking is occurring. This may be accomplished by a temperature monitoring device installed in, on, or near the hood to activate the exhaust fan(s) at a pre-determined temperature, or as otherwise approved by the code official. 
[M] 609.2.1. Operation. Type I hood systems shall be designed and installed to automatically activate the exhaust fan whenever cooking operations occur. The activation of the exhaust fan shall occur through an interlock with the cooking appliances, by means of heat sensors or by means of other approved methods. 
901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests, and maintenance required by the referenced standards and this code shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years. A copy shall also be sent to the fire code official by the service company or individual performing such work. 
901.6.3 Noncompliant systems. Fire suppression, protection or other related systems found to be noncompliant, malfunctioning or otherwise non-operational by the service company or individual performing such service shall be tagged "noncompliant" and the fire code official and the occupant shall be notified immediately. At no time shall an approval, compliance, or other indication of operability be affixed to, on or near noncompliant systems so as to give false indication of designed, intended or expected operation. 
901.6.4 Anti-freeze fire sprinkler systems. Fire sprinkler systems designed and installed to protect areas prone to freezing shall be drained and tested annually, then refilled and maintained to ensure the solution is operable to -40 degrees F or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
901.6.5 Alarm and supervisory service. When testing, repairing or modifying any suppression system, standpipe or fire alarm system connected to a supervisory service, reasonable notice shall be given to the fire department before initiation of the tests, repairs or modifications and upon completion of the tests, repairs, or modifications. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive obligations imposed on alarm or supervisory service providers by other provisions of the Kentwood Code. 
SECTION 902 DEFINITIONS 
902.1 Definitions. The following terms are defined in Chapter 2: 
ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. 
ALARM SIGNAL. 
ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE. 
ANNUNCIATOR. 
AUDIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. 
AUTOMATIC. 
AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. 
AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM. 
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM. 
AUTOMATIC WATER MIST SYSTEM. 
AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. 
CARBON DIOXIDE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. 
CLEAN AGENT. 
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. 
CONSTANTLY ATTENDED LOCATION. 
DELUGE SYSTEM. 
DETECTOR, HEAT. 
DRY-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING AGENT. 
ELEVATOR GROUP. 
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM. 
EMERGENCY VOICE/ALARM COMMUNICATIONS. 
FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL. 
FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT. 
FIRE ALARM SIGNAL. 
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. 
FIRE AREA. 
FIRE DETECTOR, AUTOMATIC. 
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. 
FIRE SAFETY FUNCTIONS. 
FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO). 
FOAM-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. 
HALOGENATED EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. 
IMPAIRMENT COORDINATOR. 
INITIATING DEVICE. 
MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX. 
MULTIPLE-STATION ALARM DEVICE. 
MULTIPLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. 
NONCOMPLIANT. 
NOTIFICATION ZONE. 
NUISANCE ALARM. 
PRIVATE GARAGE. 
RECORD DRAWINGS. 
SINGLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. 
SLEEPING UNIT. 
SMOKE ALARM. 
SMOKE DETECTOR. 
STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF. 
Class I system. 
Class II system. 
Class III system. 
STANDPIPE, TYPES OF. 
Automatic dry. 
Automatic wet. 
Manual dry. 
Manual wet. 
Semiautomatic dry. 
SUPERVISING STATION 
SUPERVISORY SERVICE. 
SUPERVISORY SIGNAL. 
SUPERVISORY SIGNAL-INITIATING DEVICE. 
TIRES, BULK STORAGE OF. 
TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. 
TROUBLE SIGNAL. 
VISIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. 
WET-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING AGENT. 
WIRELESS PROTECTION SYSTEM. 
ZONE. 
ZONE, NOTIFICATION. 
903.2.5 Group H. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in high-hazard occupancies as required in Sections 903.2.5.1 through 903.2.5.4. 
R 408.30442 
903.2.5.1 General. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in Group H occupancies unless the requirements of section 903.2.5.4 are met for buildings containing consumer fireworks. 
R 408.30442 
903.2.5.4 Consumer fireworks (1.4G). Buildings used for the retail sale of consumer fireworks shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with the Michigan fireworks safety act, 2011 PA 256, as amended. 
R 408.30442 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area. 
Exception: Camp buildings in remote areas without municipal water supply that meet all of the following: 
1.  Not more than 1 story, 2,000 square feet (185m 2 ) and 25 occupants. 
2.  Are used not more than 5 months in a year. 
3.  Shall be provided with not less than 2 exits in compliance with section 1019. 
4.  Shall not be provided with not less than 2 exits in compliance with section 1019. 
5.  Provided with a manual fire alarm system and smoke alarms throughout in compliance with NFPA 72 or listed in chapter 80. For cabins sleeping 4 or fewer occupants only, smoke alarms are required. 
6.  Storage and equipment rooms shall be protected by a 1-hour fire partition. 
7.  Compliance with all applicable requirements of the code. 
R 408.30442 
903.2.8.2 Adult foster care family homes. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in adult foster care family homes or small group homes for 6 or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling and licensed in accordance with the adult foster care facility licensing act, 1979 PA 218, as amended. 
R 408.30442 
903.2.8.3 Child care organizations. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in child care organizations that are within a single-family dwelling and licensed in accordance with the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, as follows: 
(a)  Foster family homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for more than 4 but fewer than 7 minor children. 
(b)  Foster care family group homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for more than 4 but fewer than 7 minor children. 
(c)  Family child care homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for fewer than 7 minor children. 
(d)  Group child care homes licensed under the child care organizations act, 1973 PA 116, as amended, that provide care for more than 6 but not more than 12 minor children. 
R 408.30403 
903.2.11.3 Buildings more than 30 feet (9 144 mm) in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the building that has an occupant load of 30 or more occupants and which is located 30 feet (9 144 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open parking structures. 
2.  Occupancies in Group F-2. 
3.  Existing buildings having occupied floor levels not more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, where the local unit of government complies with the following parameters: 
3.1  The local unit of government having a municipal fire department with an ISO rating of 3 or lower, employing a full-time career fire fighting staff. 
3.2  The governing body of the local unit of government has passed a resolution affirming the use of this exception and filed that resolution with the department of licensing and regulatory affairs, bureau of construction codes. 
R 408.30445 
903.3.8.1 Number of sprinklers. Limited area sprinkler systems shall not exceed 20 sprinklers. 
R408.30403 
903.3.8.5 Calculations. Hydraulic calculations in accordance with NFPA 13 shall be provided to demonstrate the available water flow and pressure are adequate to supply all sprinklers installed with discharge densities corresponding to the hazard classification. 
R408.30403 
903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible and visual devices shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location. Exterior audible and visual devices shall activate only on water flow. Where a fire alarm system is installed in the building, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. 
904.3.5 Monitoring. Automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be monitored by a supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72 as approved by the fire code official. Where a building fire alarm system is installed, automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be monitored by the building fire alarm system in accordance with NFPA 72 and shall automatically annunciate their location at the building's fire alarm control panel, and activate the building's fire protective signaling sequence. 
907.2.5.1 Consumer fireworks (1.4G) facilities fire alarms. Fire alarm systems in consumer fireworks (1.4G) facilities used for the retail sale of consumer fireworks storage shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the code for the manufacture, transportation, storage, and retail sales of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles, NFPA 1124, as referenced by the Michigan fireworks safety act, 2011 PA 256, as amended. 
R 408.30441 
907.2.11.8 Smoke alarm locations in existing buildings constructed before November 6, 1974. Within each dwelling unit or sleeping unit, a single-station smoke alarm shall be installed in all of the following locations: 
(1)  In each sleeping room or each area directly outside of the sleeping room. 
(2)  On each floor level including the basement level. 
For sleeping units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than 1 full story below the upper level. 
R 408.30446 
907.2.11.8.1 Equipment requirements. The required equipment for smoke alarms shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Installation. Smoke alarm devices shall be listed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation requirements, the provisions of the Michigan Building Code, and the provisions of NFPA 72 as listed in chapter 80. 
(2)  Power source. The equipment shall be operable by power from 1 of the following primary sources: 
(a)  The building wiring provided the wiring is served from a commercial source and is equipped with a battery backup. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
(b)  A non-rechargeable battery able to power the smoke alarm in the normal condition for a life of 5 years. 
(c)  A rechargeable battery, with proper charging, able to power the alarm for a life of 5 years. 
(d)  A commercial use alarm system with battery backup listed and approved in accordance with the commercial fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72, as adopted by reference in this rule. 
(3)  Audible Alarm Notification. The activation of the alarm signal shall produce a sound that is audible in all occupiable dwelling areas. 
(4)  Testing and Maintenance. The owner of a dwelling unit, in which required or optional fire detection or fire protection systems equipment is installed, shall be responsible for the proper operation, testing, and maintenance of the equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions included with the equipment. The occupant of rental dwelling units shall be responsible for the periodic operational testing and periodic cleaning of the installed equipment within the rental unit in accordance with the testing instructions provided in the manufacturer's instructions for the equipment. If the system fails, breaks, or is out of service, it shall be repaired and functional within 30 days. 
Exception: Smoke alarms and devices installed in buildings constructed before November 6, 1974 where an installation was approved by the appropriate enforcing agency under regulations in effect at the time of the installation shall be considered to comply with the provisions of the code. 
R 408.30446 
907.5.2.1.3 Audible alarm appliance silencing. Where required by the fire code official, there shall be a means provided at the fire alarm control panel to silence audible alarm devices without resetting the panel. Where audible alarm devices are provided in connection with visual alarm devices, there shall be a means provided to silence the audible alarm devices without disabling the visual alarm devices or resetting the panel. 
907.5.2.4 Signs. Where fire alarm systems are not monitored by a supervising station, an approved permanent sign shall be installed adjacent to each manual fire alarm box that reads: WHEN ALARM SOUNDS-DIAL 9-1-1. 
Exception: Where the manufacturer has permanently provided this information on the manual fire alarm box. 
907.6.7 Separate annunciation. Where fire detection systems exist in multi-tenant occupancies (e.g., strip malls), separate annunciation shall be required for each separately addressed tenant space. 
910.2.3 Consumer fireworks (1.4G) facilities smoke and heat vents. Smoke and heat vents in consumer fireworks (1.4G) facilities used for the retail sale of consumer fireworks storage shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the code for the manufacture, transportation, storage, and retail sales of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles, NFPA 1124, as referenced by the Michigan fireworks safety act, 2011 PA 256, as amended. 
R 408.30441 
912.2 Location. With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings and landscaping, fire department connections shall be so located that fire apparatus and hose connected to supply the system will not obstruct access to the buildings for other fire apparatus. The location of fire department connections shall be approved by the fire code official. 
912.2.1 Visible location. Fire department connections shall be located on the street side of buildings, fully visible and recognizable from the street or nearest point of fire department vehicle access or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
912.4 Access. Immediate access to fire department connections shall be maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes, trees, walls or any other fixed or moveable object. Access to fire department connections shall be approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: Fences, where provided with an access gate equipped with a sign complying with the legend requirements of Section 912.4 and a means of emergency operation. The gate and the means of emergency operation shall be approved by the fire code official and maintained operational at all times. 
912.4.2 Clear space around connections. A working space of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth and 78 inches (1981 mm) in height shall be provided and maintained in front of and to the sides of wall-mounted fire department connections and around the circumference of free-standing fire department connections, except as otherwise required or approved by the fire code official. 
SECTION 916 TEMPERATURE AND MONITORING 
916.1 General. Precautions shall be taken in all rooms and areas containing fire sprinkler equipment such as piping, valve(s), and fire pump(s) to prevent freezing of the equipment during times of extremely cold temperatures. Where the code official deems necessary, equipment shall be installed to monitor the temperature of said areas and send a trouble or supervisory signal to an approved location when the temperature falls below 40 degrees F to warn of freezing conditions so that the occurrence of frozen and/or broken piping, valve(s), and fire pump(s) can be prevented. 
TABLE 1004.1.2 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA ALLOWANCES PER OCCUPANT 
FUNCTION OF SPACE FLOOR AREA IN SQ. FT. PER Accessory storage areas, mechanical equipment room 300 gross Agricultural building 300 gross Aircraft hangars 500 gross Airport terminal  Baggage claim 20 gross  Baggage handling 300 gross  Concourse 100 gross  Waiting areas 15 gross Assembly  Gaming floors (keno, slots, etc.) 11 gross  Exhibit gallery and museum 30 net Assembly with fixed seats See Section 1004.4 Assembly without fixed seats  Concentrated (chairs only - not fixed) 7 net  Standing space 5 net  Unconcentrated (tables and chairs) 15 net Bowling centers, allow 5 persons for each lane including 15 feet of runway, and for additional areas 7 net Business areas 100 gross Courtrooms-other than fixed seating areas 40 net Day care 35 net Dormitories 50 gross Educational  Classroom area 20 net  Shops and other vocational room areas 50 net  Locker rooms 15 gross Exercise rooms 50 gross Group H-5 fabrication and manufacturing areas 200 gross Industrial areas 100 gross Institutional areas  Inpatient treatment areas 240 gross  Outpatient areas 100 gross  Sleeping areas 120 gross Outpatient areas 100 gross Sleeping areas 120 gross Kitchens, commercial 200 gross Library  Reading rooms 50 net  Stack area 100 gross Locker rooms 50 gross Mall buildings-covered and open See Section 402.8.2 of the International Building Code Mercantile 60 gross  Storage, stock, shipping areas 300 gross Parking garages 200 gross Residential 200 gross Skating rinks, swimming pools  Rink and pool 50 gross  Decks 15 gross Stages and platforms 15 net Warehouses 500 gross  
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m 2 
R 408.30418 
1009.4 Elevators. To be considered part of an accessible means of egress, an elevator shall be in compliance with the emergency operation and signaling device requirements of the Michigan elevator code, R 408.7001 to R 408.8695. 
R408.30459 
1016.2.2 Group E. Egress from classrooms in group E occupancies shall be limited to pass through 1 intervening space before reaching an exit access door leading directly to a corridor or an exit. 
R 408.30421 
1023.11 Smokeproof enclosures. In buildings required to comply with Section 403 or 405 of the Michigan Building Code, each of the exits of a building that serves stories where the floor surface is located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access or more than 30 feet (9 144 mm) below the level of exit discharge serving such floor levels shall be a smokeproof enclosure or pressurized stairway in accordance with Section 909.20 of the Michigan Building Code. 
R 408.30447 
1025.1 General. Approved luminous egress path markings delineating the exit path shall be provided in buildings with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access of groups A, B, E, I, M, and R-1 occupancies in accordance with sections 1024.1 to 1024.5. 
R 408.30421 
1030.1 General. In addition to the means of egress required by this chapter, provisions shall be made for emergency escape and rescue in Group R occupancies as applicable in section 101.2 of the Michigan Building Code. Basements and sleeping rooms below the fourth story above grade plane shall have at least 1 exterior emergency escape and rescue opening in accordance with this section. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, emergency egress and rescue openings shall be required in each sleeping room, but shall not be required in adjoining areas of the basement. The opening shall open directly into a public street, public alley, yard, or court. 
Exceptions: 
1.  In other than group R-3 occupancies as applicable in section 101.2 of the Michigan Building Code, buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
2.  In other than group R-3 occupancies as applicable in section 101.2 of the Michigan Building Code, sleeping rooms provided with a door to a fire-resistance-rated corridor having access to 2 remote exits in opposite directions. 
3.  The emergency escape and rescue opening may open onto a balcony within an atrium in accordance with the requirements of section 404 of the Michigan Building Code, provided the balcony provides access to an exit and the dwelling unit or sleeping unit has a means of egress that is not open to the atrium. 
4.  Basements with a ceiling height of less than 80 inches (2032 mm) shall not be required to have emergency escape and rescue openings. 
5.  High rise buildings in accordance with section 403 of the Michigan Building Code. 
6.  Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required from basements or sleeping rooms which have an exit door or exit access door that opens directly into a public street, public alley, yard, egress court, or to an exterior exit balcony that opens to a public street, public alley, yard, or egress court. 
7.  Basements without habitable spaces and having not more than 200 square feet (18.6 square meters) in floor area shall not be required to have emergency escape and rescue openings. 
R 408.30421 
SECTION 1032 
CONSUMER FIREWORKS 
1032.1 Consumer fireworks (1.4G) facilities means of egress. The means of egress in consumer fireworks (1.4G) facilities used for the retail sale of consumer fireworks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the code for the manufacture, transportation, storage, and retail sales of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles, NFPA 1124, as referenced by the Michigan fireworks safety act, 2011 PA 256, as amended. 
R 408.30441 
TABLE 1103.1 
OCCUPANCY AND USE REQUIREMENTS a 
SECTION USE OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION High-rise Atrium or covered mall Under-ground building A B E F H-1 H-2 H-3 H-4 H-5 I-1 I-2 I-3 I-4 M R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 S 1103.2 R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 1103.3 R - R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 1103.4.1 R - R - - - - - - - - - - R R - - - - - - - 1103.4.2 R - R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 1103.4.3 R - R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 1103.4.4 - R - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1103.4.5 - - - - R - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - - 1103.4.6 - - - R - R R R R R R R R R R R - R R R R R 1103.4.7 - - - R - R R R R R R R R R R R - R R R R R 1103.4.8 R - R R R R R R R R R R R - - R R R R R R R 1103.4.9 R - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - - - - - 1103.5.1 - - - R 1103.5.2 b 1103.5.3 - - - R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 1103.6.1 R - - R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R - R R 1103.6.2 R - - - R R 1103.7.1 - - - - - R - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1103.7.2 - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - - - - - - 1103.7.3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - - - - - 1103.7.4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - - - - 1103.7.5 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - 1103.7.6 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - 1103.7.7 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - R - 1103.8 - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - R R R R - 1103.9 R - - - - - - - - - - - R R - R - R R R R - 1104 R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R 1105 - - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - - - - - 1106 - - - - - - - - - - - - - R - - - - - - - -  
a. Existing buildings shall comply with the sections identified as "Required" (R) based on occupancy or use, or both, whichever is applicable. 
b. Only applies to Group I-2 Condition 2 as established by the adopting ordinance. 
R = The building is required to comply. 
1103.5 Sprinkler systems. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in existing buildings in accordance with Sections 1103.5.1 through 1103.5.3. 
1103.5.2 Group I-2 Condition 2. In addition to the requirements of Section 1103.5.1, existing buildings of Group I-2 Condition 2 occupancy shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
2101.1 Scope. Dry cleaning plants and their operations shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, NFPA 32, and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, or its equivalent. 
2301.1 Scope. Automotive motor fuel-dispensing facilities, marine motor fuel-dispensing facilities, fleet vehicle motor fuel-dispensing facilities, aircraft motor-vehicle fuel-dispensing facilities and repair garages shall be in accordance with this chapter and the Michigan Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code, Michigan Mechanical Code and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalent. Such operations shall include both those that are accessible to the public and private operations. 
2306.1 General. Storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Chapter 57 and Sections 2306.2 through 2306.6.3, and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalent. 
2306.7.8 Gravity and pressure dispensing. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by gravity from tanks, drums, barrels or similar containers. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by a device operating through pressure within a storage tank, drum or container. Approved pumps taking suction from the top of the container shall be utilized. 
2307.3 Attendants. Motor fuel-dispensing operations for LP-gas shall be conducted by qualified attendants or in accordance with Section 2307.7 by persons trained in the proper handling of LP-gas. 
2801.1 Scope. The storage, manufacturing and processing of solid biomass feedstock, timber, lumber, plywood, veneers and agro-industrial byproducts shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
3304.2.2 Combustible waste material removal. 
1.  Combustible debris, rubbish and waste material shall be removed from buildings not less than daily. 
2.  No combustible rubbish shall accumulate on a construction site and all combustible rubbish must be removed not less than daily. 
3304.3 Burning of combustible debris, rubbish and waste. Combustible debris, rubbish and waste material shall not be disposed of by burning. 
3304.4 Open burning. Deleted. 
3308.2 Prefire plans. The fire prevention program superintendent shall develop and maintain an approved prefire plan in cooperation with the fire code official. The fire chief and the fire code official shall be notified of changes affecting the utilization of information contained in such prefire plans. 
3310.1 Required access. Approved vehicle access for fire fighting shall be provided to all construction or demolition sites. An access road not less than 20 feet wide and able to support 20 tons on a single axle with dual wheels and standard road tires shall be constructed to within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of the furthest point of the structure before construction or erection of combustible building materials may begin. The road may be gravel, but vehicle access shall be maintained at all times until permanent fire apparatus access roads are available. 
3312.1 When required. On-site construction involving combustible building materials shall not occur until operable fire hydrants are in place within 500 road feet of the furthest point of any building being constructed. 
SECTION 3318 
UNIQUE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS 
3318.1 General. If building permits are issued before final plat or site condominium approval in residential developments encompassing a site in excess of 200 acres with 600 residential houses (not apartment units) or more, then, combustible materials shall not be stored or used on site until the developer provides: 
1.  Operable fire hydrants on a public water main within 800 feet of the building site by road distance. 
2.  A construction drive, able to support a 20-ton emergency vehicle, to within a 400 foot radius of a building prior to the issuance of the first building permit; or 
3.  A dedicated public road within a 400 foot radius of the building. 
CHAPTER 39 
GROWING AND PROCESSING OF MARIHUANA WITHIN NEW AND EXISTING BUILDINGS 
3901 Scope. 
3901.1 Applicability. Chapter 39 shall apply to the growing and/or processing of marihuana and/or extraction of the oils and fats by use of a solvent desolventizing of the raw material, production of the miscella, distillation of the solvent from the miscella and solvent recovery. The use, storage, transfilling and handling of hazardous materials in these facilities shall comply with this chapter, other applicable provisions of this code and the Michigan Building Code. This chapter does not apply to the retail sale of marihuana where growing and/or processing does not occur and does not affect the privileges or immunities of registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, IL1 of 2008, as amended, or the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Act No. 281 of the Public Acts of 2016, as amended. 
3901.2 New and existing buildings or facilities. New and existing buildings or facilities used for the processing of plants or where the medium of extraction or solvent is changed shall comply with this chapter. 
3901.3 Where a material, its use, or associated process poses multiple hazards, all hazards shall be addressed in accordance with applicable requirements of this code. 
3902 Definitions. 
Desolventizing. The act of removing a solvent from a material. 
Marihuana, also known as marijuana and cannabis. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., growing or not; the seeds of that plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. Marihuana does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. Marihuana does not include industrial hemp grown or cultivated, or both, for research purposes under the Industrial Hemp Research Act, Act No. 547 of the Public Acts of 2014, as amended. 
Miscella. A mixture, in any proportion, of the extracted oil or fat and the extracting solvent. 
3903 Growing or Production of Marihuana 
3903.1 Compliance. The occupant of a building, tenant space, or facility or portion thereof that grows and/or processes marihuana shall comply with all applicable provisions of the building and fire codes adopted by the City of Kentwood including, but not limited to, fire protection systems, means of egress, ventilation for light fixtures, and odor control. 
3903.1.1 Fire Protection Systems. Fire protection systems shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 9 of this code. 
3903.1.2 Ventilation for Light Fixtures. Light fixture ductwork shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer and NFPA 90A. 
3903.1.3 Odor Control. The use of ozone generators used for odor control shall comply with Chapter 60 of this code. 
3903.2 Interior Finish, Contents, and Furnishings. 
3903.2.1 Interior finish, including the use of any plastic, Mylar, or other thin film sheeting to enclose rooms or cover any walls or ceilings shall comply with the provisions of this code. 
3903.2.2 Hanging of plastic from ceiling or from suspended overhead structures to create wall dividers is not permitted. 
3903.3 Fumigation. Fumigation and insecticidal fogging operations within buildings, structures and spaces shall comply with Chapter 26 of this code. 
3903.3.1 Sources of Ignition. Sources of ignition shall be shut off during the fumigation activity and remain shut off until the required ventilation is completed. 
3903.3.2 Notification. 
3903.3.2.1 The fire code official shall be notified in writing not less than 48 hours before the building, structure or space is to be closed in connection with the utilization of any toxic or flammable fumigant. 
3903.3.2.2 Notification shall include the following: 
(1)  The location of the enclosed space to be fumigated or fogged. 
(2)  The occupancy. 
(3)  The fumigants or insecticides to be utilized. 
(4)  The person(s) responsible for the operation. 
(5)  The date and time at which the operation will begin. 
3903.3.2.3 Written notice of any fumigation or insecticidal operation shall be given to all affected occupants of the building, structure, or space in which such operations are to be conducted with sufficient advance notice to allow the occupants to evacuate the building, structure or space. 
3903.3.2.4 Written notice shall inform the occupants as to the purpose, anticipated duration, and hazards associated with the fumigation or insecticidal fogging operation. 
3903.3.3 Signage. 
3903.3.3.1 Approved warning signs indicating the danger, type of chemical involved, and necessary precautions shall be posted on all doors and entrances to the premises, including interior rooms and areas. 
3903.3.3.2 Signage shall be located at the exterior main entry and at the entries to those areas being fumigated indicating the duration of the fumigation. 
3903.3.4 Watch Personnel. 
3903.3.4.1 During the period fumigation is in progress a watchperson shall remain on duty at the entrance or entrances to the enclosed fumigated space until after the fumigation is completed and the building, structure, or space is properly ventilated and safe for occupancy. 
3903.3.4.2 Sufficient watchpersons shall be provided to prevent any person from entering the enclosed space under fumigation unobserved. 
3903.3.5 Occupancy During Fumigation. Occupants of the building, structure or space to be fumigated, except the personnel conducting the fumigation, shall be evacuated from such building, structure, or space prior to commencing fumigation operations. 
3903.3.6 Sealing of Building, Structure or Space. Paper and other similar materials used to wrap or cover a building, structure or space in excess of that required for the sealing of cracks, casements, and similar openings shall meet the flame propagation criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2 of NFPA 701. 
3903.3.7 Maintenance of Openings. All openings to the building, structure, or space to be fumigated or fogged shall be kept securely closed during such operation. 
3903.3.8 Venting and Cleanup. At the end of the exposure period the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Fumigators shall safely and properly ventilate the premises and contents. 
(2)  Fumigant containers, residues, debris, and other materials used for such fumigation shall be properly disposed. 
(3)  Obstructions shall be cleared from gas-fired appliance vents. 
3903.4 Pesticide Application. 
3903.4.1 A warning sign shall be provided to indicate that pesticides have been applied. 
3903.4.2 A record of pesticide application shall be provided and shall include the following: 
(1)  The pesticide product or chemical used. 
(2)  The date and time the pesticide was applied. 
(3)  When the room or area is safe to reoccupy. 
3904 Processing or Extraction. 
3904.1 Extraction Room. 
3904.1.1 Extraction rooms in a marihuana extraction facility shall be constructed in accordance with the Michigan building code and this code. 
3904.1.2 For other than carbon dioxide and nonhazardous extraction process, the marihuana extraction equipment and process shall be located in a room of noncombustible construction dedicated to the extraction process and the room shall not be used for any other purpose. 
3904.1.3 Marihuana extraction shall not be located in any building containing assembly, educational, day care, health care, ambulatory health care, residential board and care, residential, or detention and correctional facilities. 
3904.1.4 Means of Egress. For extraction rooms using hazardous materials, each room shall be provided with at least one exit access door complying with the following: 
(1)  The door shall swing in the direction of egress travel. 
(2)  The door shall be provided with a self-closing or automatic closing device. 
(3)  The door shall be equipped with panic or fire exit hardware. 
3904.2 Staffing. 
3904.2.1 For other than approved, unattended processes, the extraction process shall be continuously staffed. 
3904.2.2 Staff monitoring the extraction process shall be trained in the following: 
(1)  The extraction process. 
(2)  The transfer of solvents, where applicable. 
(3)  All emergency procedures. 
3904.2.3 All staff training records shall be maintained on site and made available to the fire code official upon request. 
3904.3 Operator Training. 
3904.3.1 In addition to the provisions of 3904.2, the operator of the marihuana extraction equipment shall also receive training in safe operation of the equipment. 
3904.3.2 Documentation of training shall be maintained on site and made available to the fire code official upon request. 
3904.4 Signage. 
3904.4.1 All applicable safety data sheets (SDS) shall be posted in the extraction room. 
3904.4.2 The NFPA 704 hazard rating diamond sign and no smoking signs shall be posted on the exterior of the extraction room door. 
3904.4.3 Applicable hazard warning signage shall be posted throughout the facility as applicable for emergency equipment. 
3904.5 Systems, Equipment and Processes. 
3904.5.1 General. Systems and equipment used with the processing and extraction of oils and products from plants shall comply with Sections 3904.5.1 through 3904.5.6.3. 
3904.5.1.1 Systems, equipment, and processes shall include, but are not limited to, vessels, chambers, containers, cylinders, tanks, piping, tubing, valves, fittings, and pumps. 
3904.5.1.2 Processes, methods, specifications, equipment testing and maintenance, design standards, performance, installation, equipment design and construction and other pertinent criteria shall be in accordance with Sections 3904.5.1.2 through 3904.5.1.6. 
3904.5.1.3 Design and Construction of Containers, Cylinders and Tanks. Systems or equipment used for the extraction of oils from plant material shall be listed or approved for the specific use. Containers, cylinders and tanks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with approved standards. Containers, cylinders, tanks and other means used for containment of hazardous materials shall be of an approved type. 
3904.5.1.4 Piping, Tubing, Valves and Fittings. Piping, tubing, valves, fittings, and related components used for hazardous materials shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Piping, tubing, valves, fittings, and related components shall be designed and fabricated from materials compatible with the material to be contained and shall be of a strength and durability to withstand the pressure, structural and seismic stress, and exposure to which they are subject. 
2.  Piping and tubing shall be identified in accordance with ASME A13.1, Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems, to indicate the material conveyed. 
3.  Readily accessible manual valves, or fail-safe emergency shutoff valves operated by a remotely located manually or automatically activated shutdown control, shall be installed on supply piping and tubing at the following locations: 
(a)  Point of use 
(b)  Tank, cylinder or bulk source 
4.  Manual emergency shutoff valves and remotely located manually activated shutdown controls for emergency shutoff valves shall be identified, and the location shall be clearly visible, accessible, and indicated by means of a sign. 
5.  Backflow prevention or check valves shall be provided where the backflow of hazardous materials could create a hazardous condition or cause the unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials. 
6.  Liquids or gases classified in accordance with NFPA 704 shall be carried in pressurized piping above a gauge pressure of 15 psi having a hazard ranking as follows: 
(a)  Health hazard Class 3 or Class 4. 
(b)  Flammability Class 4. 
(c)  Instability Class 3 or Class 4. 
7.  The pressurized piping specified in 3904.5.1.4(6) shall be provided with an approved means of leak detection and emergency shutoff or excess flow control in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Where the piping originates from within a hazardous material storage room or area, the excess flow control shall be located within the storage room or area. 
(b)  Where the piping originates from a bulk source, the excess flow control shall be located at the bulk source. 
(c)  Piping for inlet connections designed to prevent backflow and piping for pressure relief devices shall not be required to be equipped with excess flow control. 
3904.5.1.5 Additional Regulations for Supply Piping for Health Hazard Materials. Supply piping and tubing for liquids or solids having a health hazard ranking of Class 3 or Class 4 in accordance with NFPA 704 shall be in accordance with ASME B31.3, Process Piping, and the following: 
1.  Piping and tubing utilized for the transmission of highly toxic, toxic, or highly volatile corrosive liquids shall have welded, threaded, or flanged connections throughout, except for connections located within a ventilated enclosure, or an approved method of drainage or containment. 
2.  Piping and tubing shall not be located within corridors, within any portion of a means of egress required to be enclosed in fire resistance-rated construction, or in concealed spaces in areas not classified as Protection Level 1 through Protection Level 4 occupancies. 
3904.5.1.6 Equipment, Machinery, and Alarms. Equipment, machinery, and required detection and alarm systems associated with the use, storage, or handling of hazardous materials shall be listed or approved. 
3904.5.1.7 Systems or equipment used for the extraction of marihuana oils and products from plant material shall be performed using equipment that has been listed or approved. 
3904.5.2 Equipment . 
3904.5.2.1 Where an explosion condition exists, heating equipment such as vacuum ovens, heating mantels, heat guns, or other equipment shall not be used to heat flammable or combustible liquids or oils containing liquefied petroleum gases. 
3904.5.2.2 Refrigerators, freezers, and other cooling equipment used to store or cool flammable liquids shall be listed for the storage of flammable/combustible liquids or be listed for Class I, Division 1 locations, as described in Article 501 of NFPA 70. 
3904.5.2.3 Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) tanks shall comply with Chapter 61 of this code. 
3904.5.2.4 Post-processing and winterization involving the heating or pressurizing of the miscella to other than normal pressure or temperature shall be approved and performed in an appliance listed for such use. Domestic or commercial cooking appliances shall not be used. 
3904.5.2.5 The use of industrial ovens shall comply with chapter 30 of this code. 
3904.5.3 Approval for Systems and Equipment with No Listing. 
3904.5.3.1 Where the system used for extraction of marihuana oils and products from plant material is not listed, the system shall have a designer of record. 
3904.5.3.2 The designer of record shall be a registered design professional. 
3904.5.4 Documentation for Equipment with No Listing. If the system used for extraction of oils and products from plant material is not listed, the system shall be reviewed by a registered design professional. The registered design professional shall review and consider any information provided by the system's designer or manufacturer. 
3904.5.4.1 Technical Report. For systems and equipment not listed for the specific use, a technical report in accordance with Sections 104.7.2 documenting the design or peer review of the equipment shall be prepared and submitted to the fire code official for review and approval. The firm or individual preparing the technical report shall be approved by the fire code official prior to performing the analysis. 
3904.5.4.1.1 Technical Report Content. The technical report shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  Manufacturer information. 
(2)  Preparer of record of the technical report. 
(3)  Date of review and report revision history. 
(4)  Signature page, including all of the following: 
(4.1)  Author of the report. 
(4.2)  Date of the report. 
(4.3)  Date and signature of the registered design professional of record performing the design or peer review. 
(5)  Model number of the item evaluated. If the equipment is provided with a serial number, the serial number shall be included for verification at the time of site inspection. 
(6)  Methodology of the design or peer review process used to determine minimum safety requirements. Methodology shall consider the basis of design and shall include a code analysis and code path to demonstrate whether specific codes or standards are applicable. 
(7)  Equipment description. A list of every component and subassembly, such as fittings, hose, quick disconnects, gauges, site glass, gaskets, valves, pumps, vessels, containers and switches, of the system or equipment indicating the manufacturer, model number, material and solvent compatibility. Manufacturer's data sheets shall be provided. 
(8)  A general flow schematic or general process flow diagram of the process. Post-processing or winterization shall be included in this diagram. Primary components of the process equipment shall be identified and match the equipment list required in Item 7. Operating temperatures, pressures and solvent state of matter shall be identified in each primary step or component. A piping and instrumentation diagram (PID or P&ID) shall be provided. 
(9)  Analysis of the vessel(s) if pressurized beyond standard atmospheric pressure. Analysis shall include purchased and fabricated components. 
(10)  Structural analysis for the frame system supporting the equipment. 
(11)  Process safety analysis of the extraction system, from the introduction of raw product to the end of the extraction process. 
(12)  Comprehensive process hazard analysis considering failure modes and points of failure throughout the process. The process hazard analysis shall include a review of emergency procedure information provided by the manufacturer of the equipment or process and not that of the facility, building or room. 
(13)  Review of the assembly instructions, operational and maintenance manuals provided by the manufacturer. 
(14)  List of references used in the analysis. 
3904.5.5 Change of Extraction Medium. 
3904.5.5.1 Where the medium or solvent is changed from the material indicated in the technical report or as required by the manufacturer, the technical report shall be revised at the cost of the facility owner and submitted for review and approval by the fire code official prior to the use of the equipment with the new medium or solvent. 
3904.5.5.2 If the original designer of record is not available, then the new designer of record shall comply with 3904.5.3.1. 
3904.5.6 Equipment and Field Verification. 
3904.5.6.1 Prior to operation of the extraction equipment, the designer of record for the equipment shall inspect the site of the extraction process once equipment has been installed for compliance with the technical report and the building analysis. 
3904.5.6.2 The designer of record performing the field verification shall provide a report of findings and observations of the site inspection to the fire code official for review and approval prior to the approval of the extraction process. 
3904.5.6.3 The field inspection report authored by the designer of record shall include the serial number of the equipment used in the process and shall confirm the equipment installed is the same model and type of equipment identified in the technical report. 
3904.5.7 Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) Extraction. 
3904.5.7.1 General Marihuana extraction facilities using liquefied petroleum gas solvents shall comply with 3904 and 3904.5.7. 
3904.5.7.2 Exhaust. 
3904.5.7.2.1 An approved exhaust system shall be provided for LPG extractions. 
3904.5.7.2.2 The exhaust systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the mechanical code. 
3904.5.7.2.3 All LPG extraction operations, including processes for off-gassing spent plant material and oil retrieval, shall be conducted within a chemical fume hood or enclosure in compliance with the mechanical code. 
3904.5.7.2.3.1 Liquefied petroleum gases shall not be released to the atmosphere except where released in accordance with Section 7.3 of NFPA 58. 
3904.5.7.3 Electrical 
3904.5.7.3.1 All conductive equipment and conductive objects within the exhaust room shall be bonded and grounded with a resistance of less than 1.0 x 10 6 ohms in accordance with NFPA 70. 
3904.5.7.3.2 The area within a hood or enclosure used for LPG extractions shall be classified as a Class I, Division 1 hazardous location in accordance with NFPA 70. 
3904.5.7.3.3 Areas adjacent to Class I, Division 1 locations shall be classified in accordance with NFPA 70. 
3904.5.7.3.4 All electrical components within the extraction room shall be interlocked with the hazardous exhaust system such that room lighting and other extraction room electrical equipment will only operate when the exhaust system is in operation. 
3904.5.7.3.5 An automatic emergency power system shall be provided for the following items, when installed: 
(1)  Extraction room lighting. 
(2)  Extraction room ventilation system. 
(3)  Solvent gas detection system. 
3904.5.7.4 Extraction Room Gas Detection System. 
3904.5.7.4.1 An approved continuous gas detection system shall be provided. 
3904.5.7.4.2 The gas detection system shall alert the extraction operator in an approved manner at a gas detection threshold no greater than 25 percent of the gas lower explosive limit/lower flammability limit (LEL/LFL). 
3904.5.7.4.3 Gas detection systems shall be provided with constant noninterlocked power. 
3904.5.7.4.4 Gas detection system control units shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL864 or UL 2017. Gas detectors shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2075 for use with the gases and vapors being detected. 
3904.5.7.4.5 Operation. Activation of the gas detection system shall result in all of the following: 
(1)  Initiation of distinct audible and visual alarm signals in the extraction room. 
(2)  Deactivation of all heating systems located in the extraction room. 
(3)  Activation of the mechanical ventilation system, where the system is interlocked with gas detection. 
3904.5.7.4.6 Failure of the Gas Detection System. Failure of the gas detection system shall result in the deactivation of the heating system, activation of the mechanical ventilation system where the system is interlocked with the gas detection system, and initiation of a trouble signal to sound in an approved location. 
3904.5.7.4.7 Interlocks. Electrical components within the extraction room shall be interlocked with the gas detection system. Activation of the gas detection system shall disable all light switches and electrical outlets. 
3904.5.7.5 Emergency Shutoff. Extraction processes utilizing gaseous hydrocarbon-based solvents shall be provided with emergency shutoff systems in accordance with Section 5803.1.3. 
3904.5.7.6 Protection. An automatic suppression system shall be provided within hoods or enclosures, including ductwork, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  An automatic water sprinkler system that meets all applicable requirements of NFPA 13. 
(2)  A carbon dioxide extinguishing system that meets all applicable requirements of NFPA 12. 
(3)  A dry chemical extinguishing system that meets all applicable requirements of NFPA 17. 
(4)  A gaseous agent extinguishing system that meets all applicable requirements of NFPA 2001. 
3904.5.7.7 Storage LPG containers not in use shall not be stored within extraction rooms. 
3904.5.7.8 Facility Piping Systems LPG liquid piping systems shall be in compliance with NFPA 58. 
3904.5.8 Flammable and Combustible Liquid Extraction . 
3904.5.8.1 General Marihuana extraction facilities using flammable and combustible liquid solvents shall comply with 3904 and 3904.5.8. 
3904.5.8.2 Exhaust . 
3904.5.8.2.1 Extraction and post oil processing operations, including dispensing of flammable liquids between containers, shall be performed in one of the following locations: 
(1)  A chemical fume hood in accordance with Chapter 7 of NFPA 45. 
3904.5.8.2.2 Unheated processes at atmospheric pressure using less than 16 ounces of flammable liquids shall not be required to comply with 3904.5.8.2.1. 
3904.5.8.2.3 Classified electrical systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 70. 
3904.5.8.2.4 All electrical components within the chemical fume hood or exhausted enclosure shall be interlocked such that the exhaust system shall be in operation for lighting and components to be used. 
3904.5.8.3 Storage and Handling. The storage and handling of flammable liquids shall be in compliance with this chapter and chapter 57 of this code. 
3904.5.8.4 Heating of flammable or combustible liquids over an open flame is prohibited. 
3904.5.9 Carbon Dioxide Extraction . 
3904.5.9.1 General. Marihuana extraction facilities using carbon dioxide solvents shall comply with 3904 and 3904.5.7.4. 
3904.5.9.2 Storage and Handling. All carbon dioxide compressed gas cylinders shall be secured to a fixed object to prevent falling. 
3904.5.9.3 Carbon Dioxide Gas Detection. 
3904.5.9.3.1 An approved, listed carbon dioxide detector shall be installed in the carbon dioxide extraction room. 
3904.5.9.3.2 Auto calibrating and self-zeroing devices or detectors are prohibited. 
3904.5.9.3.3 The detector shall be set to alarm at 5,000 ppm of carbon dioxide. 
3904.5.9.3.4 Carbon Dioxide Discharges. The extraction equipment pressure relief devices and blow-off valves shall be piped to the exterior of the building. 
3905 Transfilling. Filling LPG extraction equipment supply containers shall be in compliance with 6104.3, 6106, and NFPA 58. 
5003.2.4 Installation of tanks. Installation of tanks shall be in accordance with Sections 5003.2.4.1 through 5003.2.4.2.1 and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended (R 29.5101 through R 29.5516), or their equivalent. 
5003.5.1 Markings. Individual containers, cartons or packages shall be conspicuously marked or labeled in an approved manner. Containers, cartons and packages shall be identified on at least one side. The side marked shall be clearly visible when stored. Rooms or cabinets containing compressed gases shall be conspicuously labeled: COMPRESSED GAS. 
5103.2 Identification. Cartons shall be identified on at least one side with the classification level of the aerosol products contained within the carton as follows: 
LEVEL _______ AEROSOLS 
The side of the carton marked shall be clearly visible when stored. 
5601.1.1 Explosive material standard. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, NFPA 495 and the Michigan Explosives Law 1970 PA 202, as amended, or its equivalent, shall govern the manufacture, transportation, storage, sale, handling and use of explosive materials. 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited unless in compliance with this Chapter, the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, 2011 PA 256, as amended, or its equivalent, and NFPA 1124. To the extent that any provision of Chapter 56 is preempted by Section 7 of the Fireworks Safety Act, 2011 PA 256, as amended, such provision shall not be enforceable. 
Exceptions: 
The following exceptions apply unless such exceptions are pre-empted by the Fireworks Safety Act, 2011 PA 256: 
1.  Storage and handling of fireworks as permitted in Section 5604. 
2.  Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as permitted in Section 5605. 
3.  The use of fireworks for fireworks display as permitted in Section 5608. 
4.  The possession, storage, sale, handling and use of specific types of Division 1.4G fireworks where allowed by applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, provided such fireworks and facilities comply with NFPA 1124, CPSC 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, and DOTn 49 CFR, Parts 100-185, for consumer fireworks. 
5601.1.4 Rocketry. The storage, handling and use of model and high-power rockets shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 1122, NFPA 1125, and NFPA 1127, and the Michigan Model Rocket Law 1965 PA 333, as amended, or its equivalent. 
5601.2.4 Insurance for public display. Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant for a public display shall furnish the City, in a form satisfactory to the fire code official, evidence of the applicant's insurability including, without limitation, a minimum of $2,000,000 personal liability and property damage coverage, workers' compensation and company medical insurance for operator(s). The City, its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds under such policies. 
5608.1 General. The display of fireworks, including proximate audience displays and pyrotechnic special effects in motion picture, television, theatrical, and group entertainment productions, shall comply with this chapter and NFPA 1123 or NFPA 1126. Public displays shall be handled by an approved competent operator, and the fireworks shall be arranged, located, discharged and fired in a manner that will not be a hazard to property or endanger any person. 
5701.3 Referenced documents. The applicable requirements of Chapter 50, other chapters of this code, the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Mechanical Code pertaining to flammable liquids, the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalents shall apply. 
5701.4 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7 of this code, and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, or its equivalent. 
5704.2.9 Above-ground tanks. Above-ground storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 5704.2 and Sections 5704.2.9.1 through 5704.2.9.7.9, the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalents. 
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited except as allowed in the City Zoning Ordinance. 
5704.2.11 Underground tanks. Underground storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 5704.2 and Sections 5704.2.11.1 through 5704.2.11.4.2, and the Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules, Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, and Part 211, Underground Storage Tank Regulations, 1994 PA 451 Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, as amended, or their equivalents. 
5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited except as allowed in the City Zoning Ordinance. 
5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited except as allowed in the City Zoning Ordinance. 
6101.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7 and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207 as amended, or its equivalent. 
Distributors shall not fill an LP-gas container for which a permit is required unless a permit for installation has been issued for that location by the fire code official. 
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited except as permitted under the City Zoning Ordinance. Where the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is permitted by the City Zoning Ordinance, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L). 
Exception: In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be determined by the fire code official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed LP-gas containers, degree of fire protection to be provided, and capabilities of the local fire department. 
6108.1 General. Fire protection shall be provided for installations having LP-gas storage containers with a water capacity of more than 4,000 gallons (15 140 L), as required by NFPA 58. 
CHAPTER 80 
REFERENCED STANDARDS 
This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title, and the section or sections of this document that reference the standard except that NFPA standards shall reference the applicable sections of the current edition. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section 102.7. 
The following shall be added to those items that are referenced in Chapter 80: 
MI 
State of Michigan Laws, Rules, or Requirements including but not limited to the following, with amendments, or their equivalents: 
Michigan Electrical Code ..... R408.30801 to R408.30880 of the Michigan 
 Administrative Code 
Michigan Fire Prevention Code, 1941 PA 207 
Michigan Explosives Law, 1970 PA 202 
Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, 2011 PA 256 
Michigan Mechanical Code ..... R408.30901 to R408.30998a of the Michigan 
 Administrative Code 
Michigan Model Rocket Law, 1965 PA 333 
Michigan Plumbing Code ..... R408.30701 to R408.30796 of the Michigan Administrative Code 
Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451 
Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, 1992 
Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules, 1999 
Michigan Uniform Energy Code ..... R408.31061 to R408.31099 of the Michigan 
 Administrative Code 
Michigan Elevator Code ..... R408.7001 to R408.8695 of the Michigan 
 Administrative Code 
Michigan Boiler Code ..... R408.4001 to R408.5507 of the Michigan 
 Administrative Code 
NFPA 
33-11 Standard for Spray Application Using Flammable or 
  Combustible Materials ..... 2404.3.2 
750-15 Standard on Water Mist Fire Protection Systems ..... 202, Table 901.6.1, 904.11.1.1 
96 Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of 
  Commercial Cooking Operations ..... 609.1 
ASME 
A13.1-2007 Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems ..... 3509.3, 3904.5.1.4(2), 5003.2.2.1, 5303.4.3, 5503.4.5, 5703.5.2 
B31.3-2012 Process Piping ..... 3904.5.1.5, 5003.2.2.2, Table 5703.6.2 
NFPA 
12 Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems ..... Table 901.6.1, 904.8, 904.12, 3904.5.7.6(2) 
13 Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems ..... 903.3.1.1, 903.3.2, 903.3.8.2, 903.3.8.5, 904.12, 905.3.4, 907.6.4, 914.3.2, 1019.3, 1103.4.8. 3201.1, 3204.2, Table 3206.2, 3206.4.1,3206.9, 3207.2, 3207.2.1, 3208.2.2, 3208.2.2.1, 3208.4, 3210.1, 3401.1, 3904.5.7.6(1), 5104.1, 5401.1.1, 5106.5.7, 5704.3.3.9, Table 5704.3.6.3(7), 5704.3.7.5.1, 5704.3.8.4 
17 Standard for Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems ..... Table 901.6.1, 904.6, 904.12, 3904.5.7.6(3) 
45 Standard on Fire Protection for Laboratories Using Chemicals ..... 3904.5.8.2.1(1) 
58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code ..... 603.4.2.1.1, 3904.5.2.3, 3904.5.7.2.3.1, 3904.5.7.8, 3905, 6101.1, 6103.1, 6103.2.1, 6103.2.1.2, 6103.2.1.7, 6103.2.2, 6104.1, 6104.3.2, 6104.4, 6105.2, 6106.2, 6106.3, 6107.2, 6107.4, 6108.1, 6108.2, 6109.11.2, 6111.3 
61 Standard for the Prevention of Fires and Dust Explosions in Agricultural and Food Processing Facilities ..... Table 2204.1, 3904.5.2.3 
70 National Electrical Code ..... 603.1.3, 603.1.7, 603.5.2, 604.1.2, 605.3, 605.4, 605.9, 605.11, 606.16, 610.6, 610.7, 904.3.1, 907.6.1, 909.12.2, 909.16.3, 910.4.6, 2006.3.4, 2104.2.3, 2108.2, Table 2204.1, 2301.5, 2305.4, 2308.8.1.2.4, 2309.2.3, 2309.6.1.2.4, 2311.3.1, 2403.2.1, 2403.2.1.1, 2403.2.1.4, 2403.2.5, 2404.6.1.2.2, 2404.9.4, 2504.5, 2603.2.1, 2606.4, 2703.7.1, 2703.7.2, 2703.7.3, 2803.4, 2904.1, 3103.12.6.1, 3104.15.7, 3304.7, 3506.4, 3904.5.2.2, 3904.5.7.3.1, 3904.5.7.3.2, 3904.5.7.3.3, 3904.5.8.2.3, 5003.7.3, 5003.8.7.1, 5003.9.4, 5303.7.6, 5303.8, 5303.16.11, 5303.16.14, 5503.6, 5503.6.2, 5703.1, Table 5703.1.1, 5703.1.3, 5704.2.8.12, 5704.2.8.17, 5706.2.8, 5803.1.5, 5803.1.5.1, 5807.1.10, 5906.5.5, 5906.5.6, 6109.15.1 
90A Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilation Systems ..... 3903.1.2 
701 Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films ..... 806.2, 807.4, 807.5.1.2, 2603.5, 3104.2, 3903.3.6 
704 Standard System for Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response ..... 606.7, 202, 3104.2, 3904.4.2, 3904.5.1.4(6), 3904.5.1.5, 5003.2.2.1, 5003.2.2.2, 5003.5, 5003.10.2, 5005.1.10, 5005.2.1.1, 5005.4.4, 5503.4.1, 5704.2.3.2 
2001 Standard on Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems ..... Table 901.6.1, 904.10, 3904.5.7.6(4) 
UL 
864-03 Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems-with revisions through August 2012 ..... 3904.5.7.4.4 
2017-08 General Purpose Signaling Devices and Systems-with revisions through May 2011 ..... 3904.5.7.4.4 
2075-2013 Standard for Gas and Vapor Detectors and Sensors ..... 3904.5.7.4.4 
(Code 2004,  22-104; Ord. No. 18-05,  4, 10-23-2005; Ord. No. 16-08,  3, 12-26-2008; Ord. No. 7-12,  3, 7-25-2012; Ord. No. 7-14,  3, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 5-17,  3, 6-20-2017, eff. 6-30-2017; Ord. No. 15-18,  1, 2, 11-2-2018) 
Sec. 22-105. - Separability. 
    Each section of this Code and every subsection of each section is separable and the holding of any section or part as void, ineffective, or unconstitutional for any cause, shall not affect any other section or part. 
(Code 2004,  22-105; Ord. No. 18-05,  5, 10-23-2005) 
Sec. 22-106. - Repeal of ord. 7-14. 
    Ordinance No. 7-14 is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 5-17,  4, 6-20-2017, eff. 6-30-2017) 
Sec. 22-107. - Adoption of National Fire Codes by reference; purpose. 
    Pursuant to section 3(k) of Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.3(k)), the city hereby adopts by reference the National Fire Codes (subscription service), with amendments and supplements, as adopted and promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion. 
(Code 2004,  22-107; Ord. No. 12-87,  22-107, 6-26-1987) 
Sec. 22-108. - Codes available for public use and inspection. 
    A complete copy of the National Fire Codes is available for public use and inspection at the office of the city Fire Prevention Bureau. 
(Code 2004,  22-108; Ord. No. 12-87,  22-108, 6-26-1987; Ord. No. 16-08,  4, 12-26-2008; Ord. No. 7-12,  5, 7-25-2012) 
Sec. 22-109. - References in code. 
    References in the National Fire Codes and amendments and supplements to "state" and "name of state" shall mean the State of Michigan; references to "municipal charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Kentwood; reference to "municipality" shall mean the City of Kentwood; and reference to "local ordinances" shall mean the ordinances of the City of Kentwood. 
(Code 2004,  22-109; Ord. No. 12-87,  22-109, 6-26-1987) 
Sec. 22-110. - Amendment to NFPA No. 58. 
    Section 1-5 of NFPA standard No. 58 shall not read as printed but shall read in full as follows: 
Notification of installations. A complete set of plans and specifications of a proposed installation or addition to a present installation shall be submitted to the City of Kentwood, Bureau of Fire Prevention, together with a map showing the legal description of the proposed location as to buildings, tanks and existing occupancies for a distance of 500 feet, before the installation is started. (See also 3-4.9.1g). 
(Code 2004,  22-110; Ord. No. 12-87,  22-110, 6-26-1987) 
Sec. 22-111. - Amendment to NFPA Nos. 30, 385 and 386. 
    NFPA No. 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code; and NFPA No. 385, Standard for Tank Vehicles for Flammable and Combustible Liquids; and NFPA No. 386, Standard for Portable Shipping Tanks for Flammable and Combustible Liquids; are hereby adopted with additions and amendments incorporated in the rules for the storage and transportation of flammable and combustible liquids promulgated by the state fire board effective on July 13, 1983. 
(Code 2004,  22-111; Ord. No. 12-87,  22-111, 6-26-1987) 
Sec. 22-112. - Compliance and appeal. 
    Should any ordinances or portions thereof of the city be in conflict with the National Fire Codes, the more stringent ordinance or portion thereof shall prevail. However, upon appeal to the fire chief, chief of building inspections and mayor, the requirements of the less restrictive code may be permitted, provided that plans have been submitted to the fire and building inspections departments for review prior to issuance of construction permits. Any variance thus approved shall be confirmed in writing by the appropriate fire and building officials and made a part of the permanent records of both departments. 
(Code 2004,  22-112; Ord. No. 12-87,  22-112, 6-26-1987) 
Secs. 22-113-22-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 22-141. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Guard against the occurrence of fires; 
(2)  Protect the property and lives of the citizens of the city against damages and accidents resulting from fires; 
(3)  Govern conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion; 
(4)  Establish a bureau of fire prevention and provide for the powers and duties of such bureau. 
(Code 2004,  22-141; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.003) 
Sec. 22-142. - Bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The bureau of fire prevention in the city fire department is established to enforce fire protection rules and regulations in the city. The bureau of fire prevention shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The chief of the bureau of fire prevention (fire marshal) shall be appointed by the fire chief, with the approval of the mayor. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department may detail to the bureau of fire prevention such members of the fire department as shall be necessary from time to time. 
(d)  Site plans and building specifications (plans) of all new construction and renovation shall be submitted to the bureau of fire prevention for approval before a building permit is issued, except in the case of single-family and two-family residences, in which case a plat plan review is required. Any requirements or conditions required by the city and the bureau of fire prevention in accordance with applicable codes previously adopted by the city shall become part of the building permit application and shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(e)  A certificate of occupancy and/or business license must be approved by the bureau of fire prevention before issuance by the city clerk to the applicant. 
(f)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually to the chief of the fire department and transmitted to the mayor and the city commission. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to this article which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 2004,  22-142; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.004) 
Sec. 22-143. - Fees and charges. 
    Any fees or charges provided for in this article shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  22-143; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.011) 
Sec. 22-144. - Modifications. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, provided that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 2004,  22-144; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.008) 
Sec. 22-145. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this article do not apply or that the true intent or meaning of this article has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision in writing within 15 days from the date of the decision appealed, in the following order: 
(1)  Fire chief; 
(2)  City commission committee of the whole; and 
(3)  City commission. 
(Code 2004,  22-145; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.009; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 22-146. - Liability for damages. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, controlling or installing any building material, device or equipment for damages to persons or property caused by a defect; nor shall the city, or any of its officers, agents, employees or subdivisions, assume responsibility for any damages to persons or property because of the enforcement or lack of enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  22-146; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.005) 
Secs. 22-147-22-152. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ordinance No. 7-12, with an effective date of July 25, 2012, repealed  22-147-22-152, which pertained to fire protection devices; fire hydrants; tampering with fire hydrants, fire extinguishers and fire apparatus; numbering buildings; fire lanes; construction sites and building construction; and derived from Comp Ords. of 1987,  40.006, 40.007. 
Sec. 22-153. - Obstructing and disobeying firefighters acting in line of duty. 
    Any person who shall knowingly or willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighter in the performance of his duties, or who shall, while within the vicinity of any fire, willfully disobey or disregard any order, directive, rule or regulation of the officer commanding any fire scene activity during or after such fire, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2004,  22-153; Comp. Ords. 1987,  40.007(F)) 
State Law reference- Obstructing or resisting firefighters, MCL 750.241. 
Secs. 22-154-22-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- This article pertaining to fire hydrant charges was deleted. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.251--25.258 and Code 2004,  22-191-22-198. 

Secs. 22-191-22-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ordinance No. 7-12, with an effective date of July 25, 2012, repealed art. 7,  22-231-22-236, which pertained to fire lock boxes and derived from Comp. Ords. of 1987,  40.101-40.106. 

Secs. 22-231-22-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ordinance No. 7-12, with an effective date of July 25, 2012, repealed art. 8,  22-271-22-274, which pertained to open burning and derived from Comp. Ords. of 1987,  35.182-35.185. 

Secs. 22-271-22-274. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Failure to obtain required license. 
    No person shall engage in any profession, trade, occupation or other activity for which a license is required by any federal law, state statute or city ordinance without first obtaining, and thereafter maintaining, such license. 
(Code 2004,  26-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(12)) 
Secs. 26-2-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BUSINESS LICENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 6-08, adopted March 4, 2008, amended art. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. 2 consisted of  26-31-26-46, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance No. 3-03, adopted April 1, 2003; and Ordinance No. 4-03, adopted April 1, 2003. 

Sec. 26-31. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that in order to protect the public's health, safety and welfare, and in order to enhance the provision of city services, it is necessary to license businesses, solicitors, and transient merchants operating in the city. Among other matters, the city finds that identifying and registering the nature and scope of businesses, solicitors, and transient merchants assists in the provision of city emergency services and public safety. 
(Code 2004,  26-31; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any trade, occupation, profession, work, commerce, enterprise, establishment or activity, together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein, which is conducted, owned, or operated within the city for private profit or benefit, and any noncommercial organization engaged in actively soliciting funds or donations. The term "business" shall not mean a "home occupation," as that use is defined and regulated pursuant to appendix A, zoning, to this Code. 
    City license officer and license officer mean the city clerk or his designee. 
    Insignia means any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker, or any other kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with any license. 
    License and licensee shall include, respectively, the terms "permit" and "permittee" or the holder for any use or period of time of a similar privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this article or other law or ordinance. 
    Person means individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations and any kind of personal representative in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. For purposes of this article, the term "person" does not include an individual under the age of 18 years. 
    Premises means all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. 
    Solicitor or canvasser means any person who travels from place to place, house to house, or street to street by foot or other means of conveyance, and offers for sale, takes orders or attempts to take orders for the commercial sale of any goods, property or service whatsoever for future delivery. "Solicitor" and "canvasser" does not include a person canvassing solely for the limited purpose of distributing religious, political, or other noncommercial information. 
    Transient merchant means any hawker, peddler, or transient vendor as herein defined: 
    Hawker means any person who offers goods, property or services for sale in the streets, highways, thoroughfares or public rights-of-way of the city by crying out, or by signals, music or other noise. 
    Peddler means any person who travels from place to place by foot or any other means of conveyance, for the purpose of displaying, selling, making sales, offering for sale or leasing with the option to buy, at retail, any goods, property or services. "Peddler" also means any person who, while on a public street or while in a public place, offers for sale, takes orders for or attempts to take orders for the retail sale of any goods, personal property or service whatsoever for future delivery. 
    Transient vendor means any person who sells, offers for sale, exhibits, displays, demonstrates or takes orders for the sale of any property or services from any stand, vending cart, or temporary structure. 
(Code 2004,  26-32; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-33. - License required; solicitors and canvassers; transient merchants. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall commence or engage in a business within the city without first obtaining a license pursuant to this article and without keeping such license current during any business operation or activity. 
(b)  Solicitors and canvassers. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall engage in business as a solicitor or canvasser within the city, or actively solicit funds or donations of any kind, by any means, without first obtaining a license or permit pursuant to this article and without keeping such license or permit current during any business operation or activity. 
(1)  No solicitor or canvasser, whether licensed pursuant to this article or not, shall barter, sell, or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise, or actively solicit funds on property against the wish or desire of the property owner, tenant, or occupant of such property, as expressed through a "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign, a sign displaying words of similar import, or any other means. This section applies to all solicitors, no matter what their purpose, including persons canvassing solely for the limited purpose of distributing religious, political, or other noncommercial information. 
(2)  Any solicitor who engages in business by traveling door to door or house to house may only so operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(c)  Transient merchants. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall engage in business as a transient merchant within the city without first obtaining a license pursuant to this article and without keeping such license current during any business operation or activity. 
(1)  No transient merchant, whether licensed pursuant to this article or not, shall use the streets, alleys, lanes or public places of the city for the transaction of business or service of customers or operate or maintain any stand, vehicle, store, or place of business on or near to any street, highway or public place in such a manner that the person's customers occupy or congregate within the limits of the street, lane, highway or public place. 
(2)  No transient merchant, whether licensed pursuant to this article or not, shall barter, sell, or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise, or actively solicit funds on property against the wish or desire of the property owner, tenant, or occupant of such property, as expressed through a "no solicitation" or "no trespassing" sign, a sign displaying words of similar import, or any other means. 
(3)  No transient merchant, whether licensed pursuant to this article or not, shall barter, sell, or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise within 500 feet of the entrance to any school building between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the days when school is in session or on the portion of a street abutting a public park. 
(4)  No person shall engage in business as a transient merchant on or within any street, alley or public place after having been requested to desist by any police officer of the city. 
(5)  Except as permitted by the city, no transient merchant shall, while in any public space, shout or cry out his goods or merchandise, blow any horns, ring any bell, broadcast or play any sound, or use any similar device to attract the attention of the public. 
(6)  A transient merchant may not offer food for sale within 100 feet of any restaurant, storefront, or establishment that sells the same type of food being offered for sale by the transient merchant. 
(d)  Violation of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Any person that violates any provision of subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall, with respect to each violation, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2004,  26-33; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-34. - License not transferable. 
    No license may be transferred by the licensee to any other person. Any transfer or attempt to transfer a license will result in the immediate revocation of the license without further action by the city. 
(Code 2004,  26-34; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-35. - License not required for delivery only. 
    A license is not required of any person for the simple delivery in the city of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from such person at his regular place of business outside the city, where no intent is shown to evade the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  26-35; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-36. - Separate license required for branch establishments. 
    A license shall be obtained, in the manner prescribed in this article, for each branch establishment or location of a business, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate business. 
(Code 2004,  26-36; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-37. - Permits issued to nonprofit enterprises actively soliciting funds or donations. 
    The city license officer shall issue permits, without the payment of any license fees or other charges, to any person or organization for the conduct or operation of a nonprofit enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when he finds that the applicant operates without private profit for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal, religious or other noncommercial purpose. Persons or organizations conducting or operating nonprofit enterprises are required to apply for and obtain a permit under this article only if such persons or organizations are actively soliciting funds or donations of any kind, by whatever means, as opposed to canvassing solely for the limited purpose of distributing religious, political or other noncommercial information. An applicant for a permit shall submit an application to the city license officer and, when operating under a permit, shall operate his enterprise in compliance with this article and all other applicable rules and regulations. 
(Code 2004,  26-37; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-38. - Duties of city license officer. 
    The city license officer shall collect all license fees, if any, shall issue licenses in the name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions of this article, and shall also: 
(1)  Rules. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary in the operation and enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to the administration of this article. 
(3)  Departmental review. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to appropriate city departments for review as to compliance by the applicant with all city laws which they have the duty of enforcing. 
(4)  Investigation. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license as prescribed in this article including, without limitation, requiring the applicant to establish authority to operate on private property. 
(5)  Examination. Examine such records of an applicant as deemed reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(6)  Notification. Notify an applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his application and, upon the refusal of a license or permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefore and deliver them to the applicant. 
(Code 2004,  26-38; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-39. - Qualifications of applicants for licenses. 
(a)  In general. The general standards set out in this section relative to the qualifications of every applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the city license officer: 
(b)  Compliance with zoning regulations. The applicant must comply with all zoning restrictions of the city as determined by city officials or employees; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply for purposes of this article only to a business in lawful operation as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or to a business applying for renewal of a valid license. 
(1)  The applicant's business shall not be illegal or violate any federal, state, county, or city statute, law, rule, regulation, or ordinance. 
(2)  If required by law, the applicant shall furnish with the application proof of a valid health permit issued by the county health department. 
(3)  The applicant must submit to a background investigation where requested by the city. As permitted by state law, the city may require fingerprinting for such background investigations. The city may charge the applicant the appropriate fee for the background investigations. 
(Code 2004,  26-39; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-40. - Procedure for issuance of license. 
(a)  Formal application required. Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city shall submit an application for such license to the city license officer. The application shall be: 
(1)  Submitted in writing upon forms approved by the city and provided by the city license officer. Such form shall include a sworn affidavit by the applicant and shall require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance with this article and of any other information which the city license officer shall find to be reasonably necessary for the fair administration of this article. 
(2)  Accompanied by a payment in full of the application fee established by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(b)  Initial license. In order to obtain a license as required by this article, an applicant shall submit an application not less than 30 days prior to the time the applicant wishes to begin conducting business. 
(c)  Issuance of receipts. Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time the application for the license is made, the city license officer shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance. Such receipt shall not be construed as the approval by the city license officer for the issuance of a license, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Renewal license procedure. An applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit an application for such license to the city license officer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. An application for renewal of a license shall be submitted not later than June 15 of each year. If an applicant fails to file its application for renewal on or before June 15, the city license officer shall not be required to approve or disapprove the license before the expiration of the current license. 
(e)  Nonapproval of license. The license officer shall, upon disapproving any application submitted under the provisions of this article, advise the applicant, in writing, of the denial and the basis for the same including, without limitation, the results of any background check. 
(f)  Compliance with article pending legal action. When the issuance of a license is denied and an action is instituted by the applicant to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the business for which the license was refused unless and until a license be issued pursuant to a judgment ordering the same. 
(g)  Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the license officer in the denial of an application for a license as provided in this article, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a license as provided in section 26-45(c), shall have the right of appeal to the city ordinance committee. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the city license officer, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city ordinance committee shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in section 26-45(c). The decision and order of the city ordinance committee on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(h)  Conditions of approval. Any license issued by the city shall, as a condition to its issuance, be subject to all terms and conditions contained in this article. 
(Code 2004,  26-40; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-41. - Fees. 
    Fees for applications for a business license pursuant to this article shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  26-41; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-42. - Duties of licensee. 
(a)  General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this article must comply with the following general standards of conduct. Failure to comply with such standards shall result in revocation of a license. 
(1)  Permit and cooperate with the reasonable inspection of the business by public authorities so authorized by law. 
(2)  Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws, codes, regulations, and ordinances applicable to such licensed business, including obtaining and maintaining any other licenses required by city ordinance, state law, or federal law. 
(3)  Avoid all forbidden, improper, or unnecessary practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(4)  Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after expiration of a license or during the period a license is revoked or suspended. 
(5)  Refrain from transferring or assigning a license to any other person. 
(6)  Comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(b)  Display of license and insignia. Every licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article upon his person at all times when engaged in the activity for which the license was granted. Where such licensed activity for which the license was issued occurs in a fixed place or establishment, the license shall be exhibited at all times in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. Every licensee shall produce the license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any other city official or employee. 
(2)  Not allow any license, special permit, or insignia to remain posted, displayed, or used after the period for which it was issued has expired, or when it has been suspended or revoked, or for any other reason has become ineffective. The licensee shall promptly return such inoperative license, permit, or insignia to the license officer. 
(3)  Not loan, sell, give, or assign, to any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage, or remove, or to have in his possession, except as authorized by the license officer or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued to such licensee. 
(Code 2004,  26-42; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-43. - Agents responsible for compliance. 
    The agents or other representatives of licensees who are doing business in this city shall be personally responsible for the compliance with this article by their principals and by the businesses they represent. 
(Code 2004,  26-43; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-44. - Term, expiration date of licenses. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be annual licenses and shall be valid from date of issuance to the following June 30 (unless earlier revoked). Licenses issued pursuant to other city ordinances shall expire as provided by such ordinances. 
(Code 2004,  26-44; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-45. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspections. The following persons are authorized to conduct inspections in the manner prescribed in this section: 
(1)  City license officer. The city license officer shall make all investigations reasonably necessary for enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Officials having duties. The city license officer shall have the authority to request the inspection of licensees, their businesses and premises, by all city officials or employees having duties to perform with reference to such licensees or businesses. 
(3)  Police officers. All police officers may inspect and examine businesses licensed pursuant to this article to enforce compliance with this article. 
(4)  Code officials. All code officials, including, but not limited to, members of the fire department, may inspect and examine businesses licensed pursuant to this article to enforce compliance with city codes or this article. 
(b)  Authority of inspectors. A condition of any license or permit is that all persons authorized to inspect licensees and businesses pursuant to this article may enter, with or without search warrant, during business hours and at other reasonable times, the following premises: 
(1)  Those for which a license has been applied but not finally issued. 
(2)  Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of inspection, are operating under a license. 
(3)  Those for which a license is required in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Revocation of license. When a person fails to comply with the standards of conduct or any other requirement of this article, engages in actions contrary to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, engages in unauthorized business or business that is beyond the scope of the license granted, or in violation of any other law or ordinance, the license officer shall issue an order to comply; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall limit the rights of the city to otherwise enforce its ordinances to the extent permitted by law. Such order, and all other notices issued in compliance with this article, shall be in writing and shall apprise the person affected of the nature of the violations. A copy of such order shall be affixed to some structure on the premises and shall be deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the person affected, which action shall constitute proper service. 
(1)  Period for compliance. The order shall require compliance within a reasonable time identified in the order following service on the affected person. 
(2)  Hearing. Upon written appeal by the person affected, received before the expiration of the period for compliance, the city license officer shall order a hearing consistent with section 26-40(g). Notice of such a hearing shall be given to the affected person in the manner prescribed for the original order of compliance. 
(3)  Modifying authority of license officer. Upon written request on his own motion, the license officer shall have the authority, for good cause shown, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date, and to change, modify or rescind any recommendation or order. 
(4)  Final order. Upon the failure or refusal of a violator to comply with the provisional order or with order made after hearing, the license officer shall declare and make the order of compliance final. 
a.  Authority of license officer. The license officer shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to this article upon making or declaring an order of compliance final. 
b.  Effect of revocation or suspension. Upon revocation or suspension of a license, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and he shall immediately cease all business at all places for which the license was issued. 
(5)  Summary action. When the conduct of any licensee, agent, or employee is so inimical to the public health, safety, and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and give rise to an emergency, the license officer shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the close of premises or to suspend or revoke the license. Unless waived in writing, within seven days after he has acted summarily, the license officer shall conduct a hearing for such action in respect to the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice of such hearing shall be given the affected person by personal service and in the manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(6)  Right to appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the license officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the city commission committee of the whole by filing a written appeal as provided in section 26-40(g) within ten business days after receipt of notice of such decision. 
(Code 2004,  26-45; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-46. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Violation. Unless otherwise specified in this article, a person who violates a provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Other relief. In addition to the remedies and penalties otherwise provided in this article, the city may seek temporary and permanent equitable relief to abate and enjoin violations of this article and shall have all other remedies provided by law or equity. 
(Code 2004,  26-46; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-47. - Exempt persons. 
    The following persons shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article, but shall be subject to the other provisions hereof: 
(a)  Noncommercial. Any person offering to sell goods or products on behalf of, churches or other organizations involving religious worship or observance, public or private schools, youth organizations, or other noncommercial entities; provided, however, that any such church, school, youth organization, or noncommercial entity shall be recognized as a tax-exempt charitable, educational, or religious organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code or as defined under Michigan General Property Tax Act, being Public Act 206 of 1893, as amended. 
(b)  Salespersons. Any permanently employed and bonded route salespersons that solicit orders from and distribute goods to regular customers on established routes. 
(c)  Otherwise exempt. Any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this article by virtue of state or federal law. 
(Code 2004,  26-47; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-48. - Special events license. 
    A nonprofit, religious, cultural, charitable or educational organization sponsoring a special event with a duration not to exceed two days may obtain a special event license which shall excuse such vendors conducting business at the special event from obtaining a license as otherwise required by this article. A special event license shall be issued only under the following conditions: 
(a)  Organization sponsor. The special event license shall apply only to those transient merchants conducting business at the special event under the auspices of, and with the permission of, the organization obtaining the special event license. 
(b)  Maintenance of record. The organization sponsoring the special event shall maintain a record containing the name, address, e-mail address, telephone number and date of birth of each transient merchant operating under its auspices at the special event. This record shall be displayed to any law enforcement officer or any representative of the city upon request. 
(c)  Single location. A special event license shall be issued only for a single location. 
(d)  Other laws. The organization sponsoring the special event and all transient merchants conducting business at the special event shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this Code and all provisions of any other applicable ordinance, law, rule or regulation. 
(e)  Written application. Applicants for a special event license must file a written application with the city clerk on a form furnished by the city clerk. 
(f)  Revocation. A special event license shall not be transferable and may be revoked at any time for failure to comply with the provisions of this Code or any of the conditions set forth in the license. 
(Code 2004,  26-48; Ord. No. 6-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Sec. 26-49. - Commercial snow plowers license. 
(a)  Commercial snow plowers are required to obtain a snow plow license for each vehicle used to move snow within the city except: dump trucks and front end loaders. 
(b)  All owners of such vehicles must provide a copy of current vehicle registration and proof of insurance of contractor's motor vehicle bodily injury and property damage insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 per person, $300,000.00 per accident, bodily injury, including accidental death: $100,000.00 per occurrence, property damage with fees for each vehicle pursuant to this article set by city commission resolution from time to time. 
Secs. 26-50-26-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 26-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, restaurant or other establishment which regularly features or displays: 
(1)  Live performances predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any specified sexual activity; or 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area. 
    Adult merchandise store means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade merchandise which is predominantly distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar establishment that offers: 
(1)  Accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television (as distinguished from commercial cable services) transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  A sleeping room for rent, or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room, for a period of time that is less than ten hours, if the rental of such room accounts for more than ten percent of the establishment's gross revenues. 
    Adult-oriented business means a business or commercial establishment engaging in one or more of the following enterprises: 
(1)  Adult cabaret; 
(2)  Adult merchandise store; 
(3)  Adult motel; 
(4)  Adult theater; 
(5)  Escort agency; 
(6)  Nude model studio; or 
(7)  Sexual encounter center. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly features live performances predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of any specified anatomical area or by any specified sexual activity or which regularly or primarily shows films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, other photographic reproductions or visual media predominantly characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area. This definition includes, without limitation, establishments which offer individual viewing booths. 
    Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration and regardless of who pays the consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or entity which furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration. An escort agency is deemed to be operated in the location where: 
(1)  A request for an escort is received; or 
(2)  The escort and the person requesting the escort are together. 
    Material means anything tangible, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound or in any other manner, including, but not limited to, anything printed or written, any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, picture, drawing, pictorial representation, motion picture, photograph, videotape, videodisk, film, transparency, slide, audiotape, audiodisk, computer tape, holographic image or any other medium used to electronically produce or reproduce images, or any mechanical, chemical or electronic reproduction. Such term includes undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and other latent representational objects, whether or not processing or other acts are required to make the content of the material apparent. This definition is intended to include material which is the product of any technology, whether that technology is available on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or becomes available after that date. 
    Merchandise means material and novelties. 
    Novelty means any instrument, device or paraphernalia which depicts or describes any specific anatomical area or any specific sexual act, or which is designed for use, or commonly used, in connection with specific sexual activities, excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person displays any specified anatomical area as provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by any other person who pays money or any form of consideration. 
    Sexual encounter center means an establishment, except that which is part of the practice, and under the supervision and control, of a physician, psychologist or psychiatrist, licensed to practice in the state, that offers: 
(1)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons exposes or displays any specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  The matching and/or exchanging of persons for any specified sexual activities. 
    Specified anatomical area means any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, anus or female breast at or below the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast; 
(2)  A sex act, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections (1), (2) or (3) of this definition. 
(Code 2004,  26-331; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.871) 
Sec. 26-332. - Permitting or aiding or abetting violations. 
    The following shall be a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Permitting, allowing, encouraging or promoting any violation of any provision of this article, including any owner, manager, employee, patron, customer, officer, partner or other person; or 
(2)  Aiding, assisting or abetting the violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 2004,  26-332; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.876) 
Sec. 26-333. - General requirements for adult-oriented businesses. 
    All adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No person under the age of 18 years shall enter or be on the premises of an adult-oriented business at any time the adult-oriented business is open, nor shall any owner, partner, performer, contractor or employee of an adult-oriented business sell or provide goods, merchandise or services to persons under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  The following shall not be visible or audible to a person outside the building in which an adult-oriented business is operated, whether through a window or doorway, or otherwise: 
a.  Any depiction or description in any material of any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area; 
b.  Any novelty; or 
c.  Any person engaging in any specified sexual activity or exposing any specified anatomical area. 
(3)  No adult-oriented business shall allow the consumption of alcohol on the premises of the business. 
(4)  No person or establishment shall operate an adult-oriented business: 
a.  Before 8:00 a.m. or after midnight, on Monday through Saturday; or 
b.  On any Sunday or legal holiday. 
(5)  No adult-oriented business shall engage in business unless each of the following are satisfied: 
a.  At least two employees, excluding entertainers, are on the premises of the business at all times the business is open; and 
b.  The business is equipped with operational security cameras which shall be used at all times the business is open. 
(6)  Any booth, room or cubicle located in any adult-oriented business, except an adult motel, used by patrons for the viewing of merchandise or any other entertainment must comply with all of the following requirements: 
a.  It must be unobstructed by any door, lock or other entrance and exit control device; 
b.  One side must be totally open to a public, lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times from the adjoining aisle of any occupant; 
c.  It must be illuminated so that a person of normal visual acuity looking into the booth, room or cubicle from the entrance adjoining the public lighted aisle can clearly determine the number of people within; and 
d.  There shall be no holes or openings in any side or rear wall not relating to utility, ventilation or temperature control services or otherwise required by any governmental code or authority. 
(7)  No sign or advertising for an adult-oriented business may include any photographs, silhouettes, drawings or other representations of any specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity. 
(8)  All adult-oriented businesses shall be open to inspection by the city's ordinance enforcement officer, building inspector, fire inspector, police officer, sheriff's deputy and state police trooper for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the establishment is occupied or open for business. 
(Code 2004,  26-333; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.872) 
Sec. 26-334. - Additional requirements for adult-oriented businesses offering live entertainment. 
(a)  Any adult-oriented business offering live entertainment shall provide all of the following: 
(1)  A dressing room for performers, with direct access between the dressing area and the performance area or stage so that the performer may enter the performance area or stage without entering the area from which patrons will view the performance; 
(2)  The access, performance area or stage and dressing room shall be handicapped accessible to the extent required by the Americans With Disabilities Act and the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act (MCL 37.2101 et seq.); 
(3)  All performances shall occur on a stage elevated at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the nearest employee or patron; and 
(4)  The dressing area for performers shall be separate and not freely accessible from areas of the business accessible to patrons, and the dressing area shall contain hot and cold running water and toilet facilities. 
(b)  There shall be no physical contact between any performer and any other performer or between any performer and any owner, independent contractor, employee, patron or other person during or for at least 15 minutes following such performance. The term "physical contact" includes, but is not limited to, any contact in which any part of the body or clothing of one person touches any part of the body or clothing of the other person, or if a person causes anything under that person's direct control to touch any part of the body or clothing of another person. 
(c)  Each escort agency shall maintain permanent records on the premises, showing the name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of every person for whom an escort is provided, the fee paid, the name of the escort provided, and the location where the escort and the person requesting the escort initially meet. The records shall be made available, upon demand, to any city official inspecting the premises pursuant to this article. 
(Code 2004,  26-334; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.873) 
Sec. 26-335. - Registration. 
    Each adult-oriented business shall register its existence with the city clerk and zoning administrator prior to commencing business, or, in the case of a business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, within 30 days after such effective date. The registration shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, residence address, e-mail address, business address and telephone number of the applicant and manager. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or similar business entity, the name, residence address and e-mail address of each of the officers, directors, managers and each of the owners, partners or shareholders owning ten percent interest or more, either directly or beneficially, shall also be provided. 
(2)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner of the building where the business will be conducted, and of the building manager, if different from the owner. 
(3)  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
(Code 2004,  26-335; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.874) 
Sec. 26-336. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Except on a stage or other area of performance as specified in section 26-334, no person within an adult-oriented business shall display any specified anatomical area to the view of any other person. 
(b)  No person shall engage in any specified sexual activity on the premises of an adult-oriented business. 
(Code 2004,  26-336; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.875) 
Secs. 26-337-26-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - MASSAGE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Massage therapy, MCL 333.17951 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-371. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adamitism means the practice of going naked, and the state of being unclothed. 
    Anilingus means erotic stimulation achieved by contact between the mouth or tongue and the anus. 
    Coprophilia means the use of feces for sexual excitement. 
    Cunnilingus means the stimulation of the vulva or clitoris with the lips or tongue. 
    Fellation means the practice of obtaining sexual gratification by oral stimulation of the penis. 
    Flagellation means an act or instance of obtaining sexual gratification by beating, flogging or scourging another or being the recipient of such action. 
    Frottage means masturbation by rubbing against another person. 
    Manager means each person who is responsible for the daily operation of a massage establishment. 
    Massage and practice of massage means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the human body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health and well-being of the client. Practice of massage includes complementary methods, including the external application of water, heat, cold, lubrication, salt scrubs, body wraps, or other topical preparations; and electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands. Practice of massage does not include medical diagnosis; practice of physical therapy; high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust to a joint; electrical stimulation; application of ultrasound; or prescription of medicines. 
    Massage establishment means a building, room, place or establishment where body massage is regularly practiced on the human body to club members or to the general public for a charge, but such term shall not include hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or offices of state licensed physicians, surgeons, osteopaths or chiropractors. 
    Masturbation means the erotic practice involving the genital organs commonly resulting in orgasm and achieved by manual or other bodily contact, exclusive of sexual intercourse, or by instrumental manipulation. 
    Massage therapist means a person who is compensated for the practice of massage but shall not include the professionals identified in section 26-372(1) through (4) when practicing their respective professions. 
    Sexual intercourse means carnal copulation of a male and female implying actual intercourse of the organs of the female. 
    Sodomy means penetration of the male organ into the anus of another person. 
    Urolagnia means sexual excitement associated with the urine or urination. 
(Code 2004,  26-371; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.761; Ord. No. 9-14,  1, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 26-372. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following persons while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Any medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine, doctor of chiropractic medicine, physical therapist, psychiatrist, psychologist, clinical social worker or family counselor who is licensed to practice his respective profession in the state, or who is permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an association or establishment duly licensed in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their nursing duties. 
(3)  A barber, manicurist, beautician or cosmetologist who is duly licensed under the laws of this state or another state within the United States, or the federal government, and who practices within the established limits of his license, and who administers a massage in the normal course of his duties; provided, however, that such barber, manicurist, beautician or cosmetologist shall perform a massage only upon the face, hands, feet or neck of another person, and performs the practice of massage for beautifying or cosmetic purposes only. 
(4)  Any athletic trainer who has been certified by the National Athletic Trainers Association or who is employed by one of the public schools or state approved nonpublic schools, as such terms are used in state law, and who is performing massage on the school premises. 
(5)  Massage therapists who meet the current requirements of the state in accordance with part 179A of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.17951 et seq.). 
(6)  Any establishment in which only the persons described in subsections (1)-(4) of this section exclusively practice their respective professions. 
(Code 2004,  26-372; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.752(D); Ord. No. 9-14,  2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 26-373. - Inspections. 
(a)  The premises of each massage establishment shall be open to inspection by the city at all reasonable times. 
(b)  A licensee shall not hinder, obstruct, resist or oppose such inspection by the city. 
(Code 2004,  26-373; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.767) 
Sec. 26-374. - Physical establishment standards. 
    Each massage establishment shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, except reception and administrative areas, shall be made of nonporous materials which may be readily disinfected. 
(2)  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linens, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. 
(3)  Closed containers shall be provided for soiled linens, towels and waste materials. 
(4)  Separate toilets, lavatory facilities and shower stalls shall be supplied for patrons and personnel of the establishment. Separate toilet facilities and shower stalls shall be provided for male and female patrons. Each area in which massage is practiced shall be equipped with a hand lavatory. No toilet, lavatory facility or shower stall may be used in conjunction with any other business and such toilets, lavatories and shower stalls shall be located so as to ensure privacy between the massage establishment and any other business or use. 
(5)  All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories and any other such accoutrements shall be regularly treated by disinfectants and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(6)  No part of the premises shall be used for, or connected with, any bedroom or sleeping quarters; nor shall any person sleep in a massage establishment, except for a limited period incidental, and directly related, to a massage or bath. No bed, water mattress, cot or equipment designed for sleeping shall be permitted on the premises. 
(7)  There shall be no locks on any interior door to any room in which any person engages in the practice of massage. 
(8)  No massage shall be performed in a massage establishment in a private room which is completely closed to the view of other persons. Each room in which any person will engage in the practice of massage shall have an unobstructed opening or window of a size not less than six inches by ten inches and which is located no less than four or more than six feet above the floor, from which the massage area of the room in which the massage is to be administered is clearly visible. 
(9)  All exterior doors and the door separating the waiting/reception area from the remainder of the premises shall remain unlocked during business hours. 
(10)  No massage establishment or any part of the premises shall be equipped with any electronic, mechanical or artificial device used, or capable of being used, for recording, videotaping or monitoring the activities, conversation or other sounds in a room used by customers. 
(Code 2004,  26-374; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.765) 
Sec. 26-375. - Sanitation standards. 
    Each massage establishment shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  A massage shall not be performed on any patron who is infected with any fungus or other skin infection; nor shall any service be performed on a patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions, or having any contagious or communicable disease unless a duly licensed physician has certified that such person may be safely served. 
(2)  All personnel shall wash their hands in hot water with soap before giving any service or treatment to each separate patron. 
(3)  All towels, tissues, sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly for each patron and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after use. 
(4)  Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after each use upon a patron. 
(5)  All employees shall at all times wear clean outer garments, the use of which is restricted to the massage establishment. The garments shall be opaque and shall cover the torso, legs, and sexual and genital parts of the employee's body. 
(6)  Employees shall not attend to a patron if the employee has any contagious or communicable disease. 
(7)  The sexual and genital areas of patrons and customers must be covered by towels, cloths or opaque garments at all times when in the presence of any massage therapist or employee of a massage establishment. 
(Code 2004,  26-375; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.766) 
Sec. 26-376. - Regulated and unlawful activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to offer, or massage therapist or any other employee to offer or engage in, adamitism, anilingus, cunnilingus, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, frottage, masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or any intentional stimulation of the sexual or genital parts of the human body. 
(b)  No alcoholic liquor, or controlled substance, as such term is defined by state law, shall be sold or otherwise provided to patrons or customers on the premises of any massage establishment, except for the sale of alcoholic liquors at massage establishments which have obtained a valid license pursuant to the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.). 
(c)  A massage therapist shall not practice massage upon a person who is visibly intoxicated by, or under the influence of, any liquor or controlled substance. 
(d)  A massage therapist shall not practice massage while intoxicated or under the influence of any liquor or controlled substance. 
(e)  A massage therapist shall not practice massage upon any person under the age of 18 years, except upon written order by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine or physical therapist, and such order shall be dated and in the possession of the massage therapist giving the massage or treatment. If the person under the age of 18 years is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this subsection shall not apply. Otherwise, no person under the age of 18 years shall enter or remain, nor shall any owner or operator allow such person to enter or remain, on the premises of a massage establishment at any time. 
(f)  Every massage establishment shall maintain permanent records on the premises showing the name, address, e-mail address, telephone number and signature of every person receiving massage services, the date and time of the massage, the type of massage services provided, the fee paid for such services, the name of the person providing the massage services, and must also indicate that such information was verified through the display of positive identification (i.e., indicate a driver's license was displayed to verify information provided). The record shall be made available, upon demand and without prior notice, to any city official inspecting the premises pursuant to section 26-373. 
(Code 2004,  26-376; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.768) 
Secs. 26-377-26-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 26-401. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall operate a massage establishment without first securing a license to do so from the city. 
(b)  No person shall employ as a massage therapist any person who does not meet the current requirements of the state in accordance with part 179A of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.17951 et seq.), as required by this division. 
(c)  No person shall engage in, advertise, solicit or offer to engage in the practice of massage or massage therapy for compensation without meeting the current requirements of the State of Michigan in accordance with part 179A of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.17951 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  26-401; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.762(A)-(C); Ord. No. 9-14,  3, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 26-402. - Massage establishments. 
(a)  An application to operate a massage establishment shall be made to the city clerk. The application shall be made under oath, stating that the information contained in the application is true and accurate and upon a form provided by the city clerk. Any false statement set forth in an application shall be a violation of this article and be cause for revocation of the license. The nonrefundable license fee must be paid and the license shall not be processed until the following information has been supplied: 
(1)  The names, residence addresses, e-mail addresses, business addresses and telephone numbers of each applicant and manager. If the applicant is a corporation, the names, residence addresses and e-mail addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and each shareholder owning ten percent interest or more in the corporation, either directly or beneficially, shall also be given. If the applicant is a partnership, the names, residence addresses and e-mail addresses of each general partner shall also be given. 
(2)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner of the building where the business will be conducted, and the name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the building manager, if different from the owner. 
(3)  The two previous addresses and telephone numbers immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and all managers. 
(4)  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
(5)  Written proof that the applicant, if an individual or partnership, and all managers are at least 18 years of age. 
(6)  A copy of identification from each manager and applicant, such as a driver's license, if an individual; partnership agreement and certificate, if a partnership; or certificate of good standing from the state, if a corporation. 
(7)  Two identical photographs and a set of fingerprints of each individual applicant, each manager, each general partner of a partnership applicant, and each officer and managing agent of a corporate applicant. All photographs and fingerprints shall be taken by the city police department or another governmental agency acceptable to the city police department. 
(8)  Business, occupation or employment of each applicant and manager for three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(9)  The business history of the applicant for the five years prior to the date of the application, including all individuals identified in subsection (a)(1) of this section, whether such applicant, including all individuals identified in subsection (a)(1) of this section, in previously operating in this or another city or state has had a business license denied, revoked or suspended, the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the denial, revocation or suspension. 
(10)  All criminal pleas or convictions of the individuals identified in subsection (a)(1) of this section, including the dates of each plea or conviction, nature of the crime and place convicted. 
(11)  The name and address of any other massage business owned or operated by any person identified in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(12)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. 
(13)  The name, address and e-mail address of each massage therapist and other employees who are or will be employed in the massage establishment. 
(14)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. 
(15)  Such other identification and information necessary to verify the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(16)  A certification by the city's building inspector that the physical standards for the establishment as set forth in section 26-374 and any other relevant standards of this article have been met. Prior to issuing such certification, the building inspector shall obtain prior approval of all appropriate city departments, including, but not limited to, the fire department and police department. 
(17)  The annual license fee for each massage establishment, which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(18)  The names, current addresses, e-mail addresses, telephone numbers and written statements of at least three permanent residents of the United States that the applicant, including all individuals identified in subsection (a)(1) of this section, is of good moral character. The term "good moral character" means the propensity on the part of an individual to serve the public in a fair, open and honest manner. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of the city, then the county, then the state and lastly from the rest of the United States. The references must be persons other than relatives. 
(b)  The applicant or holder of a license shall notify the city clerk in writing of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten days after such change occurs. 
(c)  The license granted under this section shall be for one year, beginning July 1 of each year. A license granted under this section is nontransferable. 
(d)  Each employee of an establishment licensed under this section shall be issued an identification card containing such information as the city shall specify thereon. Such card shall be carried by such employee at all times while such employee is on the licensed premises. 
(e)  Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, the license shall be void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage establishment. 
(f)  The owner and operator of a massage establishment shall display the license in a conspicuous place at all times so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
(g)  The owner and operator of a licensed massage establishment shall maintain a copy of this article on the premises for public inspection at all times during business hours. 
(Code 2004,  26-402; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.763) 
Sec. 26-403. - Repealed. 
Sec. 26-404. - Denial or revocation. 
(a)  Any application for a license under this division may be denied by the city clerk if there are any false statements set forth in the application and any license granted in this division may be revoked by the city commission for violation of any other provision of this article or any other city ordinance or state statute, or upon a determination that the continued operation under an existing license shall be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. Appeal of the denial of a license by the city clerk shall be made to the city commission. Except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, before the city commission revokes a license issued in this division or upon appeal from the denial of a license by the city clerk, the city commission shall cause a written notice to be sent by certified mail to the licensee or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license or application, informing such person of the right to a hearing, upon request. If the licensee does not request a hearing thereon within ten days of the date such notice was sent, the license may be forthwith revoked or the denial of the application affirmed. If the licensee requests a hearing before the city commission in regard to such proposed revocation or denial, such hearing shall be held within 21 days after the date of the written request. If the licensee or applicant is a massage establishment, the owner of the premises, according to the latest tax assessment roll, where such establishment is or plans to locate shall also be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail. 
(b)  Any license issued by the city may be immediately suspended by the mayor if the mayor determines that the licensee, or a person at or upon the licensed location, has violated any city ordinance or state law and that continued operation under the license is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. A licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any license suspension by the mayor. The mayor shall cause a written notice to be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the licensee, at the address stated in the license, informing the licensee of the suspension and the licensee's right to a hearing, upon request. If the licensee does not file a written request within ten days after receipt of the notice, the city commission may forthwith confirm such suspension, or revoke or reinstate the license. If the licensee requests a hearing before the city commission, the hearing shall be held within 21 days after the date of the written request. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the licensee by certified mail at the address stated in the license. If the licensee is a massage establishment, the owner of the licensed premises, according to the latest tax assessment roll, shall also be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail. 
(c)  Both the city and the licensee shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present evidence on the issue at the hearing. If a license is revoked under this section, the licensee, or a substantially similar or related licensee, shall not be granted a new license, nor shall a license be granted for the same premises for a period of three years from the date of revocation. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee for such license or permit shall not be refunded. The action taken by the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 2004,  26-404; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.769) 
Secs. 26-405-26-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - OPEN AIR BUSINESSES 

Sec. 26-431. - Definitions. 
    The following words terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Short-term open air business shall mean, Uses operated for a period of less than 61 days in a calendar year substantially in the open air or under a tent as an accessory use to an existing principal use conducted on the lot, including, and limited to: 
(1)  Outdoor display and sale of trees, flowers and homemade foods; or 
(2)  Items produced or sold by the existing principal use. 
(Code 2004,  26-431; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.602; Ord. No. 7-06,  1, 4-30-2006) 
Sec. 26-432. - Finding of public purpose. 
    The city commission finds it necessary to establish a procedure to regulate and control the operation of short-term open air businesses for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve the orderly operation of the commercially zoned areas. 
(Code 2004,  26-432; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.601) 
Sec. 26-433. - Districts where permitted. 
    The operation of any short-term open air business within the city shall be considered a permitted accessory use with the approval of the zoning administrator. The site plan review standards of the zoning ordinance shall be used to evaluate the short-term open air business. 
(Code 2004,  26-433; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.603; Ord. No. 7-06,  2, 4-30-2006) 
Sec. 26-434. - Written permission of owner required. 
    Short-term open air business operations require written permission from the owner of the lot, parcel or tract intended for the site of operations. Such written permission shall be upon a form approved by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 2004,  26-434; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.604) 
Sec. 26-435. - Deposit. 
    A deposit or bond as established by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be made to the city clerk to ensure that clean up of site is accomplished following the expiration of the sales permit. If the clean up is not completed in that time, the deposit is forfeited. 
(Code 2004,  26-435; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.605; Ord. No. 10-05,  1, 7-31-2005) 
Sec. 26-436. - Site plan review. 
    The applicant must submit a simple site plan sketch, to be approved by the zoning administrator, that conforms with applicable sections of the current zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code), as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 2004,  26-436; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.606) 
Sec. 26-437. - Signs. 
    Sign display is regulated by the section of the current zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code) dealing with the sign restrictions for the district involved. 
(Code 2004,  26-437; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.607) 
Sec. 26-438. - Period of operation. 
    The operation of the short-term open air business may be allowed by the zoning administrator for a period of not more that 30 consecutive days. All short-term sales operations must obtain approval from the zoning administrator and not more that two approvals may be allowed to a business or property within a 12-month period. 
(Code 2004,  26-438; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.608; Ord. No. 7-06,  3, 4-30-2006) 
Sec. 26-439. - Appeals. 
    Where it is alleged that there is an error or misinterpretation in any order, requirement, grant or refusal made by the zoning administrator, an appeal may be made by the applicant to the city commission to hear specific application of such action. The city commission, by a majority vote, may amend, change or modify such action so that it is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the requirements. 
(Code 2004,  26-439; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.609) 
Secs. 26-440-26-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - BODY ART FACILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Body art facilities, MCL 333.13101 et seq. 

Sec. 26-471. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out in this article, the provisions of part 131 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.13101 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  26-471-26-503; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.851, 21.855-21.859; Ord. No. 10-13,  1, 10-29-2013) 
Secs. 26-472-26-503. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - ENTERTAINMENT VENUES 

Sec. 26-504. - Purpose. 
    This article is intended to further the protection of public health, safety and welfare by requiring that certain entertainment venues be licensed to ensure that they are operated and maintained so that they cause no excessive demands upon public safety services, nor any risk of harm to the public health, safety, or welfare, or interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or parking, or give rise to any public nuisance, disorderly conduct or curfew violation either within the establishment or on or about the adjacent businesses and public streets, alleys, parks, parking facilities, and other areas open to the public. 
(Code 2004,  26-504; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-505. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City license officer or license officer has the meaning set forth in section 26-32. 
    Entertainment venue. Commercial premises which are open to the public, the primary function of which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in the following social activities: dancing or similar activity to music, the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers. As an incidental function, an entertainment venue may sell and serve food and non-alcoholic beverages to its patrons. The term "entertainment venue" does not include the following: 
(1)  Premises which serve alcoholic liquors as defined by state law; 
(2)  Theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; 
(3)  Full service restaurants where the only entertainment provided is incidental to the primary function of serving food; 
(4)  Outdoor performances; 
(5)  A banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited guests which is not otherwise open to the public; 
(6)  Dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit religious, charitable, benevolent, fraternal, or social organization; or 
(7)  Any adult-oriented establishment subject to article 3 of this chapter. 
    Person. The definition set forth in section 26-32 applies to this article. 
    Venue premises. Any place where an entertainment venue is operated or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and other adjacent portions of the premises which are accessible to or utilized by the public during operating hours. 
(Code 2004,  26-505; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-506. - Entertainment venue license required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own, lease, operate, manage or maintain an entertainment venue in the city without first obtaining an entertainment venue license from the city. The entertainment venue license is required in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other license, permit or approval required by law, including without limitation, a business license issued pursuant to article 2 of this chapter. For multiuse facilities which include an entertainment venue, a separate and additional license must be issued for the entertainment venue operation. A license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of a business. 
(Code 2004,  26-506; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-507. - License not transferable. 
    No license may be transferred by the licensee to any other person. Any transfer or attempt to transfer a license results in the immediate revocation of the license without further action by the city. 
(Code 2004,  26-507; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-508. - License application. 
(a)  An applicant for an entertainment venue license shall provide an operating plan that includes: 
(1)  A written statement setting forth all measures that will be undertaken to ensure that adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and outside the venue premises, will be maintained. The statement must provide the number and placement of security personnel, identify areas open to patrons and describe means of maintaining public access to all sidewalks, streets, parking areas, and rights-of-way in the vicinity of the venue premises. 
(2)  A statement of the schedule of operating hours and days. 
(3)  Building and site plans showing the venue premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and adequate plans for screening. 
(4)  A noise control plan, including any soundproofing required to meet the requirements of section 38-263 and chapter 38 of this Code. 
(5)  Plans for adequate ventilation and sanitation facilities consistent with all applicable codes. 
(b)  An applicant shall provide a written statement affirming whether the applicant, or the applicant's officers, directors, partners or any other person involved in the operation or management of the entertainment venue has been convicted within the preceding five years of any crimes involving firearms, gambling, racketeering, controlled substances, sexual offenses, prostitution, assault, or contributing to the delinquency of a minor. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit documentation of the applicant's interest in the venue premises, including, without limitation, a lease, deed, etc. If the applicant is not the owner of the venue premises, the owner's written consent to the application is required, and the owner shall be named as a co-applicant. 
(d)  The applicant shall agree and consent to the entrance and inspection of the venue premises by a member of the police or fire department, a building inspector or the city license officer. 
(e)  A completed application submitted on forms provided by the city license officer. 
(Code 2004,  26-508; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-509. - Fees. 
    Fees, including an inspection fee, for applications pursuant to this article shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  26-509; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-510. - Term, expiration of license. 
    All licenses issued under the terms of this article shall be annual licenses and shall be valid from date of issuance to the following June 30 (unless earlier revoked). Each license shall be reviewed annually with reports submitted by the police chief, the fire chief and the building inspector. After reviewing the reports and other application materials, the license officer shall renew or deny the license in the same manner, and subject to the same standards, as a new license. 
(Code 2004,  26-510; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-511. - Procedures for issuance or denial of license. 
    After receiving a complete application for an entertainment venue license, the city shall follow the following procedures: 
(1)  The city license officer shall forward copies of the application to appropriate city officials for their comments regarding compliance with regulations under their jurisdiction. The city license officer shall consider all materials and comments submitted and shall issue or deny the license within ten business days after the date on which a completed application was filed unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the time period in writing. 
(2)  An entertainment venue license shall be denied in writing by the city license officer for any one or more of the following grounds: 
a.  If the business premises do not comply with all applicable city ordinances and state laws; 
b.  If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material misrepresentation; 
c.  If the application does not show adequate measures for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in terms of traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and outside the premises as provided in section 26-508(a); 
d.  If the applicant or the applicant's officers, directors, partners or any other person involved in the operation or management of the entertainment venue has been convicted within the preceding five years of any crimes involving firearms, gambling, racketeering, controlled substances, sexual offenses, prostitution, assault, or contributing to the delinquency of a minor; or 
e.  If applicant fails to have an adequate interest in the venue premises in order to ensure compliance with the standards and requirements of this article. 
(3)  An interested person aggrieved by the action of the city license officer in the denial of an application for an entertainment venue license, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of such license, as provided for elsewhere in this article, shall have the right of appeal to the city commission committee of the whole. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the city license officer, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city commission committee of the whole shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of the appeal shall be affixed to some structure on the premise and deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the applicant. 
(Code 2004,  26-511; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-512. - Operating rules and regulations. 
    The following operating rules and regulations shall apply to all entertainment venues in the city: 
(1)  The regulations and licensing requirements applicable to all businesses in the city shall apply to entertainment venues. 
(2)  No entertainment venue shall be open to the public after 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(3)  It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ an adequate number of qualified security personnel during all operating hours to maintain peace and order and to ensure compliance with all applicable laws. 
(4)  The licensee shall not assist, aid, abet, permit or encourage any underage person to violate the curfews provided in section 38-392. 
(5)  The licensee shall ensure that public rest room facilities are kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(6)  The licensee shall ensure that all doors and windows which may direct sound to adjacent properties shall remain closed during hours of operation. 
(7)  No outdoor music or amplification is permitted. 
(8)  Dancing is only permitted in a well-marked area free of tables, chairs or other obstacles. 
(9)  No overcrowding on dance floors is permitted. 
(10)  Smoking or drinking on the dance floor is prohibited. 
(11)  Intoxicated persons are not permitted on the venue premises, and the illegal possession or use of any alcoholic liquors or controlled substances on the venue premises is prohibited. 
(12)  The entertainment venue shall be operated in a manner that does not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or create or maintain any unlawful conduct, either on the venue premises or on or about the adjacent businesses, public right-of-way, parking facilities and other areas open to the public. 
(13)  The licensee shall secure and maintain in force, at its own expense, comprehensive general liability insurance. This insurance shall be written in comprehensive occurrence form and shall protect the licensee against all claims for personal and bodily injuries to members of the public, damage to public premises and equipment, property of others, and completed operations arising from any act or omission of licensee, its officers, employees, agents, representatives and invitees. The liability limits shall not be less than: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/$2,000,000.00 general aggregate; and $2,000,000.00 aggregate for completed operations. 
(Code 2004,  26-512; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-513. - Closing of entertainment venue. 
(a)  An entertainment venue may be ordered to close as follows: 
(1)  Any police officer is authorized to order the entertainment venue be immediately vacated whenever a violation of this article or any unlawful conduct or condition exists at any entertainment venue, including any conduct or condition that is likely to become a public nuisance. 
(2)  Any fire department, officer or employee, shall have the authority to order any entertainment venue be immediately vacated if any fire law, regulation or ordinance is not complied with. Failure to promptly correct the conduct or condition causing the vacation shall be grounds to revoke the license. 
(3)  When the conduct of the licensee is so inimical to the public health, safety, and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and give rise to any emergency, the license officer shall have the authority to summarily order closure of the entertainment venue. 
(b)  When an entertainment venue is closed in accordance with this section, the license officer shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business or to suspend or revoke the license. Unless waived in writing, within seven days after he has acted summarily, the license officer shall conduct a hearing for such action in respect to the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice of such hearing shall be given the affected person by personal service and in the manner provided in section 26-514. 
(Code 2004,  26-513; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-514. - Revocation of license. 
    When a person fails to comply with the regulations, standards or any other requirement of this article, engages in actions contrary to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, engages in unauthorized business or business that is beyond the scope of the license granted, is in violation of any other law or ordinance, or submits license application materials containing false or fraudulent information, the license officer shall issue an order to comply; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall limit the rights of the city to otherwise enforce its ordinances to the extent permitted by law. Such order, and all other notices issued in compliance with this article, shall be in writing and shall apprise the person affected of the nature of the violation(s). A copy of such order shall be affixed to some structure on the premises and shall be deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the person affected, which action shall constitute proper service. 
(1)  Period for compliance. The order shall require compliance within a specified period of time identified in the order following service on the affected person. 
(2)  Hearing. Upon written appeal by the person affected, received before the expiration of the period for compliance, the license officer shall order a hearing consistent with section 26-40(g). Notice of such a hearing shall be given to the affected person in the manner prescribed for the original order of compliance. 
(3)  Modifying authority of license officer. Upon written request on his own motion, the license officer shall have the authority, for good cause shown, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date, and to change, modify or rescind any recommendation or order. 
(4)  Final order. Upon the failure or refusal of a violator to comply with the provisional order or with order made after hearing, the license officer shall declare and make the order of compliance final. 
a.  Authority of license officer. The license officer shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to this article upon making or declaring an order of compliance final. 
b.  Effect of revocation or suspension. Upon revocation or suspension of a license, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and he shall immediately cease all business at all places for which the license was issued. 
(5)  Right to appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the license officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the city ordinance committee by filing a written appeal as provided in section 26-40(g) within ten business days after receipt of notice of such decision. 
(Code 2004,  26-514; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-515. - Enforcement. 
    Entertainment venue licenses shall also be subject to the enforcement provisions of business licenses, as set forth in section 26-45(a) and (b). 
(Code 2004,  26-515; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 26-516. - Penalties. 
    A person who violates a provision of this article, upon conviction, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A violation shall also be deemed, without limitation, a nuisance per se. 
(Code 2004,  26-516; Ord. No. 1-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Secs. 26-517-26-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq. 

Sec. 26-601. - Secondhand dealer defined; automated recycling kiosk defined; application of article. 
(a)  As used in this article, "secondhand dealer" means any person, including any corporation or other entity, whose business is that of dealing in, buying, selling, storing or exchanging secondhand goods, articles or merchandise of any kind, including lead pipe, tools, lighting fixtures, plumbing fixtures, radios, watches, jewelry, precious stones, scrap metals, musical instruments, electrical motors, electrical appliances, firearms, automotive parts and accessories, bicycles, clothing, wearing apparel, micrometers, clothing or any article of personal property or other valuable thing. This definition does not include: 
(1)  Householders selling articles owned and possessed by themselves or executors or administrators of any such householders; 
(2)  New articles, wares or merchandise from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sale to customers; 
(3)  Used car dealers; 
(4)  Secondhand or used tires when such tires are removed from the vehicle to which such tires are attached in the presence of the person receiving them; 
(5)  Nonprofit organizations reselling donated goods. 
Without limiting the foregoing, secondhand dealer also includes a person that is engaged in the business of receiving tangible personal property for recycling by means of an automated recycling kiosk. 
(b)  As used in this article, "automated recycling kiosk" means an interactive device that meets all of the following: 
(1)  Is installed in a secure retail space. 
(2)  Has the following technological functions: 
a.  Verification of a seller's identity by remote examination of a government-issued identification card by a live representative during all hours of operation. 
b.  Secure storage of items accepted by the kiosk for recycling. 
c.  Capture and storage of images of the seller and the article purchased during the transaction. 
d.  Electronic reporting of all transactions to law enforcement. 
(c)  This article does not apply to persons whose principal business is that of dealing in new goods, articles and merchandise and who do not buy secondhand goods, articles and merchandise outright, but occasionally accept in trade or repossess household appliances, watches, jewelry, precious stones and musical instruments. 
(Code 2004,  26-601; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009; Ord. No. 12-18,  1, 11-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-602. - License required. 
    No person shall operate as a secondhand dealer without first obtaining a license to do so from the city, as provided in this article. A secondhand dealer that uses an automated recycling kiosk to receive articles is considered to be carrying on the business of a secondhand dealer and must obtain a license under this article in the city. 
(Code 2004,  26-602; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009; Ord. No. 12-18,  2, 11-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-603. - License application, fee, term and transfer. 
(a)  A person desiring to operate as a secondhand dealer shall make a truthful application to the city on forms prepared by the city. The city shall grant an annual license under this article upon: approval of the chief of police and payment of a license fee as set by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Licensee shall designate the particular place where he shall carry on his business, and no licensee shall carry on business in any place not so designated. 
(c)  Such license shall not be transferable. 
(d)  Such license may be revoked for cause. 
(e)  A licensee's location shall be subject to local zoning requirements. 
(f)  A license shall not be issued to, and a licensee shall not employ, a person who has been convicted of a crime involving an element of theft, dishonesty, or the possession or sale of stolen property. 
(g)  All licenses shall be issued for a term of one year and may be renewed annually by July 1 of each following year upon the licensee's completion of such renewal applications developed by the city and payment of a renewal fee as established by the resolution of the city from time to time and subject to the city clerk's determination that the licensee is otherwise in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(h)  A licensee shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations. and to the extent of a conflict between such laws or regulations and this article, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Code 2004,  26-603; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
Sec. 26-604. - State pawnbroker license required for certain practices. 
    No person shall advertise or represent themselves as a pawnbroker or accepting items at pawn unless so licensed by law. 
(Code 2004,  26-604; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
State Law reference- Pawnbroker licensing, MCL 446.201 et seq. 
Sec. 26-605. - Posting name of licensee; records. 
    A licensee under this article shall post conspicuously in his place of business a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon, in letters at least six inches high. A licensee shall keep a permanent record, open to inspection by a member of the police department, sheriff's department, state police or other authorized person, in which shall be written in the English language, at the time of purchase or exchange of any article, a complete and accurate description thereof. Such description shall include an electronic photograph of the article, the article's trade name and serial number, if any; the name, residence and a copy of the federal or state-issued identification/operator's license of the person from whom the article was purchased or received; and the day and hour when such purchase or exchange was made and such other matters required by law. Each entry in such record shall be numbered consecutively. A member of the police department or other authorized person is entitled to inspect the premises and records of a licensee during all normal business hours. 
(Code 2004,  26-605; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
Sec. 26-606. - Holding period; tagging articles. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), any article purchased or exchanged under a license issued pursuant to this article shall be retained by the purchaser thereof for at least 15 days before disposing of the article, in an accessible place on the premises where such articles are purchased and received. 
(b)  A secondhand dealer that operates an automated recycling kiosk may store articles acquired at the kiosk in a secure off-site location. A dealer must retain an article stored under this subsection for 30 days, and upon request return that article to a law enforcement officer of this state without cost. 
(c)  A tag shall be attached to the article in some visible and convenient place, with a number written thereupon to correspond with the entry number in the record required in section 26-605, until the article is sold or otherwise disposed of. Such purchaser shall promptly prepare a legible and correct copy on forms approved by the chief of police, written in the English language, from such record, containing a description of each article purchased or received during the preceding day, the hour and day when the purchase was made and the description of the person from whom it was purchased. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the licensee. 
(Code 2004,  26-606; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009; Ord. No. 12-18,  3, 11-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-607. - Hours of operation; purchases from certain persons prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall purchase or receive, by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise, an article under a license issued pursuant to this article from any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or as otherwise prohibited by law. Further, no person shall purchase or receive such an article from any person who is at the time intoxicated or visibly under the influence of alcohol or narcotics, from any person known by the dealer to be a thief or an associate of thieves or a prior recipient of stolen property, from any person the licensee or employee has reason to suspect of being such or from any minor under the age of 18 years without written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor. 
(b)  No person shall purchase or receive, by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise, any article or item that the person knows to be stolen, reasonably should have been known to be stolen, or suspects as having been stolen except as specifically authorized by law enforcement authorities. 
(Code 2004,  26-607; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
Sec. 26-608. - Thumbprints and identification of customers. 
(a)  Whenever a licensee or employee of licensee under this article purchases or receives any article or valuable thing as described in section 26-601, the licensee shall first take, on a form approved by the police department, in addition to the requirements of section 26-606, a legible print of the thumb of the right hand of the person from whom such article was received. If such person has no right thumb, the licensee shall take the legible print of the thumb of the left hand or a finger, which shall be so identified in writing by the licensee. 
(b)  The seller must provide the secondhand dealer with personal identification at the time of the transaction, in the form of a valid operator's license or a federal or state identification card which includes a photograph that positively matches the seller. The licensee shall obtain and maintain a copy of the identification. 
(Code 2004,  26-608; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
Sec. 26-609. - Computerized reporting of transactions. 
(a)  By 11:59 p.m. daily, at his own expense, every licensee under this article shall promptly complete and transmit, by electronic means, to the chief of police's computerized system, the data identifying all transactions in which the licensee received used goods the preceding day by pawn, trade, purchase, or consignment. A transaction reported by electronic transmission under this subsection shall not be reported on paper forms unless the chief of police so requests. 
(b)  Each transaction report and record shall include the description of the article, serial number, make, model number, size, color, purchase/loan price, ticket number, dealer name and location, employee conducting transaction, place of storage/stock location, and customer information including operator's license number or other federal or state identification number, customer's name (last, first middle), customer address, customer e-mail address, customer date of birth, physical description (height, weight, hair color, race, gender, appropriate fingerprint and any other information required by the local law enforcement agency). 
(Code 2004,  26-609; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
Sec. 26-610. - License revocation. 
    If a licensee under this article or any of his agents, servants or employees is found criminally guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article and/or any applicable state law, the chief of police may request that the city clerk revoke the license of the violator and the city clerk may, after providing notice to the licensee, revoke the license. The violator, following such revocation, shall not be permitted to carry on such business in the city for a period of one year. 
(Code 2004,  26-610; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
Sec. 26-611. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of the city clerk in the revocation of a license as a secondhand dealer, may appeal to the city commission or its designee by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address. The appeal shall contain a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city commission shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be mailed by first-class mail to the appellant. The decision and order of the city commission on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 2004,  26-611; Ord. No. 5-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
Secs. 26-612-26-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES. 

Sec. 26-700. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  IHRA means the Industrial Hemp Research Act, 2014 PA 547, MCL 286.841 et seq. 
(2)  Marihuana establishment means that term as defined in the MRTMA. 
(3)  Marihuana facility means that term as defined in the MMFLA. 
(4)  MMFLA means the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, as amended. 
(5)  MMMA means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, 2008 IL 1, as amended. 
(6)  MRTMA means the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 14-18,  1, 11-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-701. - Marihuana establishments and facilities prohibited. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 6 of the MRTMA, marihuana establishments are prohibited within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Marihuana facilities are prohibited within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-18,  1, 11-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-702. - Rights unaffected by article. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in section 26-701, this article shall not affect the rights or privileges of any individual or other person preserved under the MRTMA. 
(b)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of a marihuana facility outside of the city to engage in activities within the city that it is permitted to engage in under the MMFLA within a municipality that has not authorized marihuana facilities to operate within its boundaries. 
(c)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers under the MMMA or the MMFLA. 
(d)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of any individual or other person under the IHRA. 
(e)  This article does not affect the rights or privileges of any individual or other person under any other federal or state law, rule or regulation related to the medical use of marihuana. 
(Ord. No. 14-18,  1, 11-12-2018) 
Chapter 30 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - WATER WELLS 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consent decree means the consent decree dated December 11, 1991, and entered in the district court for the Western District of Michigan, Case No. 1:91-CV-794. 
    Isolation zone means the area legally described as follows and graphically described on Exhibit A, incorporated into this article: A land area lying partly in section 27 and partly in section 34, T6N, R11W, of the city, and described as follows: 
    Beginning at the quarter corner common to sections 27 and 34; thence south along the north and south quarterline of section 34 to a point 250 feet south of the quarter corner common to sections 27 and 34; thence east on a line parallel with the section line common to sections 27 and 34 to a point on the centerline of Wing Avenue; thence northeasterly to a point on the line common to sections 27 and 34 that is 600 feet west of the section corner common to sections 27, 34, 26 and 35; thence east along the line common to sections 27 and 34 to the section corner common to sections 26, 27, 34 and 35; thence north along the line common to sections 26 and 27 to a point that is 1,00 feet north of the quarter corner common to sections 26 and 27; thence west on a line parallel with the east and west quarterline of section 27 to a point that is 750 feet west of the north and south quarterline of section 27; thence south on a line parallel with the north and south quarterline of section 27 to a point on the centerline of Rum Creek Drive; thence east along the centerline of Rum Creek Drive to its intersection with Rum Creek Court; thence southerly along the centerline of Rum Creek Court to the center of the cul-de-sac at the southerly end of Rum Creek Court; thence southeasterly on a line terminating at a point on the north and south quarterline of section 27 that is 540 feet north from the quarter corner common to sections 27 and 34; thence south along the north and south quarterline of section 27 to the quarter corner common to sections 27 and 34, the point of beginning. 
    Scope of work means the scope of work for the remedial design and remedial action work plan at the city landfill. 
(Code 2004,  30-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.602) 
Sec. 30-32. - Purpose. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted in accordance with state law, the city's Charter, other applicable law and the consent decree as defined in section 30-31, and is intended to protect the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 2004,  30-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.601) 
Sec. 30-33. - Installation restricted; exception. 
(a)  No person shall install a groundwater drinking water well within the isolation zone unless advance written consent to such a well is obtained from the city and the Environmental Protection Agency, which consent shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of the consent decree and scope of work. In the absence of such consent, all lots in the restricted area shall be serviced by public water. 
(b)  Any groundwater drinking water well installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  30-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.603) 
EXHIBIT A 

Chapter 34 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance No. 7-08, adopted April 1, 2008, amended chapter 34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 34 consisted of  34-1, 34-31-34-38, and 34-71-34-78, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. 1987; and Ordinance No. 6-70, adopted April 25, 1970. 
State Law reference- Public nuisances, MCL 600.3801 et seq.; nuisance abatement, MCL 600.2940. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Purpose. 
    The city commission finds that the adoption of this chapter is necessary and in the best interest of the city to enhance the public welfare by comprehensively regulating nuisances in a manner that balances reasonable use of property with the effects of that use on neighboring properties. The city commission further finds that this chapter is intended to provide a mechanism for expeditiously resolving nuisances and stabilizing neighborhoods. 
(Code 2004,  34-1; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "nuisance" shall mean whatever act, omission or condition annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of others; offends decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any public street, sidewalk, stream or right-of-way; in any way renders the public insecure in life or property; or interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. Such term shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 2004,  34-2; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-3. - Illustrative nuisances. 
    Maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property any of the following is prohibited as a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration may not be construed as exclusive: 
(1)  Unless otherwise authorized by law, the storage of building materials unless there is in effect a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon such property, and such building materials are intended for use in connection with that construction. Building materials include, but are not be limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinderblocks, blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. All unused building materials must be removed from the premises prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy or final acceptance by the city building inspector. 
(2)  The storage or accumulation of junk, goods and/or materials. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other material or other castoff material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(3)  The existence of any structure or damaged partial structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable if a dwelling, or useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(4)  The existence of any vacant building, garage or other outbuilding unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or securely boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance by vandals. 
(5)  The existence of any incomplete structures, unless the structure is in the process of being constructed pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the city, and unless such construction is completed in accordance with law. 
(6)  Any condition which provides a food source or harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
(7)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises, including animal noises. 
(8)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors. 
(9)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(10)  The pollution of any public stream, lake, or body of water by sewage, dead animals, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(11)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(12)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(13)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(14)  Failure to remove and/or properly dispose of animal waste. 
(15)  Damage to the property of others by animals running at large. 
(Code 2004,  34-3; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-4. - Unlawful to occupy condemned premises. 
    No person may occupy or use premises condemned by the city building official until put in a sanitary and habitable condition, in accordance with state law and this Code. 
(Code 2004,  34-4) 
Sec. 34-5. - Handbills and handbill distribution. 
(a)  No person shall hang, post, place, put or in any other manner affix any handbill, notice, advertisement, sign, placard, card or any other advertising device on any telegraph, telephone, electric light or postal telegraph pole or poles in any street, alley or other public place in the city; provided, however, that these provisions do not apply to the posting of official governmental notices. 
(b)  Any person distributing advertising matter from house to house shall be required to follow the walks, both inside and outside the premises, shall not cut across the yards, and, if a receptacle for such advertising is furnished, shall place same in such receptacle. If no receptacle is furnished, he must secure the advertising matter so that it will not be blown about. 
(c)  No person shall throw or deposit: 
(1)  Any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city, or hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(2)  Any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that a person may hand out or distribute without charge a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle willing to accept it in a place in which such activity is otherwise lawfully permitted. 
(3)  Any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 2004,  34-5; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-6. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity which violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalties or remedies available, the city is authorized and empowered, but shall have no obligation, to notify the property owner of a violation of section 34-3 and to direct the property owner to remove the nuisance. If such notice is given it shall be in writing, addressed to the property owner as appears on the latest ad valorem property tax assessment roll, and shall inform the property owner of the following: 
(1)  The nature of the violation. 
(2)  The time in which the violation must be abated. 
(c)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any property owner to comply with the provisions of this article, the city or its authorized contractor or other designee is authorized and empowered to enter the property owner's property to abate the nuisance or to provide and to make payment for the abatement of the nuisance maintained. 
(d)  When the city abates a nuisance as provided herein, the cost of any abatement, including legal expenses, and the authorized administrative fee will be billed to the property owner. The cost and fee will be a debt of the property owner to the city, which may be assessed as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 50-19 and shall constitute a lien against the property, including interest, until paid, and enforced and collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes. 
(e)  The failure to receive the notice as provided for in subsection (b) of this section is not a defense to any action brought by a member of the public for injury or by the city to collect the costs of abatement or impose penalties or other fees as authorized by this article. 
(Code 2004,  34-6) 
Secs. 34-7-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PROPERTY CONDITIONS 

Sec. 34-31. - Nuisance declared. 
    The following conditions are declared to be a nuisance and are prohibited: 
(1)  Trees, shrubs, bushes, weeds or other plant growth obstructing a sidewalk, walkway, driveway, street or other public way. 
(2)  Weeds, grasses or other plant growth which endanger public property or the health or safety of the public, or interfere with, obstruct or render dangerous any public way, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Ragweed. 
b.  Poison ivy. 
c.  Poison sumac. 
d.  Poison oak. 
e.  Canada thistle. 
(3)  Weeds, grasses and undergrowths higher than six inches. 
(4)  Stagnant or unsanitary water. 
(5)  Dead trees which endanger public property, or the health or safety of the public. 
(6)  Any vegetation, earthwork or object, including, but not limited to, rocks, fences or basketball setups within a street right-of-way, except the following: 
a.  Mailbox posts, including: 
1.  Four-inch by four-inch wood posts. 
2.  Three pounds per foot (maximum) metal posts. 
b.  Public and private utilities, by permit only from the city. 
c.  Trees, by permit only from the city. Planting may be done only in the exact location indicated in the permit. 
d.  Wood or stone driveway curbing, six inches or less in height, but not within five feet of the edge of the pavement. 
It is the responsibility of the property owner to restore wood or stone curbing if it is disturbed during normal maintenance of the street. 
(7)  Failure by an owner or occupant of a parcel of real property on which a sidewalk abuts to keep such portion of the sidewalk clear from snow, ice or other obstruction that results in impairing or impeding travel on such sidewalk. Any accumulation of two or more inches of snow shall be considered sufficient to impair or impede free passage; the accumulation may be from any source. Such accumulation must be removed to a minimum width of five feet within 24 hours of the cessation of snowfall or within 72 hours of snow removal efforts by the city where snow is deposited onto the sidewalk. 
a.  In the event a "snow emergency" is declared by the mayor or his designee, the sidewalk clearing requirements shall be suspended until such time as the declaration is rescinded. 
b.  In the event of undue hardship as determined by the chief of police or his designee, additional time to clear snow, ice or other obstruction from a sidewalk may be provided. 
c.  The ball at the end of a cul-de-sac street in a residential district is exempt from the snow clearing requirements of this article. 
(8)  Failure by an owner or occupant of a parcel of real property which contains a fire hydrant or on which a fire hydrant abuts to keep the fire hydrant clear from any obstruction that results in impairing or impeding the operations of the fire department. 
(Code 2004,  34-31; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008; Ord. No. 1-13,  1, 1-13-2013) 
Sec. 34-32. - Nuisances prohibited; exceptions. 
    A property owner shall maintain all property, occupied or vacant, improved or unimproved, free of the nuisances described in section 34-31, except that weeds, grasses and undergrowths higher than six inches are permitted in the following locations: 
(1)  Portions of undeveloped property behind a wooded tree line. 
(2)  Portions of unsubdivided lands more than 25 feet from a public sidewalk, walkway, driveway, street or other public way. 
(3)  Portions of undeveloped lots in a subdivision less than 60 percent developed, and lying more than 25 feet from a public sidewalk, walkway, driveway, street or other public way. 
(Code 2004,  34-32; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-33. - Responsibility for maintenance of adjacent properties. 
    A property owner is responsible for maintaining, free of the nuisances described in section 34-31, all public ways abutting his own property, as follows: 
(1)  The right-of-way on either side of a public street, including, but not limited to, any sidewalk, walkway or driveway located therein. 
(2)  Public or utility easements to the centerline. 
(3)  Alleys to the centerline. 
(4)  Public walkway easements. 
(Code 2004,  34-33; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-34. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  If a property owner fails to comply with this article, the city is authorized and empowered, but shall have no obligation, to notify the property owner of the violation and to direct the property owner to remove the nuisance. If such notice is given it shall be in writing, addressed to the property owner as appears on the latest ad valorem property tax assessment roll, and shall inform the property owner of the following: 
(1)  The nature of the violation. 
(2)  The time in which the violation must be abated. 
(b)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any property owner to comply with the provisions of this article, the city or its authorized contractor or other designee is authorized and empowered to enter the property owner's property to abate the nuisance or to provide and to make payment for the abatement of the nuisance maintained. 
(c)  When the city abates a nuisance as provided in this article, the cost of any abatement and the authorized administrative fee will be billed to the property owner. The cost and fee will be a debt of the property owner to the city, which may be assessed as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 50-19 and shall constitute a lien against the property, including interest, until paid, and enforced and collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes. 
(d)  The failure to receive the notice as provided for in subsection (a) of this section is not a defense to any action brought by a member of the public for injury or by the city to collect the costs of abatement or impose penalties or other fees as authorized by this article. 
(Code 2004,  34-34; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-35. - Administrative fee. 
    An administrative fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the city commission, will be added to any costs charged by the city to the property owner whenever the city abates a nuisance under this article. 
(Code 2004,  34-35; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Secs. 34-36-34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - JUNKED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.; abandoned vehicles, MCL 257.252a et seq. 

Sec. 34-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle is defined by MCL 257.252a of the Michigan Vehicle Code as adopted by section 66-1 of this Code. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is currently not capable of being started or lawfully operated on the highway, or which is a vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated. 
    Junked, inoperable or abandoned vehicles includes major parts. The term "major parts," as used in this definition, includes all parts or accessories without which a motor vehicle is unable to be operated in a safe manner. 
    Junked motor vehicles means a motor vehicle that has been so damaged or dismantled as to be a total loss. 
    Mayor means and shall be deemed to include the mayor of the city or any employee of the city designated by the mayor to perform any of the acts or duties required by the terms of this article. 
    Owner means any person, firm or corporation whose name appears on the certificate of title of the motor vehicle in question. 
    Person having possession means any person having a legal possession of the motor vehicle in question, but who is not the legal owner as determined by the vehicle's certificate of title. 
    Premises means and includes any real property, whether public or private. 
    Public property means and includes any real property owned or under the jurisdiction of any public corporation of the state. 
    Total loss means that the cost to repair a damaged or dismantled motor vehicle exceeds the fair market value for such vehicle. For the purpose of determining fair market value, any recognized national appraisal book may be used. 
    Vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated means and includes any vehicle which is not currently registered by the state, or which lacks the equipment by the state laws so as to allow it to be driven on a public right-of-way. 
(Code 2004,  34-71; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-72. - Mayor; responsibility. 
    The mayor or his designee is authorized to remove from any public property any junked, inoperable or abandoned vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law. 
(Code 2004,  34-72; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-73. - Time for removal. 
(a)  The owner or the person having possession of any junked, inoperable or abandoned vehicle must remove the same within five days after being ordered to do so in writing by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises where such vehicle is located, or by the mayor. If the owner of any such vehicle is not known or cannot readily be ascertained, notice to remove may be given by attaching the notice to the vehicle. 
(b)  If the vehicle is on any public property, a 48-hour notice to remove the same shall be given by the mayor, provided that if the vehicle constitutes a present hazard or unduly obstructs traffic or ingress to or egress from any premises, it may be removed by the mayor without any prior notice. 
(c)  An unregistered vehicle on premises not owned or occupied by the owner or the person having possession of such vehicle is to be deemed to be abandoned. 
(d)  Vehicles legally incapable of being operated (by reason of no license plate) may be displayed for sale out in the open on a paved drive on private property. 
(Code 2004,  34-73; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-74. - Failure to remove. 
    Upon failure to remove any junked, inoperable or abandoned vehicle within the time limits prescribed in this article, the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises upon where the vehicle is located must immediately remove or cause the vehicle to be removed from the premises to a location to be provided for this purpose by the mayor. 
(Code 2004,  34-74; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-75. - Owner; regain possession. 
    The owner of any junked, inoperable or abandoned vehicle that is removed under any provision of this article may regain its possession by making application within ten days after receipt of the vehicle by the city upon paying to the city all reasonable costs of removal and storage, which sums shall be repaid to the person who paid or incurred the charges. The owner must also pay additional charges as the city commission may from time to time impose in such matters for hauling and storage charges of such vehicle while in possession of the city; provided, however, that if the vehicle is merely unregistered, or appears to be in a serviceable condition, such person shall have 30 days to regain possession of the vehicle. 
(Code 2004,  34-75; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-76. - Failure to claim vehicle. 
    If no claims for the vehicle are made as provided in section 34-75, the city may burn, cut up, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of the same as junk or for the best price obtainable and the proceeds, if any, may be used to pay the reasonable charges of removal, delivery, and storage and disposal of vehicle submitted by the person who paid the charges. 
(Code 2004,  34-76; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-77. - Liability; exclusions. 
    Neither the owner, lessee nor occupant of the premises from which any vehicle is removed or the city, its officers or employees, shall be liable for any loss or damage to any vehicle which being removed or while in possession of the city, or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition. 
(Code 2004,  34-77; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-78. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity which violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  34-78; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
ARTICLE 4. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 

Sec. 34-79. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage is liquid and solid wastes from the storage, preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the growing, handling, storage or sale of produce or other edible products. 
    Litter is garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Park is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city or other public entity and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
    Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
(Code 2004,  34-79; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-80. - Litter in public places. 
(a)  A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. 
(b)  A person who removes a vehicle that is wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road, or street shall remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road, or street as a result of the accident. 
(Code 2004,  34-80; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-81. - Placement of litter in receptacles. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any park, street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 2004,  34-81; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-82. - Sweeping litter into gutters. 
    No person shall sweep into or place in any gutter, street, storm drain, or other public place within the city, litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk adjacent to their premises free of litter. 
(Code 2004,  34-82; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-83. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Code 2004,  34-83; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-84. - Truck loads causing litter. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Code 2004,  34-84; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-85. - Litter in lakes, streams and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Code 2004,  34-85; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-86. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 2004,  34-86; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-87. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Code 2004,  34-87; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-88. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter upon any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Code 2004,  34-88; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-89. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity which violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalties or remedies available to the city, the city is authorized and empowered, but shall have no obligation, to notify a property owner of a violation of this article and to direct the property owner to remove the nuisance. If such notice is given it shall be in writing, addressed to the property owner as appears on the latest ad valorem property tax assessment roll, and shall inform the property owner of the following: 
(1)  The nature of the violation. 
(2)  The time in which the violation must be abated. 
(c)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any property owner to comply with the provisions of this article, the city or its authorized contractor or other designee is authorized and empowered to enter the property owner's property to abate the nuisance or to provide and to make payment for the abatement of the nuisance maintained. 
(d)  When the city abates a nuisance as provided in this article, the cost of any abatement and the authorized administrative fee will be billed to the property owner. The cost and fee will be a debt of the property owner to the city, which may be assessed as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 50-19 and shall constitute a lien against the property, including interest, until paid, and enforced and collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes. 
(e)  The failure to receive the notice as provided for in subsection (b) of this section is not a defense to any action brought by a member of the public for injury or by the city to collect the costs of abatement or impose penalties or other fees as authorized by this article. 
(f)  Upon the removal by the city of any refuse as provided for herein, the property owner shall, in addition to other remedies provided for in this Code, be responsible for all city costs and fees and an administrative fee as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  34-89; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Secs. 34-90-34-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - DRUG AND PROSTITUTION NUISANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Controlled substances generally, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq. 

Sec. 34-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner is a person who possesses or holds any legal or equitable interest in real property. The term "owner" also includes a person who holds, exercises or delegates any control, custody or dominion over real property whether or not that person has or claims to have any legal or equitable interest in the real property. 
    Property means any land, house, structure, building, dwelling, apartment, premises, or any part thereof. 
    Repeated or repeatedly means two or more times within any one-year period. 
(Code 2004,  34-96; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-97. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    Whenever one of the following occurs or exists repeatedly on any property within the city, the city commission may declare by resolution that the property is a nuisance, and may order the nuisance abated: 
(1)  The illegal use, sale, distribution, furnishing or possession of a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia; 
(2)  Any violation of the controlled substances act or the drug paraphernalia laws; 
(3)  Any act of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution; or 
(4)  The illegal use, sale, distribution, furnishing or possession of an alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 2004,  34-97; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008; Ord. No. 2-09,  1, 3-7-2009) 
Sec. 34-98. - Procedure for declaration of a nuisance. 
(a)  A declaration of a nuisance under this article may occur only after written notice is given to the owner of the property and the owner has an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before the committee of the whole of the city commission. Notice shall be given to the owner at least seven calendar days prior to the public hearing by personal service or certified mail to the address indicated by the city assessor's records. The notice shall state the nature of the alleged nuisance, and the time, date and location of the hearing. 
(b)  The city commission committee of the whole shall act in a quasi-judicial capacity when determining whether or not a nuisance exists under the standards established in this article. In conducting the public hearing, the city commission committee of the whole shall afford an owner and city personnel an opportunity to present evidence and make arguments as to factual and legal issues. In conducting the public hearing, the city commission committee of the whole may admit and give weight to probative evidence of a nature commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent individuals in the conduct of their affairs. 
(Code 2004,  34-98; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 34-99. - Finding of nuisance. 
(a)  The city commission committee of the whole may find that a nuisance under this article exists if all of the following conditions are established at the public hearing: 
(1)  The repeated occurrence, as established by evidence presented at the public hearing, of any of the following: 
a.  The property has been searched by law enforcement officers and an illegal controlled substance or illegal drug paraphernalia has been found; 
b.  The property has been the location of a violation of the controlled substances laws or of drug paraphernalia law as evidenced by a conviction of an individual at that location; 
c.  The property has been the location of an act of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution as proven by the conviction of an individual for either offense at that location; 
d.  The property has been searched by law enforcement officers and an illegal alcoholic liquor has been found; or 
e.  The property has been the location of a violation of the liquor control code as evidenced by a conviction of an individual at that location; and 
(2)  A written notice informing an owner that an incident or condition as stated in subsection (a)(1) of this section has occurred on the property and of the potential consequences if a similar activity occurs at the property has been: 
a.  Personally served on the owner; or 
b.  Sent by certified mail to the owner. 
(b)  A rebuttable presumption that a nuisance exists at the property arises when one of the incidents or conditions set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section occurs or exists and notice of it is given as set forth in subsection (a)(2) of this section, and if subsequently one or more such incidents or conditions occur or are found to exist within one year of the first. 
(Code 2004,  34-99; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008; Ord. No. 2-09,  2, 3-7-2009; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 34-100. - Abatement of nuisance costs. 
(a)  If the city commission committee of the whole determines by resolution that any property is a nuisance according to the provisions of this article, it may order abatement of the nuisance in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(b)  If it is determined that all or a portion of the property is to be vacated to abate the nuisance, the city commission committee of the whole shall order the property vacated and declare occupancy of all or a portion of the property prohibited, and authorize the city police department to prohibit occupancy by padlocking, boarding, or otherwise securing the property, for up to one year as determined by the city commission committee of the whole. 
(c)  The city commission committee of the whole may determine and order that the owner shall be liable for the full cost of materials and personnel, including city employees and contractors, utilized in padlocking, boarding or securing the property, and for subsequent or remedial actions required to keep the property vacant for the abatement period. 
(d)  The city commission committee of the whole may recommend, and the city commission may order, in accordance with section 50-19, that the costs incurred by the city as provided herein be assessed against the property as a single lot assessment. 
(e)  Where only a discrete area of the property is involved in the illegal activity giving rise to the declaration of a nuisance, the city commission committee of the whole shall not order any other part of the property vacated. 
(Code 2004,  34-100; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 34-101. - Notification to owners. 
    The notice of a specified incident or condition, and the notice of a public hearing, shall include a report of each specified incident or condition describing the date, location, persons known to be involved, and the nature of the underlying illegal activity. The notice shall be served on the owner of the property in a manner reasonably anticipated to apprise the owner of the incident or condition. 
(Code 2004,  34-101) 
Sec. 34-102. - Posting and listing of nuisances. 
(a)  Whenever the city commission committee of the whole declares a property to be a nuisance and orders property to be vacated, the city police department shall post a notice so stating at each entrance to any building on the property and at the entrance of each dwelling unit or other portion of the property ordered vacated. 
(b)  The city clerk shall maintain a list of properties that have been declared to be a nuisance and of the remedy ordered by the city commission committee of the whole. The list shall be available for public inspection at the city clerk's office. 
(c)  No person other than an authorized city employee shall tamper with, deface, alter, damage, or remove the notice posted by the city police department. 
(Code 2004,  34-102; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 34-103. - Appeal. 
(a)  An owner of property aggrieved by any final decision of the city commission committee of the whole under this article may appeal to the circuit court within 21 days of the date of the decision. 
(b)  The circuit court shall consider the appeal on the record made before the city commission committee of the whole. The circuit court shall review the record and determine if the city commission committee of the whole's decision is supported by competent, substantial and material evidence on the record as a whole, and involves the reasonable exercise of discretion. 
(Code 2004,  34-103; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 34-104. - Entry into or use of vacated property. 
    Except with the written permission of the city police department, no person shall enter or use any property declared to be a nuisance and ordered vacated by the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  34-104; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Sec. 34-105. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the following minimum criminal penalties which shall be assessed in addition to any other lawful sentence the court may impose: 
(1)  For a first violation, a fine of not less than $175.00 or more than $500.00. 
(2)  For a second violation, a fine of not less than $300.00 or more than $500.00 and imprisonment for not less than ten days or more than 90 days. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of not less than $400.00 or more than $500.00 and imprisonment for not less than 30 days or more than 90 days. 
(Code 2004,  34-105; Ord. No. 7-08,  1, 4-25-2008) 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, powder, liquids, and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
    Motor vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle. 
    Principal means the chief administrative employee of any public, private or parochial elementary, secondary or high school. 
    Public place means any parking lot, street, alley, park, sidewalk, public building any place of business open to the public or frequented by the public, or any portion thereof, and any other place which is open to public view to which the public, or any portion thereof, has access. 
(Code 2004,  38-1; Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1), (7), (9), (12), 4-1-2002) 
Sec. 38-2. - Allowing premises to be used for illegal activity. 
    No person shall permit or allow any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him to be used or occupied by persons engaging in any act of prostitution or any other illegal sexual activity. 
(Code 2004,  38-2; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.309(6)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.452. 
Sec. 38-3. - Transporting persons to enable them to engage in illegal acts. 
    No person shall knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling, prostitution or in any illegal act. 
(Code 2004,  38-3; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.309(4)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.459. 
Sec. 38-4. - Attending or operating illegal businesses. 
    No person shall knowingly attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal possession, use or delivery of a controlled substance, the illegal sale, possession or use of intoxicating liquor, or any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Code 2004,  38-4; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.309(3)) 
State Law reference- Engaging in illegal occupation or business, MCL 750.167(1)(d); loitering where prostitution is conducted, MCL 750.167(1)(i); loitering where illegal business conducted, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Sec. 38-5. - Ethnic intimidation. 
    No person shall maliciously and with the specific intent to intimidate or harass another person because of that person's race, color, religion, gender or national origin, do any of the following: 
(1)  Cause physical contact with another person. 
(2)  Damage, destroy or deface any real or personal property of another person. 
(3)  Threaten, by word or act, to do an act described in subsection (1) or (2) of this section if there is reasonable cause to believe that an act described in subsection (1) or (2) of this section will occur. 
(Code 2004,  38-5; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.304(12); Ord. No. 06-02,  2(4(12)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.147b. 
Sec. 38-6. - Molesting and disturbing persons in pursuit of occupation, vocation or avocation. 
    No person shall, by threats, intimidation or otherwise, and without authority of law, interfere with, or in any way molest or disturb, without such authority, any person in the quiet and peaceable pursuit of his lawful occupation, vocation or avocation, or on the way to or from such occupation, vocation or avocation. 
(Code 2004,  38-6; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.304(13); Ord. No. 06-02,  2(4(13)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.352. 
Sec. 38-7. - Improper use of a telecommunications service or device. 
    No person shall, by the use or means of a telecommunications service or device, perform any of the following: 
(1)  Disturb the peace, quiet or privacy of any other person or family by repeated contact intended to harass or annoy the person or family to whom the contact is made; 
(2)  Use obscene or offensive language, or suggest any lewd or lascivious act; 
(3)  Attempt to extort money or anything of value from any person; 
(4)  Threaten any physical violence or harm to any person; 
(5)  Repeatedly and continuously ring the telephone of any person with the intent to disturb or harass such person; 
(6)  Knowingly and intentionally make a false report of a crime, fire, traffic crash or medical emergency; 
(7)  Repeatedly dial 911, except to report an emergency condition requiring a police, fire department or emergency medical response. 
(Code 2004,  38-7; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(7)) 
State Law reference- Malicious use of service provided by telephone provider, MCL 750.540e; false fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false report of crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 38-8. - Public lodginghouses to maintain guest register; giving false information for registration. 
(a)  The proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any hotel, motel, roominghouse or other place maintained, used or kept as a public lodginghouse shall maintain a register in which shall be inscribed, at the time of arrival, the correct name of every guest renting or occupying a room, together with the home street and city address of each and every such guest. The make, year, state of registration and license number of the motor vehicle operated by such guest or in which such guest was a passenger at the time of arrival, and the number of the space assigned, and the time when such space was rented shall also be included. Such register shall be maintained for a minimum of one year after the departure of the guest or occupant. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly write, cause to be written or permit to be written any false, incorrect or inaccurate information in any register provided for by this section. 
(Code 2004,  38-8; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.801, 21.802) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.782. 
Sec. 38-9. - School premises offenses. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Trespass upon or loiter in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property in the city for any reason whatsoever, unless such person is a regularly enrolled student, a parent or guardian thereof, a school official, teacher or other public or school employee, or has received permission from the principal or other person designated by the principal to be in or upon, or to remain in or upon, such public, private or parochial school building or school property; provided, however, that such permission need not be secured by persons engaging in or attending a school for a city park and recreation commission authorized activity or by persons using a school playground or playground equipment after school hours, or when school is not in session, unless such entry or use shall have been otherwise prohibited by a published or posted rule or regulation of the school board, school principal or other person, board or committee with the authority to prohibit such use or entry. 
(2)  Willfully or maliciously make, or assist in making, any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed. 
(3)  By violence, threat of violence or other form of coercion, force, or attempt to force, any public, private or parochial school student or other person to give or lend any money or other thing of value to any person at any time. 
(4)  Damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial school building or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto. 
(Code 2004,  38-10; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.311) 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq.; malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Secs. 38-10-38-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 

Sec. 38-41. - Prohibited offenses. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Commit an assault or battery upon another person with or without a weapon. 
(2)  Orally, or by causing the delivery of a written or electronic communication, threaten any physical violence or harm to any person or any member of such person's family. 
(3)  Deliver or cause to be delivered, any letter, postal card, electronic writing or other object containing obscene language or containing any words, letters or marks with the intent to frighten, intimidate or cause annoyance to any other person, or with the intent to extort or gain money or property of any description belonging to another. 
(4)  Accost, molest, or willfully annoy another person. 
(5)  Recklessly endanger the life, health or well-being of another person. 
(6)  Engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral or obscene conduct in any public place or place open to the public. 
(7)  Utter any vile, blasphemous, vulgar, or obscene language in any public place or in such a way as to subject the public to such language. 
(8)  Commit an assault or an assault and battery on his spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his household. A police officer may arrest an individual for a violation of this article if the officer has reasonable cause to believe the individual is violating or has violated this section regardless of whether the police officer has a warrant or whether the violation was committed in the officer's presence. 
(9)  Engage in stalking. 
(10)  Knowingly and willfully engage in any conduct which exposes a child under 12 years of age to injury. This section shall not be construed as preventing a parent, guardian or other person authorized by law from using reasonable force to discipline a child. 
(11)  Knowingly and willfully utter any word or commit any act, which causes or tends to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come under the jurisdiction of the family division of the circuit court. 
(12)  Willfully focus, point or shine a laser beam, directly or indirectly upon another person or animal in any manner which would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, threatened, harassed or annoyed and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, threatened, harassed or annoyed. 
(13)  Possess a laser pointing device unless that person is at least 18 years of age. A person under the age of 18 shall not be in violation of this section if the possession of a laser pointing device is necessary for his employment, trade or occupation. 
(14)  Willfully and maliciously prevent, hinder, obstruct or delay, by any physical, mechanical or electronic means, or by use of any contrivance whatsoever, another person from the sending, receiving, conveyance or delivery of any authorized communication by or through any telephone, cellular telephone, computer or radio. 
(Code 2004,  38-41; Ord. No. 9-03, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 9-13,  1, 9-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq.; domestic assault, MCL 764.15a; stalking, MCL 750.411h et seq. 
Sec. 38-42. - Voyeurism. 
(a)  No person shall peep into an occupied dwelling of another person or go upon the land of another person with the intent to peep into an occupied dwelling of another person. 
(b)  No person shall peep into an area where an occupant of the area reasonably can be expected to disrobe, including restrooms, baths, showers and dressing rooms, without the consent of the other person. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to prevent the employee of a retail clothing store from monitoring the activity of a person of the same gender within a store dressing room. 
(Code 2004,  38-42; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.313(3)) 
State Law reference- Window peeping, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Secs. 38-43-38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-81. - Trespass. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Enter any dwelling house, apartment, private room, private garage or private outbuilding without first obtaining the permission of the owner or person in charge of the building. This subsection shall not apply to any police officer, firefighter or emergency medical personnel acting in the lawful performance of his official duties. 
(2)  Enter or remain upon the land or premises of another person, without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or person in charge of the land or premises. 
(Code 2004,  38-81; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(1), (2)) 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 38-82. - Unauthorized presence in city buildings. 
(a)  In this section, the term "city building" means any building, or portion thereof, owned, leased or used by the city for the exclusive or nonexclusive purpose of conducting its business affairs. 
(b)  No person shall remain on the premises of any city building unless such person is present for the purpose of conducting business with city officials or attending, participating in or observing any hearing or meeting held in such city building. 
(Code 2004,  38-82; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.301(2), 20.307(9); Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(1)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 38-83. - Prowling. 
(a)  In this section, the term "prowl" means to willfully lurk about, lie in wait or move stealthily about private property as if in search of prey or plunder. 
(b)  No person shall prowl about the private premises of any other person, either by day or night, without lawful authority or the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such premises. 
(Code 2004,  38-83; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(3); Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(10)), 4-1-2002) 
Sec. 38-84. - Parking on private property. 
    No person shall drive or park a motor vehicle on private property, without lawful authority, knowing the property to be private, or without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such premises. This section shall not apply to the parking lot of a business that is open to the public. 
(Code 2004,  38-84; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(4)) 
Sec. 38-85. - Entering without paying admission charge. 
    No person shall enter into any place, area or building, or any part thereof, without permission or, where applicable, having first paid any fee, charge or other consideration required for admission or failing to pay for services as required before leaving. This section shall not apply to any police officer, firefighter or emergency medical personnel acting in the lawful performance of his official duties. 
(Code 2004,  38-85; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(5)) 
Sec. 38-86. - Swimming in private waters. 
    No person shall swim, bathe, enter or wade in any creek, stream, pond, lake, quarry, swimming pool or any other body of water not designed for public use or not open to the public at that time, nor shall any person swim, bathe or wade in water on private property not owned or lawfully occupied by such person, without the express consent of the owner or person in lawful possession thereof. This section shall not apply to swimming or entry into the water necessitated by an emergency which threatens life or property. 
(Code 2004,  38-86; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(12)) 
Sec. 38-87. - Moving property without consent. 
    No person shall interfere with, move, disconnect or carry off any property not his own, without lawful authority or the express consent of the owner or person in charge of such property. 
(Code 2004,  38-87; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(6)) 
Sec. 38-88. - Malicious mischief. 
    No person shall willfully, wantonly or recklessly destroy, damage, deface or tamper with any property, private or public, not his own. 
(Code 2004,  38-88; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(7)) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 38-89. - Damaging drinking fountains or toilets. 
    No person shall destroy, damage or in any manner alter or deface any drinking fountain, public toilet or restroom, or deposit or throw any substance in any public toilet which causes, or may cause, damage to such facility, or put any substance in a water fountain which may in any manner pollute the water therein. For purposes of this section, the terms "drinking fountain" and "public toilet" mean any facilities owned or operated by the city or any governmental unit, as well as facilities owned by private businesses where such facilities are open to, and can be used by, the public. 
(Code 2004,  38-89; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(10)) 
Sec. 38-90. - Fire hydrants. 
    No person shall open, or attempt to open, interfere with or damage any fire hydrant, without authority. 
(Code 2004,  38-90; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(11)) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 38-91. - Placing signs in public places. 
    No person shall place any sign, advertisement or any other matter upon any lamppost, electric light, railway, telegraph, telephone or other utility pole, fire hydrant, bridge, pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or public building without the consent and authorization of the appropriate official. This section shall not be construed as preventing any public officer or official from doing any such act for any purpose authorized by the laws of the state or the Charter or ordinances of the city. 
(Code 2004,  38-91; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(8)) 
Sec. 38-92. - Placing signs or advertisements without permission of property owner. 
    No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or any other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate, post or tree without having first obtained the written permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the premises, and without having also obtained any necessary approval or permits. A person who violates any of the provisions of this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  38-92; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.059(B), 35.064) 
Sec. 38-93. - Operation of vehicles on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a person engaged in city business, to operate any "motor driven vehicle" or "machine," which terms are hereby defined to include, but not be limited to, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles, over and upon any land owned by the city, except for areas thereof and trails therein which are designated and posted for use by such vehicles and machines by the city. 
(b)  No person 17 years of age or over shall assist, abet or encourage any minor under the age of 17 years to violate any provision of this section. 
(c)  No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years shall knowingly allow, permit or encourage any such minor under the age of 17 years while in his legal custody to violate any provision of this section. 
(d)  No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years shall fail to exercise a sufficient or reasonable control over such minor so as to prevent the minor from violating any provision of this section, when such parent, guardian or other person had knowledge of the fact that such minor had previously committed three or more violations of this section. 
(Code 2004,  38-93; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.201-20.205) 
Secs. 38-94-38-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LARCENY, FRAUD AND RELATED OFFENSES 

Sec. 38-111. - Larceny. 
    No person shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, trick or conversion, of the property of another person, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for, or concerning, money or goods due, to become due or to be delivered, or any deed or writing counting the conveyance of land or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record. 
(Code 2004,  38-111; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(1); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(1)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Larceny generally, MCL 750.356 et seq. 
Sec. 38-112. - Theft of services. 
    No person shall, knowingly and willfully, defraud any taxicab, boardinghouse, hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, gas station, service station or cafe by procuring any transportation service, food, drink, entertainment, room, accommodation, gas, oil or repair with the intent not to pay for such goods or service. This section shall not be interpreted to conflict with the right of any person to dispute the amount, type or quality of goods or services for as long as the person gives notice of the dispute, provides identification of his name and address and the notice of the dispute is given before leaving the scene. 
(Code 2004,  38-112; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(9); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(9)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Defrauding hotels, innkeepers, etc., MCL 750.292. 
Sec. 38-113. - Fraud generally. 
    No person shall obtain, or attempt to obtain, money, goods, property or services by fraud, trick or false pretenses. 
(Code 2004,  38-113; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(2); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(2)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- False pretenses and false representation, MCL 750.218 et seq. 
Sec. 38-114. - Retail fraud. 
(a)  In this section, the term "retail fraud" means that a person does one or more of the following: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(3)  With the intent to defraud, obtains, or attempts to obtain, money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for or belongs to the store. 
(b)  No person shall engage in retail fraud. 
(Code 2004,  38-114; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(11); Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(13)), 3(10(11)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Retail fraud, MCL 750.356c, 750.356d. 
Sec. 38-115. - Obtaining telephone service by fraud. 
    No person shall knowingly obtain, or attempt to obtain, telephone service or the transmission of a telephone message by the use of any false or fictitious telephone credit number or telephone number of another person without the authority of the person to whom such telephone credit number or telephone number was issued. 
(Code 2004,  38-115; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(3); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(3)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Obtaining telecommunications services with intent to avoid charge, MCL 750.219a. 
Sec. 38-116. - Embezzlement. 
    No person shall, as the agent, servant or employee of another person, or as the trustee, bailee or custodian of the property of another person, or of any partnership, voluntary association, or public or private corporation, or of the state, or of any county, city, village, township or school district within the state, fraudulently dispose of or convert to his own use, or take or secrete with the intent to convert to his own use, without the consent of his principal, any money or other personal property of his principal which shall have come to his possession or shall be under his charge or control by virtue of his being such agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee or custodian. 
(Code 2004,  38-116; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(6); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(6)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.174. 
Sec. 38-117. - Receiving stolen property. 
    No person shall buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property, knowing the money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. 
(Code 2004,  38-117; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(4); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(4)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Receiving stolen property, MCL 750.535. 
Sec. 38-118. - Failure to return rented property. 
    No person shall refuse or willfully neglect to return a motor vehicle, trailer or other tangible property which he has on a rental or lease basis under any agreement in writing providing for the property's return to a particular place at a particular time. 
(Code 2004,  38-118; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(5); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(5)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Failure to return rented property, MCL 750.362a. 
Sec. 38-119. - False orders for deliveries of food. 
    No person shall telephone in a false order to any food delivery service or a false request to any service business and request that food be delivered to a location or that services be rendered at a particular location. 
(Code 2004,  38-119; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(8); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(8)), 4-1-2002) 
Sec. 38-120. - Accessing confidential information. 
    No person shall, by use of a computer, telephone or other electronic or mechanical device, obtain or gain access to any database, confidential records or other information not his own, without permission of the owner or keeper of such information. 
(Code 2004,  38-120; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(7); Ord. No. 06-02,  3(10(7)), 4-1-2002) 
Sec. 38-121. - Theft detection tags or shielding devices. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Theft detection shielding device means a bag, container or other device laminated, coated or constructed to shield merchandise from detection, or to otherwise prevent its detection, by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor. 
    Theft detection tag removal device means a device designed or capable of use to remove a theft prevention sensor tag from clothing or other merchandise. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly possess a theft detection shielding device, a theft detection tag removal device or any tool, implement or device which has been designed or adapted for breaking open any building or motor vehicle, or for starting the engine of a motor vehicle without the regular key, or for removing sensor tags from property for sale at retail, with the intent to use or employ such device, tool or implement for the purpose of willfully removing property not his own. 
(Code 2004,  38-121; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.310(10); Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(16), (17)), 3(10(10)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.360a. 
Secs. 38-122-38-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISHONORED CHECKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dishonored checks, MCL 750.131 et seq. 

Sec. 38-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Address of record means the address that appears on the check or the last known address of record with the secretary of state at the time the check was presented for payment of goods or services. 
    Check means any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository. 
    Dishonored means any: 
(1)  Check, draft or order drawn or written on any account, or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, without sufficient funds for the payment thereof when presentation is made to the drawee. 
(2)  Check, draft or order drawn or written on any account which has been closed with or by the bank or other depository upon which it is drawn. 
    Expenses of dishonored check response means the direct and reasonable cost incurred by the city, or by a private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, when making a dishonored check response, including the cost of providing the police, city attorney and/or administrative services in response to any dishonored check. The costs further include all of the salaries and wages of the city personnel and/or contractors responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of the personnel and contractors engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, and all costs connected with the administration and provision of any prosecution of the person causing the incident. 
(Code 2004,  38-141; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.771, 20.792) 
Sec. 38-142. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall, with the intent to defraud, make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing, at the time of the making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer does not have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository for the payment of the check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation, of the amount payable in such check, draft or order in any amount. 
(b)  No person shall, with the intent to defraud, make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, unless the person has sufficient funds for payment thereof when presentment is due to the drawee in any amount, except where the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the time thereof. 
(c)  As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all cost and protest fees, within five business days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(d)  Where such check, draft or order is protested on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(Code 2004,  38-142; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.772) 
Sec. 38-143. - Liability for dishonored check response. 
(a)  Findings. The city finds that a significant number of checks are written and dishonored within its geographical boundaries, causing serious financial loss and hardship to citizens and merchants therein. In addition, the city finds that the financial loss and hardship incurred by its citizens and merchants seriously impacts the stream of commerce and the general public by causing increases in the costs of goods and services. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police and legal services by persons who are placing dishonored checks into the stream of commerce. 
(b)  Person responsible. Any person is liable for the expense of a dishonored check response if such person proximately causes any incident resulting in a dishonored check response. 
(c)  Presumptions. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, a person is presumed to be the proximate cause of an incident if such person makes, draws, utters or delivers any dishonored check or causes, directly or indirectly, a check to become dishonored. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, a person is presumed to have acted with intent to defraud if such person shall not have paid the drawer thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, including the fees assessed under this section, within five business days after receiving notice, by first class mail to the last known address of record, that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(d)  Charges against person. To the extent permitted by law, the expenses of a dishonored check response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expense under this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(e)  Cost recovery schedule. The city commission shall by resolution adopt a schedule of costs included within the expense of a dishonored check response. The schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk, treasurer or police department. 
(f)  Billing. The chief administrative officer or his designee may submit a bill for the dishonored check response by first class mail to the last known address of record or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this section. The bill shall require full payment within 30 consecutive days from the date of service. Service by mail shall be effective upon depositing the bill in a United States Postal Service receptacle. In no event shall billing be permitted after one year from the last expense incurred. 
(g)  Failure to pay; procedure to recover cost. Any person described in this section as liable for the expense of a dishonored check response, who fails to pay the bill within 30 consecutive days of service, shall be considered in default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by law. 
(Code 2004,  38-143; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.791, 20.793) 
Secs. 38-144-38-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-161. - Endangering safety of assemblies. 
    No person shall incite or cause, or attempt to incite or cause, any assembled group of persons to act in a manner that is likely to, or does, endanger the safety of another person or property. 
(Code 2004,  38-161; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(6)) 
Sec. 38-162. - Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers. 
    No person shall have in his possession, outside of any building, structure or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other similar airtight container of any kind, large enough for a child to enter, which has a snap latch or other locking device thereon, without first removing the snap latch, other locking device or the doors from such icebox, refrigerator or other such airtight container. 
(Code 2004,  38-162; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.053) 
State Law reference- Abandoned or unattended icebox or refrigerator, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 38-163. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following shall apply: 
(1)  "Act 256" means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011 (MCL 28.451 et seq.). 
(2)  For all purposes, the words and phrases in the section shall have the same meaning as provided for in Act 256. 
(b)  Compliance with applicable ordinances and codes. Unless otherwise provided herein, a retailer or wholesaler of fireworks located within the city must comply with the requirements of the city's zoning ordinance, as well as all building codes and regulations. 
(c)  Use of consumer fireworks prohibited. 
(1)  On a day other than the day preceding, the day of, and the day after a national holiday, no person shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks in the city. 
(2)  On the day preceding, the day of, and the day after a national holiday, no person shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., consistent with Act 256. 
A person who violates this subsection (c) shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine of $500.00. 
(d)  Firework safety. No person shall recklessly endanger the life, health, safety, or well-being of any person or property by the ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks. 
(e)  Possession by or sale to minor. 
(1)  No person shall sell fireworks to a person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 years shall use, possess, explode or cause to explode any consumer fireworks within the city except while in the presence and under the control of a parent, guardian or other responsible adult. 
(3)  No person under the age of 18 years shall buy, purchase, acquire or obtain any consumer fireworks within the city. 
(f)  Use of fireworks. No person shall use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance. As used in this subsection: 
(1)  Alcoholic liquor means that term as defined in section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Controlled substance means that term as defined in section 8b of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, as amended from time to time. 
(g)  Violations, fines and penalties. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine up to $500.00. 
(Code 2004,  38-163; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(5); Ord. No. 1-12,  1, 5-23-2012; Ord. No. 4-12,  1, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 8-13,  1, 2, 6-30-2013) 
Sec. 38-164. - Placement of glass, nails or pointed objects. 
    No person shall maliciously throw or place glass, nails, tacks or other dangerous pointed or edged substances in or on any beach, highway, public property or private walk or driveway not his own. 
(Code 2004,  38-164; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.313(8)) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 38-165. - Noxious and offensive odors. 
    No person shall permit matter to putrefy or decay, or be burned so as to cause, nor in any other manner cause or create, noxious or offensive odors, fumes or gases that imperil the health or safety of any person or so as to disturb, unnecessarily and without reasonable cause, the comfort of any person within the city. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  38-165; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.055, 35.064) 
Secs. 38-166-38-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 750.222 et seq.; local regulation of firearms, MCL 123.1101 et seq. 

Sec. 38-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bow means a device for propelling an arrow from a string drawn, held, and released by hand where the force used to hold the string in the drawn position is provided by the archer's muscles. 
    Dangerous weapon means any weapon likely to produce death or great bodily injury, or a weapon which, in the manner in which it is used, or attempted to be used, endangers life or inflicts great bodily harm. 
    Firearm means any weapon or device from which is propelled any missile, projectile, bullet, shot, pellet or other mass by means of explosives, compressed air or gas or by means of springs, levers or other mechanical devices which weapon or device shall be capable by the discharge of any such propelled missile, projectile, bullet, shot, pellet or other mass of inflicting personal injury or death upon any person, except any smooth bore rifle or hand gun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling on any one manipulation of the trigger, a single BB, not exceeding .177 caliber, by means of a spring, gas or air. 
(Code 2004,  38-191, 38-199; Ord. No. 18-67,  1, 9-24-1967; Ord. No. 14-90,  1, 7-15-1990; Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(4)), 4-1-2002) 
Sec. 38-192. - Discharge. 
    No person shall, without authority by law, discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol, paintball gun or other dangerous weapon within or into the city, except at a city approved facility established for such purpose. This section shall not apply to the discharge of blank ammunition as part of a city-approved event, parade or funeral ceremony. 
(Code 2004,  38-192; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.312(7)) 
Sec. 38-193. - Possession of martial arts weapons. 
    No person shall possess weapons of the martial arts without a legitimate cause which is related to the person's occupation or business and except on the person's own private property. 
(Code 2004,  38-193; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.312(5)) 
Sec. 38-194. - Sale or possession of knife having mechanical opening device. 
    No person shall sell, offer to sell or have in his possession any knife having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade of which can be opened by manipulating a button, applying pressure on a handle or other mechanical contrivance, except under such conditions as are provided by state law. 
(Code 2004,  38-194; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.312(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.226a. 
Sec. 38-195. - Carrying concealed weapon. 
(a)  No person shall carry a dagger, knife, dirk, stiletto, double-edged nonfolding stabbing instrument of any length or other dangerous weapon, except hunting knifes adapted and carried as such, concealed on or about his person or in a motor vehicle, concealed or otherwise, operated or occupied by such person, except in his dwelling house or place of business, or on other land possessed by such person. 
(b)  No person shall carry a pistol concealed on or about his person, or, whether concealed or otherwise, in a vehicle operated or occupied by him, without a license as provided by law, except in his dwelling place or place of business, or, if licensed, carry a pistol in a place or manner inconsistent with any restrictions upon such license. 
(Code 2004,  38-195; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.312(2), (3)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.227. 
Sec. 38-196. - Public possession. 
    No person shall, without authority by law, possess or brandish any firearm, air rifle, air pistol, paintball gun or other dangerous weapon in any public street, park or place open to, or within the view of, the general public. 
(Code 2004,  38-196; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.312(8)) 
Sec. 38-197. - Weapons in vehicles. 
    No person shall possess, within the passenger compartment of any motor vehicle, any firearm, air rifle, air pistol, paintball gun or other dangerous weapon in or about any public street, park or public place unless the weapon is licensed as required by law or is unloaded and securely wrapped or encased; provided, however, that such prohibition shall not apply to a law enforcement officer in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(Code 2004,  38-197; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.312(4)) 
Sec. 38-198. - Throwing objects. 
    No person shall wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, paintball, missile or object from any moving vehicle or toward any person, vehicle or property of another person. 
(Code 2004,  38-198; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.312(6)) 
State Law reference- Throwing stone or missile at train or automobile, MCL 750.394. 
Sec. 38-199. - Reserved. 
Sec. 38-200. - Areas defined. 
(a)  No firearm shall be discharged at any time within the city limits except when properly discharged on a properly licensed firing range. A BB gun, as referred to in section 38-191, may be discharged in any place or manner permitted under the laws of the state. 
(b)  No bow and arrow shall be discharged at any time within the city, except when properly discharged on an indoor range or, when properly discharged outdoors on property consisting of not-less-than five contiguous acres, the narrow side of which is not less than 450 feet, owned by one or more persons who, by mutual written agreement, provide their property for such purpose; provided, however, that no bow and arrow shall be discharged within 450 feet of a house, garage, barn or any commercial establishment or any other occupied building, except by written consent of the owner. 
(Code 2004,  38-200; Ord. No. 18-67,  1, 9-24-1967; Ord. No. 14-90,  1, 7-15-1990) 
Secs. 38-201-38-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-231. - Disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall create or unlawfully engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in any public place, except in reasonable self-defense when attacked without reasonable provocation or in reasonable defense of another who was so attacked. 
(Code 2004,  38-231; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(1)) 
Sec. 38-232. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No person shall disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct or language. 
(Code 2004,  38-232; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(2)) 
Sec. 38-233. - Disturbing meetings. 
    No person shall disturb or unreasonably interfere with any service of worship or any other assembly gathered for lawful purposes. 
(Code 2004,  38-233; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(4)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing religious worship or other meetings, MCL 750.169, 750.170. 
Sec. 38-234. - Obstructing public passages. 
    No person shall, without proper authority, conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(Code 2004,  38-234; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(3)) 
Sec. 38-235. - Begging and soliciting. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg or solicit mean and include, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining donations. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to ask, beg or solicit from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  Except to the extent otherwise expressly permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  Within any public transportation vehicle, or within 15 feet of any bus stop, taxi stand or rapid transit stop; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall be interpreted to prohibit related parties from soliciting money or other things of value from one another. 
Organizations exempted by law from this section shall register with the clerk's office and establish that they meet the requirements of MCL 257.676b(2) and individuals soliciting on behalf of such organizations within a public right of way may not be nearer the roadway than two feet of the curb of a two-lane road or the right-hand curb lane of a multi-lane road. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)  Accosting another; or 
(2)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(Code 2004,  38-235; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.304(4); Ord. No. 06-02,  2(4(4)), 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 9-13,  2, 9-21-2013; Ord. No. 13-18,  1, 11-12-2018) 
State Law reference- Begging, MCL 750.167(1)(h). 
Sec. 38-236. - Unsanitary acts. 
    No person shall expectorate, urinate, defecate or perform any other act which creates a hazardous, unsanitary or deleterious condition in any public place or upon the property of any other person. This subsection shall not apply to the proper use of public restroom facilities. 
(Code 2004,  38-236; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.313(5)) 
Secs. 38-237-38-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOISE 

Sec. 38-261. - Penalties. 
    A person who violates any of the provisions of this division is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  38-261; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.064) 
Sec. 38-262. - Exceptions. 
    The terms of prohibitions in this division shall not apply or be enforced against the following: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. Any police, fire, public utility vehicle or ambulance while being operated in a manner authorized by law. 
(2)  Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, highways or within other public rights-of-way performed by or on behalf of any governmental agency, franchise or authorized telecommunication permittee during the night when the public safety renders it impossible to perform such work during the working day. 
(Code 2004,  38-262; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.057) 
Sec. 38-263. - Loud noises. 
(a)  No person shall permit or allow any loud noise, electrical, mechanical, human or animal in origin, to be emitted from any place occupied or controlled by him so as to unnecessarily disturb, without reasonable cause, the quiet, comfort or repose of any person. 
(b)  No person shall create any loud noise in such a manner as to unnecessarily disturb, without reasonable cause, the quiet, comfort or repose of any person between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as allowed by permit issued by the city. 
(Code 2004,  38-263; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(8), (10)) 
Sec. 38-264. - Engine exhaust. 
    The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom, is unlawful. 
(Code 2004,  38-264; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.056(G)) 
Sec. 38-265. - Construction noises. 
    The erection (including excavation therefor), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways at any time on Sundays, and except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on other days, is unlawful. The mayor, upon recommendation of the department of public works, may grant temporary exceptions to this section in writing. 
(Code 2004,  38-265; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.056(H)) 
Sec. 38-266. - Handling merchandise. 
    The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is unlawful. 
(Code 2004,  38-266; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.056(I)) 
Sec. 38-267. - Sound amplifiers. 
    The outdoor use of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other electrical or mechanical device intended to increase the volume of sound, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle, without first having obtained a permit from the chief of police, upon consultation with the community development director, is unlawful. Such permit shall be issued upon written application being made describing the intended use of such equipment and upon a determination that the described use, at the times and places indicated, will not unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, repose or safety of any person. The reason for any application's denial shall be provided in writing and may be appealed in writing to the city commission within ten days of the decision. 
(Code 2004,  38-267; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.307(8), 35.056(K)) 
Sec. 38-268. - Sound systems in vehicles. 
    No person operating or in control of a stopped or moving motor vehicle shall operate or permit operation of a sound system in the vehicle so as to produce sound that is audible at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., or audible at a distance of 25 feet from the vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the sound system of a police, fire or other public service vehicle while the public service vehicle is being used in the performance of public service work. 
(Code 2004,  38-268; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.056(M)) 
Secs. 38-269-38-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-301. - Prostitution. 
    No person shall engage in prostitution or solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal act. 
(Code 2004,  38-301; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.309(1)) 
State Law reference- Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Sec. 38-302. - Gambling. 
(a)  No person shall engage in gambling or any game of chance for money unless otherwise permitted by law. 
(b)  No person shall keep, maintain or permit the use of a gambling room, table or equipment, or any policy or pool tickets to be used for gambling on any premises occupied or controlled by him. 
(Code 2004,  38-302; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.309(2), (5)) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 38-303. - Public nudity, indecent exposure, swimming nude. 
(a)  In this section, the term "public nudity" means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or from a private place in such a manner as to allow the display to be seen from a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not limited to, payment or promise for payment of an admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast without less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. Such term does not include any of the following: 
(1)  A woman's breastfeeding of a baby, whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding. 
(2)  "Material" as defined in section 2 of Public Act No. 343 of 1984 (MCL 752.362). 
(3)  "Sexually explicit visual material" as defined in section 3 of Public Act No. 33 of 1978 (MCL 722.673). 
(b)  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in public nudity. 
(2)  Make any indecent exposure of his person in a public place or knowingly do so in a private place where the exhibition or exposure may be viewed by a person located in a public place. 
(3)  Swim or bathe in the nude in any public place or on private property without the specific permission of the owner of such property. 
(Code 2004,  38-303; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.313(1), (2), (4); Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(11)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, MCL 750.335a; power to punish public nudity, MCL 117.5h. 
Secs. 38-304-38-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq.; Michigan liquor control code of 1998. 

Subdivision 1. - In General 

Sec. 38-321. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance means a drug, substance or precursor which has been designated as a controlled substance by any federal law or state statute. 
    Drug means any drug or other substance, the sale, distribution and/or possession of which is prohibited or restricted by federal or state law. 
(Code 2004,  38-321; Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(3), (6)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
Sec. 38-322. - Sale, manufacture, use of controlled substances. 
(a)  No person shall use, knowingly possess, manufacture, plant, grow, cultivate or deliver to another person, any controlled substance. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit a police officer engaged in lawful duties, a person acting pursuant to a license granted by the United States or the state, or a person acting at the lawful direction of a licensed medical doctor or dentist. 
(b)  In addition to the fines, costs, terms of imprisonment or terms of probation, a person convicted under this section shall be subject to the driver's license sanctions authorized by state statute. 
(c)  When a person, who has not previously been convicted of an offense under this division, a similar ordinance of another municipality or any similar state statute or statute of the United States, pleads guilty, the court, with the consent of the prosecuting attorney, without entering a judgment of guilt, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation under such terms and conditions as are authorized by state statute. 
(Code 2004,  38-322; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(10)) 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
Sec. 38-323. - Selling drugs without license. 
    No person shall sell, give or furnish any drug to any person without first obtaining a license to sell, give or furnish such drug. 
(Code 2004,  38-323; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(2)) 
State Law reference- Licensing of sale of controlled substances, MCL 333.7303 et seq. 
Sec. 38-324. - Sale of alcohol to intoxicated persons. 
    No person shall sell, give or furnish any alcoholic liquor to any person who appears, or is reasonably suspected, to be drunk or intoxicated. 
(Code 2004,  38-324; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(3)) 
State Law reference- Sale to intoxicated persons, MCL 436.1707. 
Sec. 38-325. - Public intoxication. 
    No person shall be intoxicated or under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or under the influence of any drug or any combination of alcoholic liquors and drugs in any public place and either directly endanger the safety of another person or the property of another person, or act in a manner that causes or creates a public disturbance. 
(Code 2004,  38-325; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e); local ordinances punishing public intoxication, MCL 330.1286. 
Sec. 38-326. - Operation of machinery while under the influence. 
    No person shall knowingly allow or permit any other person to operate a piece of machinery owned or controlled by him when he knows, or should reasonably know, that the other person is intoxicated or under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance. 
(Code 2004,  38-326; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(8)) 
State Law reference- Driving while intoxicated, MCL 257.625 et seq.; operation of vessel under influence of alcohol, MCL 324.80176 et seq.; operation of off-road vehicle under influence of alcohol, MCL 324.81134 et seq.; operation of snowmobiles under influence of alcohol, MCL 324.82127 et seq. 
Sec. 38-327. - Public consumption or possession of alcohol. 
(a)  No person shall consume, possess or knowingly have under his control any open container of an alcoholic liquor in any public park, on public school property or upon any public street or public sidewalk. This subsection shall not apply if the alcoholic liquor is consumed or possessed exclusively within an area which is currently licensed for sale or consumption by the state liquor control commission, and if the person is otherwise lawfully entitled to consume or possess the alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  To the extent otherwise permitted by law, alcohol may only be possessed or consumed on city-owned property consistent with and subject to a permit issued by the city. 
(Code 2004,  38-327; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(9); Ord. No. 8-12,  1, 9-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-328. - Open house parties. 
    No person shall permit or allow any premises owned or controlled by him to be used or occupied by persons engaged in the unlawful use of an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance. 
(Code 2004,  38-328; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(11)) 
State Law reference- Prohibited conduct by person having control of real property, MCL 750.141a. 
Secs. 38-329-38-350. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 2. - Drug Paraphernalia[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Drug paraphernalia, MCL 333.7451 et seq. 

Sec. 38-351. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as provided for in the Michigan Public Health Code (MCL 333.1101 et seq.). Such term includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana/marihuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana/marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips, which are objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana/marihuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(Code 2004,  38-351; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.701) 
Sec. 38-352. - Exclusions. 
    This subdivision does not apply to: 
(1)  A police officer who, in the course of his duties, is required to perform certain acts in investigating illegal drug traffic. 
(2)  A person for whom marijuana/marihuana has been prescribed by a physician, duly licensed by the state. 
(3)  A person who, in the course of his business, is required to handle such items. 
(Code 2004,  38-352; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.704) 
Sec. 38-353. - Possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or possess with the intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this subdivision. 
(Code 2004,  38-353; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.702) 
Sec. 38-354. - Manufacture or delivery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, or possess with the intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this subdivision. 
(Code 2004,  38-354; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.703) 
Sec. 38-355. - Advertisement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Code 2004,  38-355; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.706) 
Secs. 38-356-38-360. - Reserved. 
Subivision 2. - Chemical Inhalants[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1-18,  1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, set out provisions adding  38-391-38-393. To preserve the existing  38-361-38-363, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as  38-361-38-363. 

Sec. 38-361. - Generally. 
    No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, hallucination, elation, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally inhale, ingest, apply, use, possess, or introduce any chemical agent into their respiratory or circulatory system. This shall not prohibit the inhalation or application of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes or the use of tobacco products or vapor pipes to the extent permitted by law. 
    No person shall knowingly use or possess with intent to use inhalant paraphernalia to inhale, ingest, apply, use, possess, or introduce any chemical agent into their respiratory or circulatory system in violation of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1-18,  1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 38-362. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chemical agent means any substance containing a toxic chemical or organic solvent or both, having the property of releasing toxic vapors. The term includes, but is not limited to, glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride, hydrocarbons, and hydrocarbon derivatives. 
    Inhalant paraphernalia means equipment or materials of any kind that is intended for use in inhaling, ingesting, or otherwise introducing into the human body a chemical agent. The term includes a tube, balloon, bag, fabric, bottle, or other container used to concentrate or hold in suspension a chemical agent or vapors of the chemical agent. 
(Ord. No. 1-18,  1, 1-8-2018) 
Sec. 38-363. - Sale of devices containing nitrous oxide. 
    A person shall not sell or otherwise distribute to another person any device that contains any quantity of nitrous oxide or sell or otherwise distribute a device to dispense nitrous oxide for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or nervous system. This section does not apply to nitrous oxide that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for human consumption or to any of the following: 
(1)  A person licensed under the Food Processing Act of 1977, 1978 PA 328, MCL 289.801-289.810, or Chapter VII of the Food Law of 2000, 2000 PA 92, MCL 289.7101-289.7137, who sells or otherwise distributes the device as a grocery product. 
(2)  A person engaged in the business of selling or distributing catering supplies only or food processing equipment only, or selling or distributing compressed gases for industrial or medical use who sells or otherwise distributes the device in the course of that business. 
(3)  A pharmacist, pharmacist intern, or pharmacy as defined in Section 17707 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17707, who dispenses the device in the course of his or her duties as a pharmacist or pharmacist intern or as a pharmacy. 
(4)  A health care professional. 
(Ord. No. 1-18,  1, 1-8-2018) 
Secs. 38-364-38-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS OR UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 38-391. - Truancy. 
(a)  In this section, the term: 
(1)  School means any public, private or parochial preelementary, elementary (grades K-6), secondary (grades 7-12), high school or combination thereof. 
(2)  Truant means a person between six and 16 years of age who is out of school during regular school hours. 
(b)  No person shall: 
(1)  Be a truant and remain in any public place, unless such activity is part of an organized school program or such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(2)  Having care or custody of a minor, knowingly permit a person between the age of six and 16 years to violate this section. 
(Code 2004,  38-391; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.313(9); Ord. No. 06-02,  1(1(14), (18)), 4-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Compulsory school attendance, MCL 380.1561 et seq. 
Sec. 38-392. - Curfew for underage persons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)  Under the age of 12 years to be in any public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Who is 12 years of age or older and less than 16 years of age to be in any public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Who is 16 years of age or older and less than 17 years of age to be in any public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the person was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the person's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the person's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the person's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the person's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency. In this subsection, the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. Such term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life; 
(6)  Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the person, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the person; 
(7)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
(8)  Married, or had been married or is an emancipated minor removed in accordance with law. 
(c)  No person shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage any person to violate subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2004,  38-392; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.341-20.346; Ord. No. 4-09,  1, 8-28-2009) 
State Law reference- Curfew for underage persons, MCL 722.751 et seq. 
Sec. 38-393. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to sale of alcohol to underage persons was deleted as covered by Code  6-1. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(6) and Code 2004,  38-393. 
Sec. 38-394. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to false representation of age in order to obtain alcohol was deleted as covered by Code  6-1. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(7) and Code 2004,  38-394. 
Sec. 38-395. - Adoption of youth tobacco act. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the youth tobacco act, Public Act No. 31 of 1915 (MCL 722.641 et seq.), as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 2004,  38-395; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.306(12)-(14)) 
Sec. 38-396. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to purchase, consumption or possession of alcohol by underage persons was deleted as covered by Code  6-1. It was derived from Code 2004,  38-396, and Ordinance No. 13-04,  1, December 27, 2004. 
Sec. 38-397. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to transport or possession of alcohol in a motor vehicle was deleted as covered by Code  66-1. It was derived from Code 2004,  38-397 and Ordinance No. 13-04,  1, 12-27-2004. 
Secs. 38-398-38-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 38-431. - False alarms or reports. 
    No person shall knowingly and willfully furnish to any police officer, firefighter, police dispatcher, fire dispatcher or employee of the city, acting in the lawful discharge of his duties, a false name, address, age or date of birth, or a false or misleading report in connection with a fire, crime, police inquiry, medical emergency or traffic accident. 
(Code 2004,  38-431; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(2)) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false report of crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 38-432. - Resisting, opposing or hindering public officers or employees. 
    No person shall knowingly and willfully use any physical or verbal conduct which obstructs, resists, hinders or opposes any police officer, firefighter or any federal, county, state or city employee who is acting in the lawful discharge of his duties. 
(Code 2004,  38-432; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(1)) 
State Law reference- Obstructing police officer, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 38-433. - Failure to obey public officers. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  When operating a motor vehicle which has been stopped in response to a police officer's signal, leave or attempt to leave the scene unless and until he has received permission to do so from the police officer. 
(2)  Knowingly and willfully fail to obey the command of any properly identified law enforcement officer to stop or halt. 
(3)  Knowingly and willfully fail to obey the command of any police officer who is directing traffic or engaging in crowd control or cross a police line without specific authority or the permission from a police officer at the scene in which the police line is constructed. 
(4)  Knowingly and willfully fail to obey the command of any law enforcement officer, school official, the mayor or other authorized representative of the department of public works and/or recreation departments to leave a public park, schoolground, playground, boulevard, swimming pool, recreation area, school building or city building when ordered to do so. 
(Code 2004,  38-433; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(6), (8)-(10)) 
State Law reference- Failure to obey police signal, MCL 750.479a. 
Sec. 38-434. - Aiding escape. 
    No person shall escape, attempt to escape or willfully engage in conduct which causes or allows the escape of any person while lawfully in the custody of any police officer. 
(Code 2004,  38-434; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(3)) 
State Law reference- Escapes, rescues and prison breaking, MCL 750.183 et seq. 
Sec. 38-435. - Failure to obey signs. 
    No person shall knowingly and willfully disobey any validly posted sign in any public park or other public place. 
(Code 2004,  38-435; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(5)) 
Sec. 38-436. - Defacing or tearing down official notices. 
    No person shall mutilate, deface, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard lawfully posted by any city officer or employee unless prior permission is given by such officer or employee to remove such notice or placard. 
(Code 2004,  38-436; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.305(9)) 
Sec. 38-437. - Concealing evidence of crime. 
    No person shall falsely indicate a lack of knowledge, or when asked by a law enforcement officer, a prosecuting attorney, the city attorney or a judge, fail to disclose or conceal knowledge of the actual commission of a violation of any statute or city ordinance from a prosecuting attorney, city attorney, judge or law enforcement officer investigating such violation. This section shall not be interpreted to conflict with the right of any person not to be a witness against himself or any other legally recognized privilege or right. 
(Code 2004,  38-437; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(7)) 
State Law reference- Perjury, MCL 750.422 et seq. 
Sec. 38-438. - Impersonation of public employee. 
    No person shall impersonate a firefighter, police officer or other employee of the city, or any government unit, without due authority. 
(Code 2004,  38-438; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.308(4)) 
State Law reference- False personation of officers, MCL 750.215. 
Sec. 38-439. - Vehicle radios receiving police frequencies; permit required. 
    No person who has been convicted of a felony during the preceding five years shall equip a vehicle or possess within a vehicle a radio receiving set that will receive signals sent on frequencies assigned by the Federal Communications Commission of the United States of America for police purposes, or use the same unless such vehicle is used or owned by a bona fide amateur radio operator holding a technician class, general, advanced, or extra class amateur license issued by the Federal Communications Commission. This section shall not be construed as restricting the use of radar detectors, or the ability of a person to transport within a vehicle an inoperable radio. 
(Code 2004,  38-439; Ord. No. 13-04,  1, 12-27-2004; Ord. No. 11-06,  1, 7-30-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.508. 
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to operate system of public recreation, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 42-31. - Established. 
    There is established a park and recreation commission. 
(Code 2004,  42-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.151) 
Sec. 42-32. - Membership. 
    The park and recreation commission shall consist of nine persons who shall be residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city commission. One member shall be a city commissioner, one member shall be a board representative from the Kelloggsville School District and one member shall be a board representative from the city public schools. Members shall serve for three-year terms, with the first park and recreation commission being appointed so that three vacancies will occur each year. Members shall be appointed so as to take office in January following their appointment. The recreation director, public works director and city planner shall be ex officio members. 
(Code 2004,  42-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.151) 
Sec. 42-33. - Officers and meetings. 
(a)  As soon as may be convenient after the appointment of park and recreation commission members to succeed those whose terms have expired, members of the park and recreation commission shall meet and elect a chairman and vice-chairman. Names of the officers shall be submitted forthwith to the city clerk. The chairman shall preside at meetings of the park and recreation commission and in his absence such duties shall be assumed by the vice-chairman. The recreation director is responsible for keeping accurate minutes of the proceedings at each meeting. 
(b)  The park and recreation commission shall meet at regular intervals, but not less than four times each year. 
(Code 2004,  42-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.152, 35.153) 
Sec. 42-34. - Finances. 
    The appropriations made by the city commission in each year for park and recreation purposes shall be used for the operation, maintenance and improvement of city parks and to operate recreational programs in the city. 
(Code 2004,  42-34; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.154) 
Sec. 42-35. - Budget request. 
    Not later than March 1 in each year, the park and recreation commission shall file with the finance director a capital improvement budget request for the following year, itemizing, in detail, the purposes for which the funds requested will be used. Such requests shall be considered together with all other proposed budget items as required by the city Charter. 
(Code 2004,  42-35; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.155) 
Sec. 42-36. - Duties. 
    The park and recreation commission shall: 
(1)  Prepare and develop plans and programs for parks, playgrounds and recreation areas for the city. 
(2)  Appoint a representative to assist the mayor in interviewing and making recommendations for the appointment of a recreation director who is to report regularly to the park and recreation commission. 
(Code 2004,  42-36; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.157) 
Secs. 42-37-42-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PUBLIC USE OF PARKS 

Sec. 42-71. - Hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be in any city park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without a written permit from the director of parks and recreation. The city activities center is exempt from such restriction at the discretion of the director of recreation; however, if the activities center is operating between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the building/activity will be under continuous supervision by a member of the recreation department. Such a permit shall be issued upon a showing that there will be compliance with all other ordinances and a further showing that public peace and public safety will not be endangered. 
(Code 2004,  42-71; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.171) 
Sec. 42-72. - Operation of motorized vehicles. 
    No person shall operate any motorized vehicle, including snowmobiles, on any city park property, except in areas specifically designated for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 2004,  42-72; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.313(6)) 
Chapter 46 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq.; litter control, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Littering and junk. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, accumulate, throw, scatter, leave or place refuse, waste, debris, garbage, dead animals, leaves or other noxious or unsightly materials in or upon any public right-of-way or other public or private place or property. 
(b)  No person shall convey or transport junk, broken glass, scrap metal, metal shavings or other sharp or dangerous materials in any form over the public streets or alleys of the city unless such junk, glass, metal or other material shall be contained in a box or other receptacle, constructed so that such junk, glass, metal or other material cannot fall through the receptacle or over the sides of the receptacle onto the public streets or alleys of the city. 
(c)  Every person shall keep or permit within the lot line of his premises a suitable receptacle for depositing cans, ashes, glass or any metal, stone, earthenware or other such materials, and shall not litter his premises with such materials. 
(d)  The occupant of any premises or the person responsible for any premises within the city in which any refuse shall be accumulated which is not disposed of by an approved incinerator or garbage grinder, shall maintain on such premises one or more refuse containers with suitable tightly fitted covers, which shall be kept in a reasonably clean condition and shall be rodentproof. All residential garbage containers must be stored inside a structure or at rear or side of a building. No refuse container shall be filled beyond its capacity. Such container shall be placed out for proper collection of refuse no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the regularly scheduled collection day and removed as soon as practicable on such collection day. 
(e)  No person shall transport or dump any refuse or other waste materials in such a manner as to cause the littering or destruction of any stream, creek, ditch, drain, culvert or gutter. 
(f)  No occupant or owner of improved or unimproved property shall place, deposit, dump, scatter, leave or allow the accumulation of junk, scrap, debris, garbage, rubbish, industrial refuse, litter of any kind, waste materials, construction waste, waste products, excess dirt or soil, or any other dangerous or unsightly materials within the lot line of such property or upon the adjacent right-of-way. 
(g)  The city or its authorized representatives are hereby empowered to enter upon any premises in the city for the purpose of assessing cleanup costs, but only where notice of such action is first provided and the owner is afforded an opportunity to comply, and no person shall molest or interfere with the city or their authorized representatives, while they are engaged in such assessment as provided in this subsection. 
(h)  A person who violates any of the provisions of this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  46-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.058, 35.064) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Secs. 46-2-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved incinerator and approved garbage grinder mean incinerators and garbage grinders, respectively, which conform with all city ordinance requirements, are used exclusively to dispose of solid waste generated by the occupant of the site of generation on which they are located and are consistent with the plan. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, refuse, wastewater sludge or other combustible materials. 
    Board of public works means the county board of public works established pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 185 of 1957 (MCL 123.731 et seq.). 
    Combustible waste means solid waste that is combustible in the MBI as shall be determined solely by the board of public works. Such term shall include garbage; combustible rubbish, such as paper; cardboard; cartons; wood; boxes; rags; cloth; bedding; leather; carpeting; combustible construction and demolition debris; and any other solid waste that is combustible in the MBI, as shall be determined solely by the board of public works. Such term shall exclude noncombustible solid waste, such as ashes; noncombustible rubbish; incinerator ash; incinerator residue; municipal and industrial sludges; animal waste; pathological and biological waste; asbestos and asbestos waste products; explosives; radioactive materials; appliances; concrete rubble; noncombustible construction and demolition debris; rock; gravel and earthen materials; automobiles; trailers; equipment wire and cable; all waste, other than solid waste, such as hazardous waste, site-separated materials and source-separated materials; and any other type of waste that is noncombustible in the MBI, as shall be determined solely by the board of public works. 
    Commercial/industrial license means a license to collect solid waste from any and all sources within the city, except single-family and duplex residential dwellings. 
    Commercial operation date means the date when the MBI has been completed and tested and is, in the sole opinion of the county, ready for full commercial operation. 
    County means the County of Kent, Michigan, acting by and through its board of commissioners or its department of public works. 
    Disposal site means any of the following: 
(1)  A solid waste transfer facility; 
(2)  A single incinerator having an average daily design capacity exceeding 50 tons of solid waste per day, or two or more incinerators located at one site, under the control of one person, and having an aggregate average daily design capacity exceeding 150 tons of solid waste per day; 
(3)  A sanitary landfill; 
(4)  A solid waste processing plant; or 
(5)  Any other solid waste handling or disposal facility utilized in the disposal of solid waste. 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables. 
    Hazardous waste means hazardous waste as defined in part 111 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.) and as identified in administrative rules promulgated pursuant to such act. 
    MBI means the mass-burn steam energy-generating incinerator, to be constructed by or on behalf of, or available by contract or lease with, the county within the City of Grand Rapids in accordance with the plan. 
    Plan means the county solid waste management plan approved by the county board of commissioners and the director of the department of natural resources, pursuant to the requirements and provisions of the state pursuant to part 115 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11501 et seq.). 
    Premises means any enclosed area used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes, separately or in combination, to which a separate street address, postal address or box, tax roll description or other similar identification has been assigned to, or is in use by, a person having control of the area. 
    Residential license means a license to collect solid waste from single-family and duplex residential buildings in the city. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
    Site of generation means any premises in, or on, which solid waste is generated by any person. 
    Site-separated materials means recyclable materials, including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, newspapers, corrugated containers, metals, grass, leaves, brush and yard trimmings, that are separated from solid waste, after collection from a site of generation, by either a waste hauler or the operators of a disposal site to which it is delivered. 
    Solid waste means 
    garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, solid commercial waste, solid industrial waste, and animal waste. However, the term "solid waste" does not include the following: 
(1)  Human body waste. 
(2)  Medical waste. 
(3)  Organic waste generated in the production of livestock and poultry. 
(4)  Liquid waste. 
(5)  Ferrous or nonferrous scrap directed to a scrap metal processor or to a reuser of ferrous or nonferrous products. 
(6)  Slag or slag products directed to a slag processor or to a reuser of slag or slag products. 
(7)  Sludges and ashes managed as recycled or nondetrimental materials appropriate for agricultural or silvicultural use pursuant to a plan approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(8)  The following materials that are used as animal feed, or are applied on, or are composted and applied on, farmland or forestland for an agricultural or silvicultural purpose at an agronomic rate consistent with GAAMPS: 
a.  Food processing residuals and garbage. 
b.  Precipitated calcium carbonate from sugar beet processing. 
c.  Wood ashes resulting solely from a source that burns only wood that is untreated and inert. 
d.  Lime from kraft pulping processes generated prior to bleaching. 
e.  Aquatic plants. 
(9)  Materials approved for emergency disposal by the state department of environmental quality. 
(10)  Source separated materials. 
(11)  Site separated material. 
(12)  Coal ash, when used under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  As a component of concrete, grout, mortar, or casting molds, if the coal ash does not have more than six percent unburned carbon. 
b.  As a raw material in asphalt for road construction, if the coal ash does not have more than 12 percent unburned carbon and passes Michigan test method for water asphalt preferential test, MTM 101, as set forth in the state transportation department's manual for the Michigan test methods (MTM). 
c.  As aggregate, road material, or building material that in ultimate use is or will be stabilized or bonded by cement, limes, or asphalt, or itself act as a bonding agent. To be considered to act as a bonding agent, the coal ash must have at least 10 percent available lime. 
d.  As a road base or construction fill that is placed at least four feet above the seasonal groundwater table and covered with asphalt, concrete, or other material approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(13)  Inert material. 
(14)  Soil that is washed or otherwise removed from sugar beets, has not more than 35 percent moisture content, and is registered as a soil conditioner under part 85 (MCL 324.8501 et seq.). Any testing required to become registered under part 85 is the responsibility of the generator. 
(15)  Soil that is relocated under section 20120c (MCL 324.20120c). 
(16)  Diverted waste that is managed through a waste diversion center. 
(17)  Beneficial use by-products. 
(18)  Coal bottom ash, if substantially free of fly ash or economizer ash, when used as cold weather road abrasive. 
(19)  Stamp sands when used as cold weather road abrasive in the Upper Peninsula by any of the following: 
a.  A public road agency. 
b.  Any other person pursuant to a plan approved by a public road agency. 
(20)  Any material that is reclaimed or reused in the process that generated it. 
(21)  Any secondary material that, as specified in or determined pursuant to 40 CFR 241, is not a solid waste when combusted. 
(22)  Other wastes regulated by state statute. 
    Source-separated materials means recyclable materials, including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, newspapers, corrugated containers, metals, grass, leaves, brush and yard trimmings, that are separated from solid waste prior to the collection of solid waste from a site of generation. 
    Tipping fee means the fee established by resolution of the board of public works to be charged upon delivery of combustible waste to the MBI. 
    Waste hauler means any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste within the city. 
(Code 2004,  46-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.102) 
Sec. 46-32. - Finding of necessity. 
    It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of all persons and property within the city, to provide, by ordinance, for the collection of solid waste within the city, and also to provide that the city may grant licenses for such collection to such waste haulers as the city deems most expedient so as to most efficiently and properly serve the city and the inhabitants thereof. 
(Code 2004,  46-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.101) 
Sec. 46-33. - Refuse collection areas. 
    All garbage, rubbish and other solid waste shall be collected only on the days indicated in the areas marked on the map entitled "Refuse Collection Areas-City of Kentwood, Michigan." 
(Code 2004,  46-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.116) 
Sec. 46-34. - Compliance with laws, rules and regulations required. 
    Waste haulers shall comply with the plan and all applicable federal and state laws, statutes, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, part 115 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11501 et seq.), and administrative rules promulgated pursuant to such act, in the collection, transportation, delivery and disposal of combustible waste. Waste haulers shall also comply with all rules and regulations of the board of public works for the administration and operation of the MBI, including, without limitation, rules and regulations prohibiting delivery of loads consisting primarily of unacceptable waste as solely determined by the board of public works, acting through its designated representatives, and other disposal sites of the county refuse disposal system. 
(Code 2004,  46-34; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.107) 
Sec. 46-35. - Transporting vehicles. 
(a)  A solid waste transporting unit shall have all openings closed and all doors or covers secured by an adequate latch or restraining mechanism to keep them closed while transporting solid waste. It shall be the responsibility of the driver and licensee to assure that the available cover is in the proper position. Special covering shall be used where conditions require control of odor, vermin, liquids, dust or smoke. 
(b)  The solid waste carrying portion of any vehicle shall not be filled beyond its capacity. 
(c)  Where spillage does occur from any solid waste transporting units, the material shall be picked up as soon as possible and the unsuitable area cleaned. 
(d)  Where solid waste is purposely dumped from a licensed solid waste transporting unit due to a hot load or fire, the fire shall be immediately extinguished by the most effective means and the area properly cleaned as soon as reasonably possible. 
(e)  A solid waste transporting vehicle shall be cleaned at intervals frequent enough to maintain the vehicle in a sanitary condition and as free from disagreeable odor as possible to prevent a nuisance or vermin attraction. 
(f)  A solid waste transporting unit shall not be parked in a residential zone longer than necessary to collect solid waste unless such vehicle is parked within a completely enclosed garage or building. A solid waste transporting unit shall not be parked, stored or established at any station so as to cause a nuisance or hazard to health. 
(g)  Any solid waste transporting vehicle issued a permit by the city shall have the name of the duly licensed waste hauler, the address and telephone number, and the number of his license plainly marked upon both sides of the vehicle in a place and color plainly visible, and in letters and figures of three inches or more. 
(h)  Any vehicle for which a license is issued to collect or transport solid waste shall meet the requirements of either subsection (1) or (2) of this subsection (h): 
(1)  Compaction units. 
a.  The weight carrying portion of the vehicle shall be equipped with a unit for compacting, and shall be totally and permanently enclosed and of welded steel construction. Articulated units need not provide compacting devices in those instances where the portion of the vehicle designed to hold or contain solid waste is an independent transportable unit designed to be replaced rather than emptied at the premises. 
b.  Such vehicles shall be of tightfitting construction and have tightfitting doors, and be of a design to form a totally enclosed body or unit. 
c.  Such vehicles shall be equipped so that all loading and unloading openings on the body have tightfitting doors or covers fitted with latches or clamps and rubber or other suitable gaskets to form a spillproof, leakproof and dustproof enclosed body or unit. 
(2)  Open body vehicles. 
a.  The solid waste carrying portion of all open body vehicles shall be of steel construction to a minimum height of two feet. 
b.  Built-up walls of open body vehicles shall be free of any gaps or spaces, and shall be of steel construction to a minimum height of two feet. 
(Code 2004,  46-35; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.104) 
State Law reference- Vehicles scattering load, MCL 257.720. 
Sec. 46-36. - Disposal of solid waste. 
(a)  Solid waste shall be disposed of only by means of an approved incinerator or garbage grinder, or by collection by licensed waste haulers, except that any individual may dispose of solid waste from his own household by personally transporting the solid waste to an approved sanitary landfill, but only in accordance with rules and regulations pertaining thereto and the plan. No person transporting any solid waste in accordance with this subsection shall fail to securely cover and secure the load so that no part of the load shall be lost while being transported. 
(b)  Commencing on the commercial operation date, all combustible waste collected or transported by waste haulers from a site of generation within the city shall be disposed of only in accordance with section 46-37. Prior to the commercial operation date, all combustible waste collected or transported by waste haulers from a site of generation within the city shall be disposed of only at disposal areas approved by the city commission, which may include solid waste processing plants, sanitary landfills, solid waste transfer stations or other solid waste facilities, such as are consistent with the plan. 
(c)  All solid waste, other than combustible waste collected or transported by waste haulers from a site of generation within the city, shall be disposed of only at disposal areas approved by the city commission, which may include solid waste processing plants, sanitary landfills, solid waste transfer stations or other solid waste facilities such as are consistent with the plan. 
(Code 2004,  46-36; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.105) 
Sec. 46-37. - Delivery of combustible waste; commercial operation date. 
(a)  Commencing on the commercial operation date and at all subsequent times, waste haulers shall deliver to the MBI all combustible waste collected or transported from a site of generation within the city and pay the tipping fee for delivery of such waste at the MBI, unless otherwise provided by contract between the city and the waste hauler. Commencing on the commercial operation date and at all times thereafter, no waste hauler shall deliver combustible waste collected or transported from a site of generation within the city to any disposal site other than the MBI. 
(b)  Waste haulers shall deliver all combustible waste to the MBI, regardless of whether the combustible waste is transported in the same load or vehicle as solid waste which is not combustible waste. This requirement shall be absolute and unconditional unless the board of public works, acting through its designated representatives, has made a prior written determination that a specific load of waste consists primarily of waste which would not be accepted for delivery at the MBI. Such a written determination of the board of public works shall not be applicable to waste collected from any site of generation, any load or vehicle, any waste hauler or any facts or circumstances, other than those expressly identified in the written determination. 
(c)  Waste haulers shall not deliver combustible waste to a site for site recyclable materials unless the board of public works, acting through its designated representatives, after the request of the waste hauler, has made a prior written determination that such delivery does not violate this section. Such a written determination shall not be applicable to waste collected from any site of generation, any load or vehicle, any waste hauler or any facts or circumstances other than those expressly identified in the written determination. A written determination pursuant to this section shall not relieve the waste hauler from the obligation to deliver to the MBI all combustible waste remaining in a load after site separation of recyclable materials. 
(d)  Waste haulers shall not deliver hazardous waste to the MBI. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, waste haulers shall not be prohibited from transporting combustible waste collected from a site of generation within the city for disposal at any disposal site located outside of the state. 
(Code 2004,  46-37; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.106) 
Sec. 46-38. - Solid waste containers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Solid waste container means a container or receptacle designed or used for depositing, storing or accumulating solid waste for collection or transportation by a waste hauler. Without limitation, such definition shall include dumpsters, packer boxes and roll-offs or other receptacles designed or used to store solid waste or transport solid waste from a site of generation. 
(b)  Marking. A solid waste container having a capacity of at least one-half cubic yard shall be plainly marked with the name and current street address or the name and current telephone number of the waste hauler which collects solid waste from, or transports solid waste within, the solid waste container. The name and current street address or the name and current telephone number of the waste hauler shall be plainly marked on at least three sides of the solid waste container in letters and figures not less than three inches in height. 
(c)  Responsibility for compliance. The waste hauler collecting solid waste from or transporting the solid waste container having a capacity of at least one-half cubic yard shall be responsible for complying with this section. It shall be a violation of this section for any waste hauler to collect solid waste from or transport such a solid waste container unless the solid waste container has been marked in compliance with this section. 
(Code 2004,  46-38; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.117) 
Secs. 46-39-46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 46-61. - Generally. 
(a)  No person shall engage, in whole or in part, in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste within the city, and no vehicle shall be used for such purposes, unless properly licensed under this division. 
(b)  Such license shall be issued by the city for such periods as it may specify, and shall be designated either as a residential license or commercial/industrial license. It shall be an express condition of each license that the waste hauler shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Every licensed waste hauler shall annually file its rates with the city clerk on July 1, and at least 15 days before the effective date of any change, or the license of such waste hauler shall become null and void. 
(d)  A separate application and license shall be issued for any and each truck or vehicle to be used in the collection of solid waste. 
(e)  The applicant shall furnish to the city clerk evidence of ownership or leasehold interest, in the form of a certificate of title or a motor vehicle registration. 
(f)  The applicant shall furnish to the city clerk evidence of workmen's compensation, contractor's public liability insurance and contractor's motor vehicle bodily injury and property damage insurance in at least the following amounts: 
(1)  Workmen's compensation as required by the state. 
(2)  Contractor's motor vehicle bodily injury and property damage insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 per person, $500,000.00 bodily injury, per accident, including accidental death, and $250,000.00 property damage, per occurrence. 
Any hired or nonownership motor vehicles shall be insured in the same amounts. Any insurance policy shall provide a 30-day written notice of cancellation to the city clerk. 
(Code 2004,  46-61; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.103) 
Sec. 46-62. - Termination. 
    The city commission may, as provided in this section, cancel and terminate any license granted to any waste hauler found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter; provided, however, that in such case, the city commission shall: 
(1)  Furnish the waste hauler a written statement of its reasons for termination at least 15 days prior to the city commission committee of the whole hearing as provided in this section. 
(2)  Grant such waste hauler a full hearing before the committee of the whole of the city commission and, if requested thereafter, a hearing before the city commission. 
(3)  Furnish the waste hauler with a written statement of findings within 30 days after any hearing and, if such statement is one of termination, shall indicate the effective date of such termination. 
(Code 2004,  46-62; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.108; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 46-63. - Failure to obtain. 
    If, at any time following the issuance of a license under this division, nonlicensed waste haulers operate in the city, the city shall take such action as it deems proper to abate such nonlicensed operation, but the grant by the city of any license under this division shall in no way obligate the city to any licensed waste hauler for any damages alleged to have been sustained by reason of unlicensed hauling. 
(Code 2004,  46-63; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.109) 
Sec. 46-64. - Existing licensees. 
    The city shall, within a reasonable time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, notify all presently licensed waste haulers of such ordinance by mailing a copy of such ordinance to each such licensed waste hauler. The city may, at its discretion, permit any presently licensed waste hauler to operate for a stated period of time, even after licenses are granted under this division, if it finds that sooner termination would cause extreme hardship upon the terminated licensee. 
(Code 2004,  46-64; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.110) 
Chapter 50 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments,  10.1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost includes, when referring to the cost of any local public improvement, the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction and legal fees and all other costs incidental to the making of such improvement, the special assessments and the financing. 
    Local public improvement means any public improvement which is of such a nature as to especially benefit any real property or properties within a district in the vicinity of such improvement. 
(Code 2004,  50-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.101) 
Sec. 50-2. - Authority to assess. 
    The whole cost, or any part thereof, of any local public improvement may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands especially benefitted by the improvement in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2004,  50-2; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.102) 
Sec. 50-3. - Project initiation. 
    Proceedings for the making of local public improvements within the city may be commenced by resolution of the city commission. Such action may be requested by the filing with the city clerk of a petition signed by at least 50 percent of the owners of the property to be assessed for the improvement, requesting that the improvement be made and the cost be defrayed by special assessment upon the property benefitted, but such petition shall be advisory to the city commission only. 
(Code 2004,  50-3; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.103) 
Sec. 50-4. - Report of city clerk. 
    Before the city commission shall consider the making of any local public improvement, it shall be referred by resolution to the city clerk, directing the city clerk or his designee to prepare a report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of costs, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment districts and such other pertinent information as will permit the city commission to decide the costs, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part, or proportion thereof, should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefitted and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The city commission shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of any local public improvement until such report of the city clerk or his designee has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the city commission for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such improvement. 
(Code 2004,  50-4; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.104) 
Sec. 50-5. - Determination; notice of hearing. 
    After the city clerk or his designee has presented the report required in section 50-4 for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of the city commission, and the city commission has reviewed the report, a resolution may be tentatively passed, determining the necessity of the improvement, setting forth the nature thereof, prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted, a determination of benefits received by affected properties and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large, designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected, designating whether it is to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits, placing the complete information on file in the office of the city clerk, where it may be found for examination, and directing the city clerk to give notice of a public hearing on the proposed improvement, at which time and place an opportunity will be given to interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of, or person interested in, the property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city. Such publication and mailing is to be made at least ten full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  50-5; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.105) 
State Law reference- Notice of hearings, MCL 211.741. 
Sec. 50-6. - Hearing. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which, the city commission may modify the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole, provided that, if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to the notice prescribed in section 54-5. If the determination of the city commission is to proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles, plans, specifications, assessment district and detailed estimates of cost, determining the probable useful life of the improvement, and directing the treasurer to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the city commission's determination and report the special assessment roll to the city commission for confirmation; provided that, if, prior to the adoption of the resolution to proceed with the making of the public improvement, written objections thereto have been filed by the owners of property in the district, which, according to the city clerk's report, will be required to bear more than 50 percent of the cost thereof, or by a majority of the owners of property to be assessed, no resolution determining to proceed with the improvement shall be adopted while such objections remain, except by the affirmative vote of five members of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  50-6; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.106) 
Sec. 50-7. - Making special assessment roll. 
    The treasurer shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefitted by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount benefitted thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of the treasurer as approved by the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  50-7; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.107) 
Sec. 50-8. - Filing assessment roll. 
    When the treasurer shall have completed the assessment roll, he shall file it with the city clerk for presentation to the city commission for review and certification by the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  50-8; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.108) 
Sec. 50-9. - Meeting to review special assessment roll. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the city commission by resolution shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place the city commission will meet to review such special assessment roll, and direct the city clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of, or person interested in, property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city. Such publication and mailing is to be made at least ten full days prior to the date of such hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the city commission. At such meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present, in writing, their objections, if any, to the assessments against them. The treasurer or their designee shall be present at every meeting of the city commission at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
(Code 2004,  50-9; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.109) 
Sec. 50-10. - Changes and corrections in special assessment roll. 
    The city commission shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll, and at such meeting, or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The city commission may correct such roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein, or it may by resolution annul such assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in the making of the new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the city commission deems justified, the city commission determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the clerk and directing the clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten days, therein commanding the assessor to spread, and the treasurer to collect, the various sums and amounts appearing thereon as directed by the city commission. Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall, from that date, be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 50-14. 
(Code 2004,  50-10; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.110) 
Sec. 50-11. - Due date. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the city commission shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Code 2004,  50-11; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.111) 
Sec. 50-12. - Payments. 
(a)  The city commission may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed 20 in number, and the first installment shall be due upon confirmation of the roll or on such date as the city commission may determine. 
(b)  Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at a rate equal to the project bond interest rate, plus one percentage point; or in the case that a bond is not sold for the project, then, a rate equal to one percentage point over the prime rate in effect as stated in the Wall Street Journal on the date the roll is confirmed, commencing on the due date of the first installment and payable on the due date of the first installment and payable on the due date of each subsequent installment; the full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment thereof. 
(c)  If the full assessment or the first installment thereof shall be due upon confirmation, each property owner shall have 60 days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of such assessment or the full amount of any installments, without interest or penalty. Following the 60-day period, the assessment or first installment shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent and the same penalties shall be collected on such unpaid assessments or first installments as are provided in the city Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. 
(d)  Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until 60 days after the due date thereof, after which time, such installments shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on such installments shall be collected as are provided in the city Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. 
(e)  After the city commission has confirmed the roll, the city treasurer shall notify by mail each property owner on such roll that such roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of the city treasurer to give such notice or of such owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any assessment, nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties. 
(Code 2004,  50-12; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.112) 
Sec. 50-13. - Creation of lien. 
    Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon from the date of confirmation of the roll shall become a personal obligation to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and, until paid, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for county and school taxes and by the city Charter for city taxes, and the lands upon which such amounts are a lien shall be subject to sale the same as are lands upon which delinquent city taxes constitute a lien. In addition to the procedures established in section 54-12 for the collection of special assessments levied against property, the city may recover such amounts in a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. In any such suit, the confirmed special assessment roll upon which the special assessment concerned appears shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of the special assessment, of the regularity of the proceedings in making the special assessment and of the right of the city to recover judgment therefor. 
(Code 2004,  50-13; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.113) 
Sec. 50-14. - Additional assessments; refunds. 
    The city clerk or his designee shall, within 60 days after the completion of each local public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify such cost to the city commission. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the city commission may make an additional pro rata assessment; provided, however, that no property shall be assessed in excess of benefits received. The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is less than five percent of the total amount of the assessment roll, but should the assessment prove larger than such amount by five percent or more, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured, in whole or in part, by such special assessment. 
(Code 2004,  50-14; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.114) 
Sec. 50-15. - Additional procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to fully carry out the making of any special assessment, the city commission shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required. 
(Code 2004,  50-15; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.115) 
Sec. 50-16. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the city commission shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatsoever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatsoever, in whole or in part, the city commission shall have the power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement, or any part thereof, has been completed and whether or not any part of the assessment has been collected. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Code 2004,  50-16; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.118) 
Sec. 50-17. - Combination of projects. 
    The city commission may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a savings in the costs; provided, however, that for each district, there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost thereof. 
(Code 2004,  50-17; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.119) 
Sec. 50-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to postponement of payment due to impoverishment was deleted. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.120 and Code 2004,  50-18. 
Sec. 50-19. - Single lot special assessments. 
(a)  Report to commission. When the city incurs an expense for or in respect to any single lot or parcel, which expense is chargeable against the lot or parcel pursuant to law and is not otherwise to be prorated among several lots or parcels in a special assessment district, the amount of labor and material, or any other applicable expense, with a description of the lot or parcel for which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the city commission. 
(b)  Determination of city commission. After reviewing the report, the city commission may determine by resolution what amount or part of such expense will be charged and the premises upon which the charge will be levied as a special assessment. By resolution, the city commission will determine the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged, designate the premises upon which the special assessment may be levied and direct the preparation of a special assessment roll in accordance with the city commission's determination. As the city commission deems expedient, it may require that notice of the assessments be given to each owner of or party in interest in the property to be assessed whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records, by mailing by first-class mail addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records which notice shall also advise the owner or party in interest of any hearing scheduled pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Certificate of roll. When the assessment roll has been completed, it shall be filed with the city clerk who will present it to the city commission. 
(d)  Resolution; notice of hearing. After the special assessment roll is filed in the office of the city clerk, the city commission shall, by resolution, fix the time and place when it will review the roll, which meeting shall not be less than ten days after notice of the time and place has been mailed to the owner of or party in interest in the property to be assessed, whose name appears on the last city tax assessment records in accordance with state law. 
(e)  Objections to roll. Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file his objections and protest in writing with the city clerk at or prior to the time of hearing, which objections shall specify how he is aggrieved. If the objections are timely and properly filed, the objecting person's appearance in person is not required at the hearing. 
(f)  Review of roll. The city commission shall meet and review the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed or an adjourned date and shall consider any objections. The city commission may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the minutes. 
(g)  Confirmation of roll. After the hearing, the city commission may confirm such special assessment roll, with any corrections that were made, and the city clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation and, upon confirmation, the roll shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 2004,  50-19; Ord. No. 5-08,  1, 3-28-2008) 
Chapter 54 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City control of highways, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII,  29; city authority to acquire, own, establish and maintain boulevards, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII,  23; obstructions and encroachments on public highways, MCL 247.171 et seq.; closing of highway for repairs, MCL 247.291 et seq.; driveways, banners, events and parades, MCL 247.321 et seq.; liability of local government for injury from the result of not keeping highway in reasonable repair, MCL 691.1402; protection of underground facilities, MCL 460.701 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Sidewalk maintenance and snow removal equipment. 
(a)  It is hereby declared necessary for the protection of the health and safety of the people of the city that the city provide for the maintenance of sidewalks in the city and regulate the use of snow removal equipment thereon. 
(b)  No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by him to fall into a state of disrepair or be unsafe. Upon receipt of written complaint of the city the owner shall make necessary repairs or replacement to conform with this section within 60 days of receipt of such complaint. The city may extend the 60-day period if weather conditions prevent such repairs and/or replacement. 
(c)  No person shall use any mechanically driven vehicle for the removal of snow from sidewalks or other pedestrian easements in the city which will, by virtue of its use for such purpose, damage, or tend to damage, any sidewalk or improved easement in the city. The use of mechanically driven vehicles for such purpose shall be lawful only where such mechanically driven vehicles do not cause damage as provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Without limitation, should any owner fail to make the repairs within the time provided for in subsection (b) of this section, then and in such event the city may, but is not obligated to, make such repair and/or replacement, and if the owner fails to pay the city's cost of such repair and/or replacement within 30 days after billing by the city, such cost shall be added to, and made a part of, the next city tax bill against the subject premises and collected in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of city taxes on real estate. 
(Code 2004,  54-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.231-20.234) 
Secs. 54-2-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - IMPUTED FRONTAGE CHARGES FOR CERTAIN PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Imputed frontage charge means the charge imposed by the city commission by resolution against the properties served by any public improvement, such as a sanitary sewer, storm sewer and/or water main, that is constructed with funds other than by special assessment against the properties served by such improvements. 
(Code 2004,  54-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.161) 
Sec. 54-32. - When imposed; collection; reimbursement. 
(a)  The imputed frontage charge will be imposed in cases where an owner of property which is located at a point beyond a public utility desires to obtain connection to such public utility and is willing to pay for the extension of such utility across the land between the existing utility and such owner's property. 
(b)  In such cases, the owner shall request the city to impose the imputed frontage charge against such property, in such amounts and payable at such times as the city commission, in each such instance, shall determine, and the city commission may thereafter reimburse such owner out of imputed frontage charges thereafter collected. 
(Code 2004,  54-32; Comp. Ords. 1987, , 12.162, 12.163) 
Sec. 54-33. - Imputed frontage charge roll. 
    In any and all cases where the city commission imposes such imputed frontage charges, it shall by resolution confirm an imputed frontage charge roll, which shall set forth the properties involved, the respective imputed frontage charge against each property and the time when payment of such charge is required. The city treasurer shall furnish the title companies in the area with such information so that the imputed frontage charges will be reflected on tax histories prepared by such title companies. 
(Code 2004,  54-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.164) 
Sec. 54-34. - Engineering costs. 
    In all such cases, the owner shall pay for all preliminary engineering work, provided that, if the improvement is constructed, such costs will be made part of the project costs and the owner will ultimately be reimbursed for such of the costs as are reflected in the imputed frontage charge roll. 
(Code 2004,  54-34; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.165) 
Secs. 54-35-54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - SNOW REMOVAL 

Sec. 54-71. - Violations. 
    Any person that violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  54-71; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.248; Ord. No. 10-02, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 54-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ordinance No. 7-08, adopted April 1, 2008, repealed  54-72-54-75 in their entirety. Former  54-72-54-75 pertained to various aspects of snow removal and derived from Comp. Ords. 1987. 
Sec. 54-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- See editor's note following  54-72. 
Sec. 54-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- See editor's note following  54-72. 
Sec. 54-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- See editor's note following  54-72. 
Sec. 54-76. - Obstructing streets and vision; depositing snow on another person's property. 
(a)  A property owner or occupant who cleans his driveway of snow shall not permit such snow to be left on the traveled portion of a street or to be piled to such a height as to obstruct vision between the driveway and street. 
(b)  Snow removed by a property owner or occupant must be returned to the property from which it was removed unless permission to deposit the snow on another person's property has been received by the owner of that property. 
(Code 2004,  54-76; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.245) 
Sec. 54-77. - Responsibility of commercially operated snow removal services. 
    If a property owner or occupant has his driveway cleared by a commercially operated snow removal service, the owner or operator of such service shall have the same responsibility as the property owner or occupant as set forth in section 54-76. 
(Code 2004,  54-77; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.246) 
Sec. 54-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to performance bond required of commercial snow plow owners was deleted. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.247 and Code 2004,  54-78. 
Secs. 54-79-54-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - SKATEBOARD PIPES AND RAMPS 

Sec. 54-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Maximum height means the vertical height of the skateboard pipe or ramp, as measured from the supporting ground/surface to the uppermost construction of the skateboard pipe or ramp. 
    Minimum setback means the horizontal distance between any part of the skateboard pipe or ramp to any side or rear property line. 
    Skateboard pipe means all outdoor structures commonly known as pipes, with a shape of a half circle or oval, which are designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move continuously from one side to the other. 
    Skateboard ramp means all outdoor structures commonly known as ramps, with an upward inclined surface, essentially one of the two sides of a pipe, which are designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move from horizontal to vertical and back to horizontal. 
(Code 2004,  54-111; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.762) 
Sec. 54-112. - Finding of necessity. 
    The unregulated construction and use of skateboard pipes or ramps in the city can be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of residents of the city, and that regulation of such ramps on the public ways and on residential properties is therefore essential. 
(Code 2004,  54-112; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.761) 
Sec. 54-113. - City commission approval required; application; fee; notice; hearing. 
(a)  No person shall construct or operate a skateboard pipe or ramp within the corporate limits of the city on property within a residential zoning district unless he shall first have obtained the approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Any person desiring to construct or operate a skateboard ramp within a residentially zoned district shall submit an application for such ramp to the building official, on forms approved by the building official, together with a fee as set by resolution of the city commission. The application shall set forth, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the applicant and property owner, if different from the applicant. 
(2)  The location of the proposed skateboard ramp. 
(3)  A site plan showing the skateboard ramp's: 
a.  Dimensions; 
b.  Height; 
c.  Placement; 
d.  Distance from property lines; 
e.  Proximity to electric utility facilities; 
f.  Location and dimension of all other structures existing on the lot. 
(4)  The type of construction materials to be utilized. 
(5)  Any noise reduction measures to be utilized in such construction. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who will utilize the skateboard ramp. 
(7)  The hours of use or operation. 
(8)  The nature of any enclosures around the skateboard ramp. 
(9)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the responsible party, if other than the applicant. 
(10)  The signature of the applicant and property owner, if different from the applicant. 
(c)  Upon receiving an application which meets the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the building official shall notify, by regular U.S. mail, all property owners and residents within a radius of 300 feet of the property where the skateboard ramp will be located. Such notice shall set forth the date, time and location of the regular city commission meeting when the application will be submitted for city commission approval. The notice shall also state that the permit application is on file for public inspection and copying in the office of the building official. 
(d)  At the meeting referred to in subsection (c) of this section, the city commission shall review the application and shall approve the application, with or without conditions, or deny the application. If the application is approved, the building official shall issue a permit which incorporates any conditions of construction or operation adopted by the city commission. The city commission may consider the following, among other things: 
(1)  Skateboard ramp size and height; 
(2)  Proximity to adjoining properties and rights-of-way; 
(3)  Noise generation and noise mitigation measures; 
(4)  Proximity to electric utility facilities; 
(5)  Comments, if any, of other property owners and residents. 
(Code 2004,  54-113; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.765-20.767) 
Sec. 54-114. - Erection, placement or use on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or use a skateboard pipe or ramp on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, park or other public property or to skate onto any public property by means of momentum obtained by the use of any skateboard pipe or ramp. 
(Code 2004,  54-114; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.763) 
Sec. 54-115. - Residential property. 
(a)  General restrictions for skateboard pipes and ramps on residential property shall be as follows: 
(1)  The maximum height, minimum setback from all property lines and building permit requirements for skateboard pipes or ramps within residential zoning districts shall comply with the following table. Only one skateboard pipe or ramp shall be permitted on any residential property. 
Residential Zone Maximum Height Minimum Setback 
(Feet) Building Permit 
Requirement All residential zones Up to three feet 15 Building permit required Up to four feet 20 Building permit required Up to five feet 25 Building permit required Up to six feet 30 Building permit required  
(2)  Skateboard pipes and ramps shall not be located in any front yard or exterior side yard on a corner lot in any easement or in violation of any building line. 
(3)  The square foot area of land coverage by a skateboard pipe or ramp shall be counted as accessory use, lot coverage as required in each residential zoning district. 
(4)  The widest or longest dimension of the skateboard pipe or ramp shall face the dwelling unit and every petition of every such pipe or ramp shall be closer to the home of the property owner than to any property line. However, there shall be a minimum fire separation of at least ten feet between such pipe or ramp and the house. 
(5)  Skateboard pipes and ramps shall not be wider than two times the height of such pipe or ramp, measured by exterior outside dimensions. 
(6)  Skateboard pipes and ramps shall not be longer than three times the height of such pipe or ramp, measured by exterior outside dimensions. 
(b)  Additional requirements for skateboard pipes and ramps over three feet in height, as permitted in the table set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Construction of all skateboard pipes and ramps shall comply with recognized engineering practices, including, but not limited to, materials, connectors, dead loads, live loads and impact loads. 
(2)  There shall be no storage of materials or equipment of any kind under the framework or structure of a skateboard pipe or ramp. 
(3)  No structural members of a skateboard pipe or ramp, on any side, shall be exposed, but shall be enclosed with the same type of materials as the rolling deck, and the enclosed walls shall include type R-13 sound-deadening insulation, at a minimum, to reduce the sound levels. 
(c)  Additional requirements for all skateboard pipes and ramps, regardless of the height or size thereof, shall be as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to charge or receive any consideration for the use of a skateboard pipe or ramp, or to use or operate such pipe or ramp in a commercial manner in any residential district. 
(2)  Only one person may use the skateboard pipe or ramp at any one time. 
(3)  Except on Sundays, when skateboard pipes or ramps shall not be used until after 12:00 noon, use of such pipes or ramps shall be permitted only between the hours of 9.00 a.m. and sunset or 9:00 p.m., whichever occurs first. 
(Code 2004,  54-115; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.764) 
Secs. 54-116-54-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - PUBLIC EVENTS 

Sec. 54-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public events means parades, gatherings, exhibitions, displays or other special occasions held on public property, sponsored by persons or organizations other than the city. 
(Code 2004,  54-151; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.631) 
Sec. 54-152. - Permit required; fee. 
    Prior to the holding of any public event in the city, the sponsoring party must apply for and receive a permit for such public event from the office of the city clerk. No fee for such permit shall be required. 
(Code 2004,  54-152; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.632) 
Sec. 54-153. - Insurance. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit for a public event, the applicant must present to the city clerk a certificate of insurance showing that the applicant and the city are insured for liability arising out of injury to persons and damage to property in amounts to be established by resolution of the city commission. Higher limits may be required by the city if such public event is of a hazardous nature, such as fireworks displays, tractor pulls and rock concerts. 
(Code 2004,  54-153; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.633) 
Secs. 54-154-54-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - CONTROL, MAINTENANCE AND REGULATION OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 54-170. - Designation of public works director as enforcement official. 
    The director of the department of public works and his designees are hereby authorized to enforce this article. 
(Code 2004,  54-170; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the director of the department of public works or his designee. 
    Driveway approach means that portion of a driveway within the public right-of-way which extends from the designed inner edge of the sidewalk to the back of curb, edge of street pavement or edge of a graded roadway. 
(Code 2004,  54-171; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-172. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation, cut or otherwise cause any damage to any street or public right-of-way in the city, except under the conditions of and in the manner authorized by this article. No person shall place any article, thing, or obstruction in any street or public right-of-way, except under the conditions of and in the manner authorized by this article, but these provisions shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street or public right-of-way reserved for vehicular traffic. The city commission may authorize the city engineer, upon the recommendation of the city traffic engineer, to grant permits for certain uses in any street within the city which the commission deems to be for the benefit of the general public. Nothing herein shall be construed or interpreted as lessening the authority of the chief of police to issue and enforce traffic control and similar orders to the extent otherwise authorized by law. 
(Code 2004,  54-172; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-173. - Permits, fees and bonds. 
    Where permits are required in the article, they shall be obtained upon application to the city engineering department, upon such forms as they shall prescribe. Such application shall be accompanied by such fees as established by resolution of the city commission. Any permit issued under this article shall be valid only for the time stated thereon and may be revoked by the director for failure to comply with this Code, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any lawful order of the director. A condition for issuance of any permit under the provisions of this article is that the applicant will complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface, or public right-of-way and installations on, over or within such street, or public right-of-way including trees, and protect and indemnify the city, its officers and employees against any claim for damage which may arise or be brought on account of injury to any person or damage to any property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therein. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making an application for a permit, they shall provide coverage in amounts to be established by resolution of the city commission, except as otherwise specified in this article. A duplicate executed copy of the original of such certificate of insurance, naming the city, its officers and employees as additional insureds shall be filed with the engineering department. An original surety company bond in the amount of $20,000.00 conditioned upon performance of the conditions of the permit and compliance with all requirements of the law, in a form preapproved by the city, shall be filed with the city each year by contractors desiring to obtain permits through the year. 
(Code 2004,  54-173; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-174. - Specifications. 
(a)  All construction work in the public right-of-way requires a permit unless such work is: 
(1)  Directed by and on behalf of the city; or 
(2)  Unless the work involves the operation and maintenance of installations in the public right-of-way which work is performed pursuant to a written agreement between the city and another governmental body or its agent. 
(b)  Failure to obtain a permit before initiating any construction within the public right-of-way is a violation of this article. 
(c)  If any job or construction covered by this article is started before a permit is obtained, an amount equivalent to double the fee shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. 
(d)  No building permit for construction or alteration of any building or structure shall be issued by the inspections department until the property owner has received the proper permits required under this article. 
(e)  When the construction involved is in connection with any sewer or water system, the permit shall be issued contingent on the contractor obtaining the necessary permit from the authorities in control of the system for making the proposed extensions and additions. 
(f)  All work shall be performed in such a way as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and restriction to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city traffic engineer. No dirt or other material shall be placed on sidewalks. 
(g)  All facilities, both below ground and above ground, shall be located as indicated by the city engineer. Pipes shall be placed to a depth that will provide not less than four feet of cover between top of roadway surface and the top of the pipe. If at any time the position of the facility interferes with improvements to the street or public right-of-way it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to move the facility to a location satisfactory to the city. All such moving shall be done at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(h)  The city engineer may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article for failure to comply with the terms of the permit or this Code. The director may suspend or revoke such permit and order any work there under to cease by serving notice of such action and the reason therefore. 
(i)  In the event a permit issued under this article is revoked, a new permit must be obtained and a new fee paid. 
(j)  Issuance of a permit does not waive the necessity for other permits that may be required by other local, state or federal agencies. 
(k)  All work subject to permit issued in accordance with this article shall be done in conformance with City of Kentwood "Specifications and Conditions for Highway Permits" which is hereby adopted and as may be periodically amended by the city engineer. A current copy of the Specifications and Condition for Highway Permits shall be maintained in the office of the city engineer. 
(l)  The foreman in charge of any work being performed under this article shall have in his possession at all times a copy of the permit along with any specifications and conditions under which work is to be done. 
(Code 2004,  54-174; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005; Ord. No. 4-08,  1, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 54-175. - Traffic protection. 
(a)  All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with prescribed warning lights. All traffic control devices shall conform to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(b)  All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workers and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(c)  At least five feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the passage of pedestrians. If construction operations are of such a nature and scope that such passage on the public sidewalk is impracticable, a temporary sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter shall be installed around such obstruction as approved in writing by the city engineer. 
(d)  Permittees under this article shall designate a foreman who shall be responsible for overseeing the work and the principal contact person for the city. The permittee must give the foreman authority to carry out all the provisions contained in this article. If the permittee fails or refuses to carry out these provisions at the time, and in a manner which in the opinion of the director is necessary to protect and direct traffic, or if the permittee cannot be located and notified to do so, the city shall have the right to perform the work and the permittee shall reimburse the city for all charges incurred in the work within ten business days of being invoiced for the same. 
(e)  Excavated material shall be deposited so it will not interfere with moving traffic; and precautions must be taken to prevent excavated material from spilling out onto the traveled portion of the highway by temporary wooden retaining walls or other means approved by the director upon the recommendation of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 2004,  54-175; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-176. - Street openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street or public right-of-way without first obtaining a written permit from the director. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit or bond and file a certificate of insurance and otherwise comply with this article. 
(Code 2004,  54-176; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-177. - Emergency openings. 
    The director may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this article are otherwise complied with. 
(Code 2004,  54-177; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-178. - Prohibited openings. 
    No permit to make any opening or excavation in or under a paved street shall be granted to any person within a period of five years after the completion of any paving thereof; provided, however, that the city engineer may suspend such prohibition where a street opening is required to protect the public health or safety, and subject to the payment of such fees established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  54-178; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-179. - Additional regulation authorized. 
    The city engineer may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, or street obstructions, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city commission. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
(Code 2004,  54-179; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-180. - Removal of encroachment. 
    Whenever there is an encroachment, obstruction or excavation in the street or public right-of-way which has not been allowed under this article, the same shall be removed forthwith and any excavation refilled. The expense of such removal or refilling shall be charged to the person responsible for such unlawful encroachment, obstruction or excavation. 
(Code 2004,  54-180; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-181. - Notice of commencement of work. 
    Any person performing work under a permit granted pursuant to this article, or as approved by the city, shall notify the engineering department at least 48 hours before the work is to be started. No street opening shall be started on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays or the day before a holiday. All permittees must contact MISS-DIG 72 hours prior to excavation. 
(Code 2004,  54-181; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-182. - Temporary street closing. 
    Subject to the review and with the consent of the chief of police, the director shall have authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he deems such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on said street, indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any portion of said street shall be closed for emergency repair work no person other than those responsible for making said repairs shall be permitted to drive a vehicle through said closure. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant under this section without authority from the director. 
(Code 2004,  54-182; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-183. - Construction machinery. 
    All construction machinery shall be equipped with pneumatic tires when any work is done on blacktop or concrete surfaced pavements. 
(Code 2004,  54-183; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-184. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the engineering department. Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall be less than ten feet in width, nor more than 30 feet in width, unless otherwise authorized by the engineering department. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be ten feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet; provided, however, that greater minimums may be required to implement city policies or as otherwise required to protect public safety. 
(4)  For any curb cut which terminates less than five feet from a construction joint, the contractor shall remove and replace the existing curb to the next joint. 
(5)  The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(6)  All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved in writing by the city engineer. 
(7)  Curb cuts for private streets and private driveways shall include a minimum 24-inch wide concrete valley gutter and Michigan Department of Transportation "F-4" modified concrete curb and gutter, or other as approved by the city engineer, throughout the public right-of-way. The requirements of this subsection (7) are in addition to those set forth in chapter 18 of the zoning ordinance entitled "private street regulations." 
(8)  All curb cuts, except for single family residential driveways, shall also be required to have a concrete apron no less than six inches in thickness. 
(9)  Curb cuts along arterial roads shall comply with sections 17.10 and 17.11 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 2004,  54-184; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005; Ord. No. 3-07,  1, 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 54-185. - Pavement openings. 
    Structures and appurtenances shall be placed under pavement by boring and jacking, or cutting through the pavement and using an open trench, and subject to the following: 
(1)  Tunneling will not be permitted. 
(2)  Cuts through concrete pavement shall be at right angles to the pavement centerline and shall be made at least six inches wider on each side than the width of the trench with a minimum width of 36 inches. 
(3)  Removal of all pavements shall be done only with concrete saw and chisels operated by hand or compressed air. 
(4)  Pavement crushers of any type are prohibited. 
(5)  Openings shall be trimmed in straight lines with right angle corners and vertical edges. 
(6)  When openings are five feet or less from an expansion or construction joints, the pavement shall be removed to the joint. 
(7)  When a pipe is installed by boring and jacking, the leading edge of the pipe must precede the auger by a distance equal to one-half the diameter of the pipe. The method to be used shall be approved by the city engineer before work is started. 
(8)  In case it is necessary to move any building or structure above or below the ground within the right-of-way of the highway, the right-of-way shall be restored to the satisfaction of the director. Underground structures damaged by boring shall be repaired or replaced at the cost of the permittee. 
(9)  Open trenches shall be not less than two feet wide, plus the diameter of the pipe, at the bottom of the excavation, and the maximum width shall be the diameter of the pipe, plus three feet, or as stated on the permit. 
(10)  The slope of the excavated trench shall not be less than one to one. 
(11)  Permanent wearing surface of bituminous material approved by the city engineer shall be placed in trenches on all blacktop surfaced roads. The thickness shall be equal to the depth of the original blacktop or three inches, whichever is greater. Permanent wearing surface of seven inches of road gravel approved by the city engineer shall be placed in trenches on all gravel or dirt roads. Permanent wearing surface on concrete surfaced roads shall be new concrete pavement of the same type, thickness and quality as the original pavement. All permanent wearing surfaces shall be placed by the applicant at his own expense. 
(12)  When tree roots are removed because of trenching, the top of the trees shall be trimmed sufficiently to balance the loss of roots. This trimming shall be done by the permittee under the direction of the city at the permittee's expense. When tree roots are bored for underground utility installations, the distance shall be one foot for each one inch of trunk diameter. 
(Code 2004,  54-185; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-186. - Backfilling. 
(a)  Within traveled right-of-way. Backfilling trenches within the traveled portion of the street (between the shoulders or curb line), shall comply with the following: Material may be sand, gravel, or sandy gravel and shall be placed in successive layers not more than six inches in depth, loose measure, and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by mechanical compaction and all backfill subject to be checked by the controlled density method showing a minimum of 95 percent proctor. All material excavated from the trench, and not used in the backfill shall be hauled away. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(b)  Outside traveled right-of-way. Backfilled trenches outside the traveled portion of the street (between the shoulders or curb and right-of-way lines), shall comply with the following: Material may be sand, gravel, or the material removed from the trench, if not frozen, except across driveways where the materials shall be sand, gravel, or sandy gravel. All backfill shall be placed in successive layers not more than 12 inches in depth, loose measure, and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by mechanical compaction and all backfill is subject to be checked by the controlled density method showing a minimum of 90 percent proctor. Topsoil and sod shall be replaced in all trenches across lawns. All material excavated from the trench, and not used in backfill, shall be hauled away. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(Code 2004,  54-186; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-187. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in streets in locations approved in advance by the engineering department As a condition to approval to install any utility or other pole in the public right-of-way, the city engineer shall retain the right to require the removal or relocation of the pole, at no cost to the city where necessary for a public improvement. 
(Code 2004,  54-187; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-188. - Maintenance of installations in street. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole, monitoring well, or any other excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate, shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers and employees, against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Code 2004,  54-188; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-189. - Sewer and water connections installed prior to paving or resurfacing. 
    Whenever the city commission shall determine to pave or resurface any street, all necessary sewer and water connections shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cast shall be charged against the premises adjacent thereto or to be served thereby or as otherwise directed by the commission. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed, in whole or in part, by special assessment, the cost of such sewer and water connections may be a lien, collected and included as part of the special assessment for the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed, pursuant to chapter 50. 
(Code 2004,  54-189; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-190. - Clear vision corner. 
    Vision clearance shall be provided on all corner lots as adopted in Appendix A, section 3.06. 
(Code 2004,  54-190; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-191. - Moving of oversized and overweight objects. 
(a)  Oversized objects. Objects over ten feet in width or 65 feet in length or 13.5 feet in height are oversized for purpose of this section. Oversized objects to be moved on city streets, shall require the submission of an application to the engineering department for approval not less than 48 hours in advance of the move. All moving shall be done on pneumatic-tired trucks trailers, moving dollies or any combination thereof, and the load shall be distributed so that no axle will carry more than the legal load permitted by state or county regulations. Motive power shall be by pneumatic-tired truck or tractor and shall be of sufficient size to handle the load with slipping. No moving shall be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays or the day before a holiday unless authorized by the city. The contractor shall be responsible for furnishing all necessary means of traffic protection before any move is made in the road right-of-way. All such moves shall be coordinated with the city police department. 
(b)  Overweight objects. Overweight objects may be moved according to the legal limits permitted by the state or county regulations. The contractor shall submit an application to the engineering department for approval not less than 48 hours in advance of the move. All moving shall be done on pneumatic-tired trucks, trailers, moving dollies or any combination thereof. All provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall also apply to such moves. 
(Code 2004,  54-191; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-192. - Street trees. 
(a)  Purpose, interpretation and application. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements necessary and which are adopted for the promotion of the public health and safety and general welfare of the people of the city. The city retains the right to trim or remove any tree or shrubbery within a public right-of-way if, in the opinion of the director of public works or city traffic engineer, it is necessary to preserve public safety or protect public property. It is the intent of this section to promote and maintain a vibrant and healthy urban streetscape and canopy. Among other purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for the requiring of a permit to plant trees or shrubs or plants in any street right-of-way of the city; to prohibit the planting of certain kinds of trees, plants and shrubs in certain places; to authorize the removal and/or replacement of diseased trees, plants or shrubs, or in such cases where the existence of such trees, plants or shrubs can be proven to cause serious prolonged health conditions; and, to authorize the director of public works to promulgate rules and regulations relative to such planting, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the planting, trimming, removal or replacement of trees, plants and shrubs in any public right-of-way, particularly that space between the public sidewalk and the curb line. 
(c)  Supervision enforcement. The responsibility for the enforcement of this section shall be vested in the director of public works and duly authorized assistants or agents. 
(d)  Jurisdiction. The director of public works shall have jurisdiction over the planting, trimming or removal of any trees, plants or shrubs in the public streets of the city. 
(e)  Permit required. No person shall plant, place or remove any tree or shrub in any public right-of-way of the city without having first secured a permit as hereinafter provided. It is understood that should it be necessary to remove any permitted tree from within an existing right-of-way to facilitate right-of-way improvements they shall be removed without reimbursement to the adjoining property owner for loss of trees. 
(f)  Application for a permit to place, trim, plant or remove. Application for a permit to place, trim, plant or remove a shade or ornamental tree, plant or shrub with a mature height greater than 36 inches in any street of the city shall be made to the director of public works of the city. Such application shall be on forms provided by the director of public works. Application fees shall be as set forth from time to time by the city commission. 
(g)  Promulgation of rules. The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate necessary rules and regulations to carry out the purpose of this section, and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The director of public works shall have the authority to recommend reasonable fees to be applied pursuant to this section. 
(h)  Approval. Rules and regulations provided for herein shall be submitted to the city commission for approval. No such rule or regulation shall become effective until approved by the city commission. 
(i)  Rules to be filed. Upon approval by the city commission, copies of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk and the office of the director of public works for distribution to interested parties. 
(j)  Standards. The rules and regulations provided for herein shall establish the minimum distance between trees, shrubs and ornamental trees planted or placed in the streets of the city, which distance shall be such as will be beneficial to the growth of such tree, plant or shrub; shall prohibit the placing or planting therein of any trees, plants or shrubs that will endanger the public health or safety of the people of Kentwood; shall provide for the minimum open space around the trunk of any tree, plant or shrub placed therein, which distance shall be sufficient to encourage the growth of trees, plants and shrubs; shall set rules regarding and standards for removal and replacement of trees; shall set rules and standards for root trimming and cutting; shall prohibit the planting or placing of any tree, plant or shrub in any location that will create a dangerous or hazardous traffic condition, and the director of public works is hereby directed to confer with the chief of police, the city engineer, the community development director, and the city engineer, or any other official agency concerned in such cases. The director of public works is likewise empowered to vary the minimum distance between trees, plants and shrubs, in accordance with the variety of tree to be placed or planted within said streets of the city, and to make reasonable rules and regulations governing the placing of and maintenance of underground and aboveground public utility facilities in or near trees or tree roots. 
(k)  Modification. The director of public works is authorized to exercise discretion in the application of any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder, where practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of such rule or regulation would result in a personal hardship to someone affected thereby. Such applications, however, must be those of a character which will not impair the overall purposes and intent of this section. 
(l)  Trees not to be disturbed. No person shall remove, destroy, break, cut, deface, trim or in any way injure or interfere with any tree, plant or shrub that is or may be hereafter placed or planted in any street by the city, without a proper permit from the director of public works. Plants or shrubs planted in any right-of-way by adjoining property owners pursuant to a permit acquired herein may be trimmed or cut to properly maintain said plant or shrub without obtaining a permit hereunder. 
(m)  Not to apply to public improvements. The provisions of subsection (l) of this section shall not be construed to apply to the removal of any tree, root, plant or shrub, or any part thereof, wherever the removal of same shall be necessary for the construction of new sidewalk projects, roadways, streets, avenues, alleys, pavements, sewers, watermains, or other public improvements where such public improvement is authorized by any public governmental agency. 
(n)  Director of public works to be notified. Whenever any tree, plant or shrub must be removed, in whole or in part, because of the placing of a public improvement, the person responsible for the construction of said public improvement shall notify the director of public works of such necessity, not less than five working days, prior to the time work is to be done. 
(o)  Posters, etc., prohibited. No person shall attach or place any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill or any similar object, on any tree now or hereafter planted or placed in any street. 
(p)  Deleterious substance. No person shall deposit or throw upon any street, parkway, avenue, alley, sidewalk, boulevard or gutter any material injurious to trees, plants or shrubs. This includes but is not limited to any poison, pesticide or chemical that is harmful to the tree or its root system. 
(q)  Trimming required. The owner of any tree or shrub on private property overhanging the right-of-way shall trim the branches to a height that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a space of ten feet above the surface of the right-of-way. The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub in the public right-of-way that has its root structure on private property when it interferes with: 
(1)  Pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(2)  With proper spread of light along the street from a street light; or 
(3)  Visibility of any traffic-control device or sign, such trimming is to be confined to the area within the right-of-way. 
The owner or owners of any premises adjacent to a street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or boulevard, or other public property shall trim all branches of any tree, plant or shrub on such premises which overhangs any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or boulevard, gutter or other public property so that there shall be a clear height of a minimum of ten feet above the surface of the street and ten feet above a sidewalk or public property unobstructed by branches. 
(r)  Dead limbs and branches. The owner or owners of any premises adjacent to a street shall remove all decayed and broken limbs and branches from trees on such property where such limbs and branches overhang a street or public property. 
(s)  Power to examine. The director of public works shall have authority as may be necessary to enter onto any lot or premises within the city for the purpose of examining trees, plants and shrubs for infectious diseases which may constitute a hazard to the people of the city or to other trees, plants or shrubs in the city. 
(t)  Procedure, if infected. If the director of public works finds any tree, plant or shrub that is infected with a disease that constitutes a hazard to the people of the city, or to other trees, plants or shrubs in the city, the director of public works shall notify the owner of such tree, plant or shrub in writing and give to such owner 30 days in which to take such action as may be directed in the notice. If such owner fails to comply with the order of the director of public works, the director of public works shall have power to take such action as may be legally necessary to enter such lots or premises and remove said diseased tree, plant or shrub, and require the owner of such lot or premises to pay the cost of such removal. 
(u)  Decision final. The determination of the director of public works with regard to any decisions required under this article shall be the final administrative determination of the matter. 
(v)  Violation; enforcement. Violation of any provision of this section or of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, with fines as set forth in section 54-195. The director of public works, or his designees, is authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2004,  54-192; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005; Ord. No. 3-10, 6-18-2010) 
Sec. 54-193. - Sidewalk and driveway approaches. 
(a)  Permits. No person, including the owner of the property abutting thereupon, shall construct, reconstruct or repair any public sidewalk, driveway approach, or curb in the city without first obtaining a permit therefore from the engineering department The engineering department is hereby authorized to issue such permit upon written application therefore and upon payment of the fee as established by resolution of the city commission. The city must also have on file an annual highway bond and certificate of insurance. 
(b)  Line and grade stakes. After a permit is issued, the engineering department shall, upon request from the contractor, furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the work. The furnishing of line and grade stakes does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the city engineer. Where it is necessary to replace engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city or its employees, a restaking charge shall be paid. 
(c)  Valve boxes and cleanouts. When valve boxes, sewer cleanouts, hand-hole covers, gas valves, hydrants or other utility installations occur in sidewalks or driveway approaches, proper allowances must be made for these structures. Metal castings or frames shall be adjusted to the finished grade of the sidewalk surface. Concrete shall be kept far enough away from the covers so that they can easily be removed and replaced after the concrete has set. When a box is not perpendicular to the slab surface, the major portion of the box cover shall be set below the surface. When larger openings exist leading to underground chambers, the covers for these shall be set about one-half inch higher than the average for drainage. In case of frames larger than six inches across standard sidewalk expansion joint material shall be placed on two adjacent sides of square or rectangular frames and completely around circular frames. This material may be one-quarter inch thick, but not over one-half inch thick. 
(d)  Single-family residential driveway approach. It shall be unlawful for anyone to construct a single-family residential driveway approach over, in or through any gutter or road ditch or to install or construct a single-family residential driveway culvert through any road, street or public right-of-way without first having obtained a permit from the engineering department. A driveway approach shall be six inches in thickness if concrete is used in lieu of asphalt and a maximum of 20 feet in width at the right-of-way line. Material and construction shall comply with the requirements of the state department of transportation current specifications for construction. 
(e)  Sidewalk specifications. Sidewalk installation shall be required as depicted in the attached Table "A". Sidewalk shall be five feet wide and shall be not less than four inches in thickness or less than six inches in thickness at driveway crossings. Material and construction shall comply with the requirements of the state department of transportation current specifications for construction. Six inch concrete forms shall be required for driveway approaches and public sidewalks adjacent to driveway approaches. 
TABLE A 
Carry Concrete Gutter Pan Across Opening Carry Concrete Sidewalk Across Opening Carry Concrete Curb and Gutter Around Radii Concrete Approach Required Residential driveway X X X - Industrial or commercial driveway X X X X Private street X - X n/a Public street - - X n/a  
(f)  Obstructing drain. It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct the flow of stormwater in or through any driveway culvert, gutter or road ditch in or through any road, street or public right-of-way. 
(Code 2004,  54-193; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005; Ord. No. 8-06,  1, 4-30-2006; Ord. No. 3-07,  2, 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 54-194. - Block parties. 
(a)  Permit. Any person desiring to use any pubic street within the city for any block party or other social gathering shall first file an application with the city clerk. A permit shall only be issued by the clerk upon the recommendation of the director, police department and fire department. 
(b)  Application contents. The application shall identify the day and time the party is to be held. The location of the street closing also needs to be stated on the application. The applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, if officers and employees from any and all claims arising out of the issuance of the permit or activities of the applicant. 
(c)  Streets where allowed. Only local streets with light vehicular traffic are permitted to be used as determined by the director. 
(d)  Barricades. Street barricades shall be obtained through the department of public works, upon payment of $25.00 deposit. The applicant will be responsible for the placement prior to and the removal of the barricades after the party. 
(e)  Damage and cleanup. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing or replacing any barricade damaged or destroyed. The applicant shall further be responsible for the clean up of the street and neighboring yards after the party. The deposit for the barricades may be returned to the applicant following inspection by city personnel. 
(Code 2004,  54-194; Ord. No. 7-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-195. - Violations; penalties, civil remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $2,500.00 for each violation. Any person, firm, or corporation who is found to be responsible for a subsequent violation of this article within a two-year period shall be fined double the amount assessed for the immediate preceding violation. 
(b)  A person, firm, or corporation found to be responsible for a violation shall pay costs and fees incurred by the city for correcting and abating the violation. If such costs and fees are not fully paid within 30 days of written notice thereof, the costs and fees may be assessed as a single lot assessment per chapter 10 of the city Charter and added to, and made part of, the tax roll for the subject property and may be collected in the same manner as provided by state law for the collection of taxes on real estate. The remedies of this subsection (b) are in addition to any other remedies at law of inequity. 
(c)  The city may also proceed against any person for a violation of this article by seeking injunctive relief and/or damages. 
(d)  Each day a violation exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2004,  54-195; Ord. No. 3-07,  3, 10-2-2007) 
Chapter 58 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Administration fee, penalty and interest-Summer taxes. 
(a)  A one-percent property tax administration fee shall be added to all summer property taxes. On all taxes paid after August 20, a three percent penalty charge shall be added to all summer property taxes. 
(b)  In addition, after September 1 and before settlement with the county treasurer, interest on the tax at the rate of one percent per month shall be added to the taxes collected by the treasurer. 
(c)  For purposes of determining the date payment of a tax is received under this section, only the date that the payment is physically received in the offices of the city treasurer shall be considered the date of receipt. 
(Code 2004,  58-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.301, 12.302; Ord. No. 4-11,  1, 5-13-2011) 
State Law reference- Penalty charge authorized, MCL 211.44(7). 
Sec. 58-2. - Same-Winter taxes. 
(a)  A one percent property tax administration fee shall be added to all winter property taxes. On all taxes paid after February 14, a three percent penalty charge shall be added to all winter property taxes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the penalty charge may be waived for the homestead property of a senior citizen, paraplegic, quadriplegic, hemiplegic, eligible serviceperson, eligible veteran, eligible widow or widower, totally and permanently disabled person, or blind person, as those persons are defined in chapter 9 of Public Act No. 281 of 1967 (MCL 206.501 et seq.), if: 
(1)  The person makes a claim before February 15 for a credit for that property provided by chapter 9 of Public Act No. 281 of 1967 (MCL 206.501 et seq.); 
(2)  The person presents a copy of the form filed for that credit to the treasurer; and 
(3)  The person has not received the credit before February 15. 
(b)  In addition, after the last day of February and before settlement with the county treasurer, interest on the tax at the rate of one percent per month shall be added to the taxes collected by the treasurer. 
(c)  For purposes of determining the date payment of a tax is received under this section, only the date that the payment is physically received in the offices of the city treasurer shall be considered the date of receipt. 
(Code 2004,  58-2; Ord. No. 4-11,  2, 5-13-2011) 
State Law reference- Penalty charge authorized, MCL 211.44(7). 
Secs. 58-3-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR CERTAIN HOUSING PROJECTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Housing project tax exemption and service charges, MCL 125.1415a. 

Sec. 58-31. - Eligible property. 
    The tax exemption established in section 15a(1) of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1415a(1)) (hereinafter referred to as the "Act") shall not apply to any housing project within the city, except government assisted housing projects providing below market rental housing exclusively for low and moderate income elderly families, handicapped persons or families where: 
(1)  Financing has occurred under Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (referred to in this article as "Section 8"); 
(2)  Financing has occurred through the state housing development authority's (referred to in this article as the "authority") issuance of tax free bonds; 
(3)  The housing project has been allocated low income housing tax credits by the authority; or 
(4)  The rental housing for low and moderate income families is receiving a mortgage loan from the authority and low income housing tax credits under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code necessary in order to implement a substantial rehabilitation project for the property. 
(Code 2004,  58-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.051; Ord. No. 16-03,  18.051, 11-10-2003) 
Sec. 58-32. - Time for commencement. 
    The tax exemption described in section 58-31(1) shall be available commencing with the 1980 assessment roll; the tax exemption described in section 58-31(2) shall be available commencing with the 1985 assessment roll; the tax exemption described in section 58-31(3) shall be available commencing with the 1994 assessment roll; and the tax exemption described in section 58-31(4) shall be available commencing with the 2004 assessment roll. 
(Code 2004,  58-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.052; Ord. No. 16-03,  18.052, 11-10-2003) 
Sec. 58-33. - Duration. 
(a)  Effective dates. 
(1)  The exemption granted pursuant to section 58-31(1) shall remain in effect for 50 years or for as long as any portion of the financing pursuant to Section 8 remains outstanding and unpaid, whichever is less. 
(2)  The exemption granted pursuant to section 58-31(2) shall remain in effect for 50 years or for as long as any portion of the financing received through the authority's issuance of tax free bonds remains outstanding and unpaid, whichever is less. 
(3)  The exemption granted pursuant to section 58-31(3) shall remain in effect for 50 years or for as long as the authority allocates low income housing tax credits, whichever is less. 
(4)  The exemption granted pursuant to section 58-31(4) shall remain in effect for the lesser of: 
a.  50 years; 
b.  So long as the authority mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid; or 
c.  So long as the authority has an interest in the property. 
(b)  Continuation. The exemptions granted pursuant to section 58-31 shall continue only during such time as the housing project has complied with the act as of the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 2004,  58-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.055; Ord. No. 16-03,  18.055, 11-10-2003) 
Sec. 58-34. - Service charge. 
(a)  Certain qualified rental units. 
(1)  The service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that part of a tax exempt housing project financed in accordance with Section 8 shall be equal to an amount determined by the following formula: 
The contract rents for the preceding calendar year for the housing project, less any charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants, less the service charge paid for the previous calendar year, times six percent. For purposes of this formula, the term "contract rents" shall be interpreted in accordance with the rules adopted pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937 as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended. 
(2)  The service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that part of a tax exempt housing project financed in accordance with the authority's issuance of tax free bonds or allocation of low income housing tax credits shall be equal to an amount determined by the following formula: 
The actual rents collected for the preceding calendar year, less any charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants, times six percent. 
(3)  The service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for a tax exempt housing project being substantially rehabilitated and financed with a mortgage loan from the authority and receiving low income housing tax credits shall be equal to an amount determined by the following formula: 
The actual rents collected for the preceding calendar year less any charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants, times six percent. 
(b)  All other property of the housing development. The service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that part of a housing project which is tax exempt pursuant to this article and the act, and which is occupied by other than low income elderly families, handicapped persons or families of low or moderate income shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the project if the project were not tax exempt. If this subsection is applicable to a housing project, then the benefits of any exemption granted by this article and the act shall be allocated by the owner of the housing project exclusively to low income elderly families, handicapped persons or families in the form of reduced housing charges. 
(c)  Reservation of right to change. The city commission retains the right to change the service charge applicable to any class of housing project, except for those where the city has by resolution entered into, or shall enter into, a contract not to change the service charge. 
(d)  First year for new construction and rehabilitation projects. The service charge for the first year of tax exemption for housing developments consisting of new construction or rehabilitation projects which do not benefit from tax exemption and a payment in lieu of taxes at the time a new resolution is being requested under this article shall be equal to the greater of the: 
(1)  Service charge which would be applied pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section; or 
(2)  Ad valorem property tax which would have been assessed to the property as of the normal tax date for the first exemption year, based on a valuation of the property as it existed prior to commencement of the construction or rehabilitation. 
For projects benefiting from tax exemption and payments in lieu of taxation at the time a request is made under this article for a new or continued exemption, the payment in lieu of taxation for the calendar year in which a new exemption is established shall be determined as set forth in the resolution applicable to that project. 
(e)  Payment. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined in this section shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before May 1 of each year, commencing with the year for which the exemption is granted. 
(Code 2004,  58-34; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.053, 18.054; Ord. No. 16-03,  18.053, 18.054, 11-10-2003; Ord. No. 02-10,  1, 4-9-2010) 
Sec. 58-35. - Reports. 
    Any housing project obtaining tax exemption pursuant to this article and the act shall provide to the city such information as the city determines is reasonably necessary to verify the amount of the service charge for each year and the project's compliance with the other terms of this article and the act. 
(Code 2004,  58-35; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.056) 
Chapter 62 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.; Michigan broadband development authority act, MCL 484.3201 et seq.; uniform video services local franchise act, MCL 484.3301 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this chapter, or the terms or conditions of a permit issued in accordance with this chapter, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  62-1; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.213) 
Secs. 62-2-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - MULTICHANNEL VIDEO SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform video services local franchise act, MCL 484.3301 et seq. 

Sec. 62-31. - Adoption of uniform video services local franchise act. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein, the uniform video services local franchise act, Public Act No. 480 of 2006 (MCL 484.3301 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  62-31--62-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.11, 12.212; Ord. No. 16-00,  1--3, 12-5-2000) 
Secs. 62-32-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATION 

Sec. 62-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All other words and phrases used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined in the act and FCC rules. 
    Act means the Communications Act of 1984, as amended, and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, PL 102-385, and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923. 
    Basic cable service means "basic service," as such term is defined in the FCC rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the act and FCC rules. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC rules means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the act. 
    Increase in rates means an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. 
(Code 2004,  62-61; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.811) 
Sec. 62-62. - Purpose; interpretation. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Adopt regulations consistent with the act and FCC rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and 
(2)  Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. 
(b)  This article shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the act and FCC rules. 
(Code 2004,  62-62; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.812) 
Sec. 62-63. - Rate regulation. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC rules. 
(Code 2004,  62-63; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.813) 
Sec. 62-64. - Filing schedule of rates or proposed increase in rates; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the act and FCC rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or proposed increase in rates complies with the act and FCC rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this article, filing by the cable operator with the city shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the city clerk. The city commission may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase in rates. 
(b)  In addition to information, data and calculations required pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the cable administrator in connection with the city review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in rates. The cable administrator may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in rates complies with the act and FCC rules, including, without limitation, 47 USC 543, 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Code 2004,  62-64; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.814) 
Sec. 62-65. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If this article, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 62-64(a) or any request for information pursuant to section 62-64(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support the reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it, or the cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)  Any interested party may file a request with the city to inspect material withheld as proprietary. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. The city will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. The city may grant, deny or condition such a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to, and consistent with, the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality, including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459. 
(Code 2004,  62-65; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.815) 
Sec. 62-66. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the receipt of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 62-64(a), the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which shall state that the filing has been received by the city clerk and, except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary, is available for public inspection and copying, and interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published. The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time and place of the meeting at which the city commission shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates. The notice shall be mailed by first class mail at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates is prepared for consideration of the city commission, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the city commission shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates. 
(Code 2004,  62-66; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.816) 
Sec. 62-67. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under section 62-64(a) unless the city commission or other properly authorized body or official tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of such filing. The city commission may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Code 2004,  62-67; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.817) 
Sec. 62-68. - Public hearing; notice. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 62-67 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, the cable operator shall submit to the cable administrator any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 62-64. In addition, the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, which shall state the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be held; interested parties may appear in person, by agent or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on, or objections to, the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information, except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary, are available for inspection or copying from the office of the city clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than ten days before the hearing. 
(Code 2004,  62-68; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.818) 
Sec. 62-69. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the cable administrator shall cause a report to be prepared for the city commission, which shall, based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review and other appropriate information, include a recommendation for the decision of the city commission pursuant to section 62-70. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first class mail not less than 20 days before the city commission acts under section 62-70. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  62-69; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.819) 
Sec. 62-70. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city commission shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which, in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase in rates, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase in rates to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC rules. If the city commission issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase in rates to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 62-67 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 62-67 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Code 2004,  62-70; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.820) 
Sec. 62-71. - Refunds; notice to cable operator. 
    The city commission may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR 76.942. Before the city commission orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven days' written notice to the cable operator by first class mail of the date, time and place at which the city commission shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  62-71; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.821) 
Sec. 62-72. - Written decisions; public notice; copy to cable operator. 
(a)  Any order of the city commission pursuant to section 62-70 or 62-71 shall be: 
(1)  In writing; 
(2)  Effective upon adoption by the city commission; and 
(3)  Deemed released to the public upon adoption. 
(b)  The city clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, which shall: 
(1)  Summarize the written decision; and 
(2)  State that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first class mail. 
(Code 2004,  62-72; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.822) 
Sec. 62-73. - Additional rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 62-64, the city commission may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings, including, without limitation, the conducting of hearings, consistent with the act and FCC rules. 
(Code 2004,  62-73; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.823) 
Sec. 62-74. - Failure of city clerk to give notices or mail copies of reports. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this article shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  62-74; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.824) 
Sec. 62-75. - Additional public hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this article, the city commission may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city commission, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Code 2004,  62-75; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.825) 
Sec. 62-76. - Additional powers; action to protect public interest. 
(a)  The city shall possess all powers conferred by the act, FCC rules, cable operator's consent agreement and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the act, FCC rules, consent agreement and this article shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. 
(b)  The city may take any action not prohibited by the act and FCC rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Code 2004,  62-76; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.826) 
Sec. 62-77. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
(a)  The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator, including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's consent agreement with the city, for failure to comply with the act, FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules or regulations promulgated under this article. 
(b)  Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the act, FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules or regulations promulgated under this article shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's consent agreement. 
(Code 2004,  62-77; Comp. Ords. 1987,  21.827) 
Secs. 62-78-62-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - RIGHT-OF-WAY ACCESS AND USE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq. 

Sec. 62-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All other terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as defined or as provided in the act. 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.). 
    Authority means the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight authority created pursuant to the act. 
    City commission means the City Commission of the City of Kentwood or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
    Mayor means the Mayor of the City of Kentwood or his designee. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the department of consumer and industry services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the act. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Such term does not include a federal, state or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunications facilities and facilities mean the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to, or can, generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals. Such terms do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses or any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act (MCL 484.2102). The term "telecommunications provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 stat. 1064, 47 USC 332, and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the act and this article only, the term "provider" also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunications facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Code 2004,  62-111; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(3), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-112. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and welfare, and to exercise reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the act and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Code 2004,  62-112; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(1), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-113. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. 
(Code 2004,  62-113; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(2), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-114. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with the act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the mayor and one copy with the city attorney. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including, without limitation, a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with the act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contains trade secret, proprietary or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.), pursuant to section 6(5) of the act (MCL 484.3106(5)), the telecommunications provider shall prominently indicate such on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, an application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The mayor may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the mayor deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests, in compliance with reasonable deadlines, for such additional information established by the mayor. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the act (MCL 484.3106(2)). 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the act (MCL 484.3105(1)), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act (MCL 484.2251), and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, but after 1985, shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. With the exception of fee provisions, which are now covered by the act, the provisions of city Ordinance No. 4-98 shall remain in full force and effect with regard to permits or consent agreements issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to November 1, 2002. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act (MCL 484.2251), shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the application fee required under subsection (d) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application, if allowed by the authority for good cause, as provided in section 5(4) of the act (MCL 484.3105(4)). 
(Code 2004,  62-114; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(4), 2, 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-115. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is delegated to the mayor. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), the mayor shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit in accordance with section 62-114(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the city. The mayor shall notify the MPSC when he has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which a permit was granted or denied. The mayor shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for a permit is approved, the mayor shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the act (MCL 484.3106(1), 484.3106(2), 484.3115). 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the act (MCL 484.3115(4)), the mayor may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and use of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the mayor shall require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. The bond shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Code 2004,  62-115; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(5), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-116. - Construction or engineering permits. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining all necessary construction or engineering permits as required by law for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Code 2004,  62-116; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(6), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-117. - Use of conduit or utility poles. 
    In accordance with the act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Code 2004,  62-117; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(7), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-118. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the act (MCL 484.3106(7)), a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and the city. The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the act (MCL 484.3106(8)). 
(Code 2004,  62-118; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(8), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-119. - Repair of damage. 
    A telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction, installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Code 2004,  62-119; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(9), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-120. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city as set forth in section 62-114(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). 
(Code 2004,  62-120; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(10), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-121. - Modification of existing fees; excess payment refunds. 
(a)  In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the act (MCL 484.3113(1)), the city modifies, to the extent necessary, fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, including providers with permits or consent agreements in effect on October 31, 2002, relating to access and use of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)), the city also approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that the providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)). 
(b)  If any fees are charged to telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Code 2004,  62-121; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(11), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-122. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the act (MCL 484.3113(5)), if section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108) is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 62-121 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Code 2004,  62-122; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(12), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-123. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the act (MCL 484.3110(4)), all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with such requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  62-123; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(13), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-124. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the act (MCL 484.3110(5)), the mayor shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority to the city. 
(Code 2004,  62-124; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(14), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-125. - Cable television operators not in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the act (MCL 484.3113(6)), the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Code 2004,  62-125; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(15), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-126. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the act (MCL 484.3104(2)), except as expressly provided in this article with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 2004,  62-126; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(16), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-127. - Compliance. 
    The city declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the act, and the provisions of this article should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the act, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from disclosure consistent with the act and state law as provided in section 62-114(c); 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements of this article, in accordance with section 62-114(f); 
(3)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to, and usage of, a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 62-115(a); 
(4)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 62-115(a); 
(5)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 62-115(a); 
(6)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 62-115(b); 
(7)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and use of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 62-115(c); 
(8)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use, in accordance with section 62-115(d); 
(9)  Not charging any telecommunications provider any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 62-116; 
(10)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 62-121; 
(11)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 62-124; and 
(12)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 62-125. 
(Code 2004,  62-127; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(17), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-128. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the act (MCL 484.3115(2)), this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunications provider's access to, and ongoing use of, a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Code 2004,  62-128; Ord. No. 21-02,  1(18), 10-15-2002) 
Sec. 62-129. - DAS/small cell/wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this section, the following terms and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
    DAS/small cell/wireless network shall mean any distributed antennae system or small cell telecommunication or data wireless network. 
    DAS/small cell/wireless facilities or DAS/small cell/wireless network facilities means structures, antennas and associated equipment installed and/or operated for the provision of telecommunication or wireless services, including without limitation, antennas, supporting structures for antennas, poles, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment. 
(b)  License agreement. No person shall install or operate, in whole or in part, DAS/small cell/wireless facilities or DAS/small cell/wireless network facilities in a city public right-of-way or other public place without first applying for and receiving a DAS/small cell/wireless license from the city in a form and subject to such terms and conditions as is acceptable to the city. 
    Nothing herein shall be interpreted to require the city to issue a license and the city reserves to itself discretion to grant, deny or modify a request for a license as it determines to be in the best interest of the city and its citizens taking into account such proprietary, safety and fiduciary interests as it deems warranted. 
    It is the policy of the city to encourage the co-location of antennas and similar facilities first, outside of public rights-of-way and, secondarily, within the pubic rights-of-way. The co-location of uses shall be a condition of approval of any license granted for a new supporting structure in the public right-of-way; provided, however, that the co-location requirement may be waived if the pole or support structure is disguised or stealthed so as to blend with the immediate environment (e.g., streetlights, power poles, etc.). 
(c)  METRO Act permit. No person shall install or operate "telecommunications facilities," as defined in the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way Oversight Act, Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, as amended (the "act") without first obtaining a permit under the act from the city, including any part of a DAS/small cell/wireless system constituting telecommunication facilities. 
(d)  Design parameters. The following minimal design parameters shall apply to DAS/small cells/wireless network facilities in city public rights-of-way: 
(1)  The required map(s) for proposed DAS/Small Cell/Wireless Facilities shall be legible, to scale, labeled with streets, and contain sufficient detail to precisely identify the proposed DAS/small cell/wireless network facilities' locations and surroundings. Where applicable, the required map shall include and identify any requested pole height(s), all attachments and detailed drawings of any attachment. 
(2)  The maximum height of a pole or other supporting structure installed to accommodate a DAS/small cell/wireless network shall be 40 feet. Equipment on a supporting structure may not exceed an aggregate width of four feet (centered on pole) and shall be secured a minimum of ten feet from the ground surface or 18 feet where equipment may overhang the back of curb line. Ground level equipment or shelters are not permitted. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted in subsection (d)(6), DAS/small cell/wireless facilities shall be located no closer than 18 inches from an existing sidewalk/face of curb or 18 inches from a proposed future sidewalk/face of curb location. 
(4)  Unless otherwise permitted in subsection (d)(6), DAS/small cell/wireless facilities shall be located no closer than ten feet from any driveway. 
(5)  In residential areas, DAS/small cell/wireless facilities shall be located in line with a side lot line and not in front of a residence. 
(6)  The licensee shall field-stake all proposed locations for DAS/small cell/wireless facilities which shall be subject to the advance approval of the city, Kent County Road Commission and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation as applicable. All approved DAS/small cell/wireless facilities' locations shall be on a per pole/equipment/other basis. Such approvals shall be memorialized by the city and licensee. 
(7)  Once precise locations have been approved in accordance with subsection (d)(6), the licensee shall provide latitude and longitude coordinates for the DAS/small cell/wireless facilities' locations to the city's engineering department as well as detailed as-built drawings within 90 days of the completion of installation. 
(8)  The licensee shall be responsible to obtain such other permits and approvals as required by law. 
(9)  Architectural design: 
a.  Unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or applicable codes poles and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized silver, gray or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, FCC or such codes, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  At all pole sites related equipment shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the facilities to the natural setting and environment. 
c.  All poles shall be of monopole design and construction unless the city approves an alternate design. Disguising or stealthing poles is encouraged. 
(e)  Modification of design parameters. Upon the written request of an applicant for a license, the city commission may modify the design parameters of subsection (d) in its sole discretion following a hearing and based on its review of factors affecting the public health, safety and welfare including, but not limited to, the following: the presence of existing poles or other structures or equipment in the immediate vicinity; the ability to reasonably comply with the design parameters set forth in subsection (d); the visual and aesthetic impact of the proposed pole, antenna or facilities on the adjacent area; the existing and planned character of the adjacent area; public comment; the scale and scope of the poles, antennas or facilities relative to the existing character of the area; whether granting the modification will adversely impact public safety; and the recommendations of city department heads (if any). Following its review, the city commission may grant, deny or grant with conditions a request to modify the design parameters and shall provide its decision and the basis for the same to the applicant in writing. The applicant shall be responsible to pay all costs of the city associated with the request to modify the design parameters. 
(f)  Compliance with applicable law. The licensee shall be responsible to comply with all applicable legal requirements and to obtain any permits or approvals otherwise required by law relative to the installation or operation of DAS/small cell wireless facilities in the city's public rights-of-way (e.g., electrical permits). The city, in reviewing and authorizing a permit under the act and/or a license referred to in this section, and the licensee, in the establishment and operation of any DAS/small cell/wireless network facilities, shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(g)  Fees. Fees for the permits and agreement required shall be as provided for in the act or those documents and as periodically authorized by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 4-16,  1, 7-19-2016; Ord. No. 7-16,  1, 12-20-2016) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Adoption of Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(a)  Adopted. Pursuant to the provisions of the home rule city act, Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), is adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this section. 
(b)  References in code. References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan. 
(c)  Enforcement; sanctions. 
(1)  The Michigan Vehicle Code may be enforced by any police officer or other employee of the city authorized to enforce criminal ordinances or authorized to issue civil infractions. 
(2)  The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference; provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(3)  When any person is found guilty of a misdemeanor or responsible for a civil infraction pursuant to this section, the judge or magistrate shall summarily determine and tax the costs of the action, which shall include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection with the violation or infraction, up to the entry of judgment. 
(Code 2004,  66-1; Ord. No. 01-03,  1-3, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 14-03,  1-3, 10-7-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Michigan Vehicle Code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 66-2. - Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code. 
(a)  Adopted. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, as promulgated by the director of the state police department and made effective October 30, 2002, is adopted by reference, as if fully set forth in this section. 
(b)  References in code. References in the Uniform Traffic Code to "governmental unit" or "municipality" shall mean the City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan. 
(c)  Enforcement; sanctions. 
(1)  The Uniform Traffic Code may be enforced by any police officer or other employee of the city authorized to enforce criminal ordinances or issue civil infractions, citations or notices. 
(2)  The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code are adopted by reference; provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Uniform Traffic Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(3)  When any person is found guilty of a misdemeanor or responsible for a civil infraction pursuant to this section, the judge or magistrate shall summarily determine and tax the costs of the action, which shall include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection with the violation or infraction, up to the entry of judgment. 
(Code 2004,  66-2; Ord. No. 01-03,  4-6, 2-4-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Uniform Traffic Code, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 66-3. - Current regulations. 
    All intersection stops and yield right-of-way requirements; regulations on stopping, standing or parking; one-way streets, roadways and alleys; crosswalks; restricted turns; through streets; play streets; angle parking zones; parking restrictions; curb loading zones; public carrier stands; parking meter zones and spaces; weight restrictions; no passing zones; speed limits and traffic control devices established and in existence on the effective date of this Code shall be deemed established under this chapter and shall remain effective until rescinded or modified as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2004,  66-3; Ord. No. 01-03,  7, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 66-4. - Traffic control devices on private property; violation as civil infraction. 
(a)  With the consent, or at the request, of the owners or persons in charge of private property that is open to the general public for travel, the traffic engineer may determine controls of the movement of vehicles and pedestrians and the parking of vehicles as needed for the safety and convenience of the public and users of the property. The traffic engineer shall place and maintain whatever traffic control devices are necessary to give notice of the controls determined to be necessary. 
(b)  A person who violates the directions of the traffic control devices is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  66-4; Ord. No. 15-01,  4, 10-2-2001) 
State Law reference- Regulation of traffic on private property, MCL 257.941 et seq. 
Secs. 66-5-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 66-31. - Traffic engineer. 
(a)  Generally. The office of traffic engineer is hereby established. The traffic engineer shall be appointed in a manner prescribed by the city commission and shall exercise the powers and duties provided in this section in a manner which is consistent with prevailing traffic engineering and safety practices and which is in the best interests of the city. If a traffic engineer is not appointed, the authority of such engineer shall be vested in the chief of police. 
(b)  General duties. The general duties of the traffic engineer are as follows: 
(1)  Plan and determine the installation, and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices. 
(2)  Conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures. 
(3)  Conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions. 
(4)  Plan the operation of traffic on the streets of the city, including parking areas. 
(5)  Cooperate with other officials of the city in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions. 
(6)  Carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the ordinances and administrative directives of the city. 
(7)  Enforce all city codes and ordinances applicable in city rights-of-way on all city public streets. 
(c)  Prohibiting certain traffic. The traffic engineer may, after an engineering and traffic investigation, designate any heavily traveled street in the city as prohibited to a class or kind of traffic found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic. The traffic engineer shall erect appropriate traffic control devices which give notice of the determination. 
(d)  Traffic control orders. 
(1)  The authority to regulate traffic in the city shall be exercised by the traffic engineer by the issuance of traffic control orders, which shall specify the rules and regulations adopted or established by him. Such traffic control orders shall become effective upon being filed with the city clerk and upon the erection of adequate signs or signals which give notice of the existence of such regulation, if such signs or signals are required by the provisions of this chapter which pertain to such regulation. 
(2)  Traffic control orders may be issued by the traffic engineer on his own authority, but, when so issued, shall be known as temporary traffic control orders and shall not be effective after the expiration of 90 days from the date of filing of such orders, and such temporary traffic control orders shall not be renewed or extended, except upon approval by the city commission. Temporary traffic control orders shall become permanent orders upon being approved by the city commission, and notice of such approval shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(3)  Permanent traffic control orders shall be issued by the traffic engineer, approved by the city commission and filed with the city clerk. 
(4)  All traffic control orders, and any actions which modify or repeal such orders, shall be kept by the city clerk in a separate book, which shall be known as the traffic control order book. 
(5)  In all court proceedings, a copy of a traffic control order, certified by the city clerk to be a true copy compared by him with the original in his office, shall be permitted into evidence in the same manner as the original would be permitted into evidence, if produced. If it appears that a traffic control sign, signal or device that conforms to the provisions of this chapter was erected or in place when the alleged violation of this chapter occurred, such showing shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of a lawful traffic control order which authorizes such traffic control sign, signal or device, and it is not necessary for the prosecution to affirmatively show the existence of a valid traffic control order in such cases, unless and until such presumption is rebutted by competent evidence. 
(e)  Authority to install traffic control devices. The traffic engineer shall place, maintain or remove traffic control signs, signals, lane markings and other devices, and shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or effect. This shall be done when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city, to indicate and carry out the provisions of such ordinances and under state law, to regulate, warn or guide traffic. 
(Code 2004,  66-31; Ord. No. 15-01,  1, 2, 5-7, 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 66-32. - Temporary emergency regulations and special conditions. 
    The chief of police is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. Temporary regulations shall remain in effect for not more than 90 days. 
(Code 2004,  66-32; Ord. No. 15-01,  3, 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 66-33. - Conformance of traffic control devices with state manual required. 
    All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the official state manual of uniform traffic control devices. All signs and signals required by this chapter for a particular purpose shall, as far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 2004,  66-33; Ord. No. 15-01,  8, 10-2-2001) 
State Law reference- Compliance with state manual required, MCL 257.610. 
Secs. 66-34-66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, MCL 257.672 et seq.; authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-61. - Parking prohibited during hours that could impair or impede snow removal. 
    From November 15-March 15 of each year and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, so that city streets may be snowplowed, cleaned or maintained, no parking of any vehicle is permitted on either side of any city street between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any other times when on-street parking could impair or impede such snowplowing, cleaning or maintenance operations. 
(Code 2004,  66-61; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.278) 
Sec. 66-62. - Parking or storage of motor vehicle in gas stations not open for business. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motor vehicles includes every type of vehicle propelled by a motor and also includes any and all items capable of being moved from one place to another with the assistance of a motor vehicle, such as, but not limited to, trailers of all types, mobile homes, modular housing, etc. 
    Oil and gasoline stations not open for business on a regular basis means oil and gasoline stations which have been closed and not open for business for a period of at least seven days. 
    Parking and storage means leaving any motor vehicle unattended for any length of time whatsoever, except for a reasonable time required to summon assistance to remove a motor vehicle from an oil and gas station not open for business on a regular basis under an emergency situation, by any person other than the owner or lessee of such station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner or lessee, to park and/or store any motor vehicle for any length of time whatsoever in any oil and gasoline service station which is not open for business on a regular basis. 
(Code 2004,  66-62; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.251-20.255) 
Sec. 66-63. - Displaying vehicles for sale on private property. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Conspicuous display means any occurrence in which a vehicle is parked and identified by signage or other printed advertisement for the sole purpose of sale or rent and located so as to provide maximum exposure to passing motorists or the general populace. 
    Vehicle means any passenger car; truck; motorcycle; farm and/or garden implement; or recreational vehicle, including travel trailers, motorhomes, pickup campers, off-road vehicles, boats and/or boat trailers; and any other portable unit which is self-propelled or towed by another vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park at any time, for the purpose of conspicuous display, any vehicle on any lot or parcel of land within the city, unless such lot or parcel is owned or leased by the same person, or unless such parcel or lot is properly zoned and approved for such use. Any vehicle being displayed must be on a paved drive area on the private property. 
(c)  The conspicuous display of a vehicle by the real property owner or lessee shall be permitted, provided that, on any given lot or parcel, such display is limited to a maximum of one vehicle for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days within a six-month period, except that selling of motor vehicles, other than the property owner's motor vehicles, in residentially zoned areas is expressly prohibited. 
(e)  Any person charged with a violation of the provisions of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(f)  The zoning administrator of the city or designated agents or any duly authorized law enforcement officer may enforce this section. 
(Code 2004,  66-63; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.291, 20.292, 20.294, 20.295) 
Sec. 66-64. - Certain parking, stopping or standing prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park, stop, or leave a vehicle standing in the space between the edge of the paved roadway and the sidewalk (or in the absence of a sidewalk, the edge of the public right-of-way) except in an emergency or when necessary to comply with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device; provided however, that this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply for a period of two years beginning on November 20, 2005, and ending on November 20, 2007, on public streets in the city where the paved roadway measures 23 feet or less in width. 
(Code 2004,  66-64; Ord. No. 3-05,  1, 6-1-2005; Ord. No. 20-05,  1, 11-20-2005) 
Sec. 66-65. - Commercial vehicles in excess of two-ton gross weight prohibited from parking, stopping or standing in street right-of-way. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all commercial vehicles with a gross weight in excess of two tons, except for authorized emergency vehicles and public utility vehicles making utility repairs. 
(b)  No commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of two tons shall be parked, stopped or left standing upon any part of a street right-of-way for a period in excess of two hours. A vehicle moved less than 100 feet is considered to be parked, stopped or left standing in its original location for purposes of this section. 
(Code 2004,  66-65; Ord. No. 3-05,  2, 6-1-2005) 
Sec. 66-66. - Trailers prohibited from parking, stopping or standing in street right-of-way. 
    Unattached trailers or semi-trailers are prohibited from parking or standing upon any part of a street right-of-way; provided however, that such trailers may be temporarily parked or left standing upon a street right-of-way for such period of time as is reasonably necessary to load or unload trailer contents, but in no case shall they be parked or left standing in excess of two hours. 
(Code 2004,  66-66; Ord. No. 3-05,  3, 6-1-2005) 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 66-67. - Finding of public purpose. 
    The city commission finds it necessary to regulate and control the parking and storage of motor vehicles on private property in residential areas for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and welfare, to enhance the visual environment of the city and to preserve property values in residential areas. 
(Code 2004,  66-67; Ord. No. 4-05,  1, 6-1-2005) 
Sec. 66-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles. It shall be located on the same lot as the main building, and shall be naturally and normally incidental to the dominant use of the structure. 
    Improved driveway means a private road, drive or parking area designed for ingress and egress, parking or turning movements, which road, drive or parking area is uniformly surfaced with concrete, asphalt, brick or macadam gravel not less than four inches thick in compacted depth. 
    Motor vehicle means any operable, properly licensed motor vehicle including, without limitation, recreational vehicles, trailers, motor homes, and motorcycles. 
    Owner means any person, firm, or corporation whose name appears on the certificate of title of the motor vehicle in question. 
    Parking, placement, and storage as used herein are synonymous, and mean leaving a motor vehicle in place or permitting the same. 
    Person having possession means any person, firm, or corporation having legal possession of the motor vehicle in question, but who is not the owner. 
(Code 2004,  66-68; Ord. No. 4-05,  1, 6-1-2005) 
Sec. 66-69. - Parking, placement, and storage. 
    In the front yard setback area of private property used or zoned for residential purposes, motor vehicles may only be parked, placed or stored within a garage or upon an improved driveway. In the cases of corner lots, this restriction applies to both established street setback areas. For purposes of this article, "street setback area" and "front yard setback area" shall have the meaning provided in the city's adopted zoning ordinance. 
(Code 2004,  66-69; Ord. No. 4-05,  1, 6-1-2005) 
Sec. 66-70. - Failure to remove. 
    Any owner or person having possession who stores, parks or places a motor vehicle on private property in violation of this article, or permits the same, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  66-70; Ord. No. 4-05,  1, 6-1-2005) 
Sec. 66-71. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this division shall be subject to a fine of $20.00. 
(Code 2004,  66-71; Ord. No. 4-05,  1, 6-1-2005) 
Secs. 66-72-66-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - TRUCK ROUTES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to limit or prohibit operation of trucks on highways, MCL 257.726. 

Sec. 66-91. - Purpose and objectives. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the orderly operation of trucks on the streets of the city. The primary objectives of this article are to facilitate the transfer of goods and services by trucks to businesses and industries, and to preserve the quality of life within residential neighborhoods. Considerations involved with this article are the safety of our citizens, the avoidance of unreasonable or unnecessary disturbance or reduction in property values due to truck noise, vibration and/or air pollution, protection against the deterioration of the streets not designated for truck traffic and the provision of economical and expeditious truck service, where required. 
(Code 2004,  66-91; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.261) 
Sec. 66-92. - Designation. 
    The following roadways, or portions thereof, in the city are hereby designated as truck routes: 
East-West Routes 28th Street West city limits to east city limits 29th Street West city limits to Acquest Avenue 32nd Street Breton Avenue to Lake Eastbrook Boulevard 36th Street Broadmoor Avenue to east city limits 44th Street West city limits to east city limits 52nd Street Division Avenue to Kelloggwoods Drive East Paris Avenue to east city limits Barden Drive East Paris Avenue to Broadmoor Avenue Sparks Drive East Paris Avenue to 900 feet east of East Paris Avenue North-South Routes Breton Avenue 32nd Street to north city limits Shaffer Avenue 32nd Street to 28th Street Radcliffe Drive 29th Street to 28th Street Broadmoor Avenue North city limits to south city limits Lake Eastbrook Boulevard 32nd Street to 28th Street Patterson Avenue Broadmoor Avenue to 1,200 feet north of 28th Street East Paris Avenue 52nd Street to 36th Street Swank Drive Broadmoor Avenue to East Paris Avenue Division Avenue North city limits to south city limits Kelloggswoods Drive Division Avenue to 52nd Street Potter Avenue 44th Street to north city limits Eastern Avenue 44th Street to north city limits Kalamazoo Avenue North city limits to south city limits Acquest Avenue 28th Street to 29th Street East Paris Avenue Sparks Drive to 29th Street  
(Code 2004,  66-92; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.262; Ord. No. 3-08,  1, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 66-93. - Temporary truck routes. 
    If a designated truck route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, motor vehicles regulated by this article shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the city. 
(Code 2004,  66-93; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.263(E)) 
Sec. 66-94. - Use required. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all motor vehicles having a weight of 10,000 pounds or more, including the load therein, except vehicles carrying or designated to carry passengers, all governmentally owned or leased vehicles, public utility vehicles and vehicles used for private refuse handling. 
(b)  Motor vehicles regulated by this article which do not have a pickup, delivery or service within the city are required to enter and exit the city on truck routes only. 
(c)  While in the city, regulated vehicles must travel on truck routes as designated in this article, except as follows: 
(1)  The operation of authorized emergency vehicles may occur on any roadway in the city. 
(2)  The operation of privately owned recreational vehicles may use any roadway in the city. 
(3)  The operation of motor vehicles regulated by this article is permitted on any roadway in the city for pickup, delivery or service where the destination is not on a truck route, provided that ingress and egress thereto or therefrom is accomplished in the following manner: 
a.  Vehicles regulated by this article must utilize designated truck routes to the point closest to delivery, pickup or service. 
b.  Upon leaving or returning to the truck route, such vehicles must utilize local streets only when necessary for the completion of the delivery, pickup or service. 
c.  In making consecutive deliveries, pickups or services to points not on truck routes, vehicles may proceed on roadways other than truck routes only if the distance traveled on nontruck routes as a result of such routing would be less than the distance traveled on nontruck routes if the vehicle had returned to a truck route as in subsection (c)(3)b of this section and then proceeded to the next delivery point as in subsections (c)(3)a and b of this section. 
(Code 2004,  66-94; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.263(A)) 
Sec. 66-95. - Signs. 
    Designated truck routes shall be posted with signs at reasonable intervals and at intersections where the truck route turns. Such signs shall consist of the words, "Truck Route," below which shall be placed an appropriate type arrow indicating the direction of the route. Nontruck route streets may be posted with signs, where appropriate. 
(Code 2004,  66-95; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.263(C)) 
Sec. 66-96. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of any person driving, or in charge or control of any vehicle regulated by this article, upon the request of a police officer, to stop and answer any questions regarding the weight of the truck, its destination and its point of origin. Such person shall also present log books, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of destination, point of origin or vehicle weight for the police officer's examination. 
(Code 2004,  66-96; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.263(D)) 
Sec. 66-97. - Temporary exceptions. 
    Temporary exceptions to this article may be granted by the mayor. Such exceptions shall be in writing. 
(Code 2004,  66-97; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.263(F)) 
Secs. 66-98-66-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - BICYCLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles, motorcycles and toy vehicles, MCL 257.656 et seq.; authority to regulate bicycles, MCL 257.606(1)(i). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-131. - Scope. 
    The regulations of this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 2004,  66-131; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.161(C)) 
Sec. 66-132. - Compliance. 
(a)  It is a civil infraction for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required, in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  66-132; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.161(A), (B)) 
Sec. 66-133. - Use of paths when provided. 
    Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 2004,  66-133; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.168(3)) 
Sec. 66-134. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
    Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Code 2004,  66-134; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.168(2)) 
Sec. 66-135. - Obedience to signs. 
    When signs are erected on any sidewalk or street which prohibit the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall disobey such signs. 
(Code 2004,  66-135; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.168(13)) 
Sec. 66-136. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under conditions then existing. 
(Code 2004,  66-136; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.168(9), 20.169) 
Sec. 66-137. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 2004,  66-137; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.168(10)) 
Sec. 66-138. - Turns. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn, or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 2004,  66-138; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.168(3)) 
Sec. 66-139. - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 2004,  66-139; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.168(12)) 
Secs. 66-140-66-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance No. 15-05, adopted September 6, 2005, repealed division 2,  66-161-66-166, in its entirety. Former  66-161-66-166 pertained to bicycle licenses and derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.162-20.167. 

Secs. 66-161-66-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Motor carrier safety act of 1963, MCL 480.11 et seq. 

Sec. 66-201. - Adoption of motor carrier safety act of 1963. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out in this article the motor carrier safety act of 1963, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  66-201-66-263; Comp. Ords. 1987,  20.801-20.803, 20.805, 20.807, 20.809, 20.810, 20.812, 20.816; Ord. No. 10-03,  1, 2, 7-1-2003) 
Secs. 66-202-66-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - PUBLIC TRANSIT REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance No. 5-14, effective August 6, 2014, enacted provisions designated as  66-231-66-235. Inasmuch as sections already exist, said provisions have been redesignated as  66-301-66-305. 

Sec. 66-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Proof of fare payment means: 
(1)  A transit pass valid for the day and time of use; or 
(2)  A receipt showing payment of the applicable fare for use of the public transportation vehicle during the day and time specified in the receipt. 
    Public transportation authority means a public authority authorized to provide public transportation services or any other entity authorized under the laws of the state to provide public transportation services. 
    Public transportation entity means any legal or administrative entity authorized under the laws of the state to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the city and such other entities that may be created with the authority to enforce this article. 
    Public transportation vehicle means a bus, train, or any other vehicle used by a public transportation authority to provide public transportation services. 
    Silver Line means a public rapid transit bus line operated by Interurban Transit Partnership or its successors between 60th Street in Wyoming/Kentwood and Michigan Street in downtown Grand Rapids, Michigan. 
    Transit pass means any pass, coupon, card, identification, token, ticket, or other document used to obtain public transportation services. 
(Code 2004,  66-301; Ord. No. 5-14,  1, 8-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-302. - Prohibition on fare evasion. 
    No person shall occupy, ride in, or use a Silver Line public transportation vehicle without paying the fare established by the public transportation authority. All persons that occupy ride in, or use a Silver Line public transportation vehicle must possess proof of fare payment and shall present such proof upon the demand of a police officer, security officer, or fare inspector authorized in accordance with this article. A violation of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, as provided for in chapter 2. 
(Code 2004,  66-302; Ord. No. 5-14,  1, 8-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-303. - Fare inspectors. 
(a)  A public transportation entity may appoint or employ fare inspectors as necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. The employing public transportation entity shall determine the requirements for employment as a fare inspector. 
(b)  A fare inspector that is appointed or employed in accordance with this section is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article while acting within the scope of his authority and in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 2004,  66-303; Ord. No. 5-14,  1, 8-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-304. - Penalties for fare evasion. 
    Violations of the fare evasion provisions of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction with the penalties plus costs and any statutory justice system assessment or similar statutory assessment. 
(Code 2004,  66-304; Ord. No. 5-14,  1, 8-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-305. - High occupancy vehicles. 
(a)  One or more traffic lanes of any street or roadway may be designated by the city commission as reserved for use by buses herein called high occupancy vehicles (HOVs), at such times and on such days as determined by the city commission. All lanes so designated shall be appropriately marked with such signs or other markers as the city commission or its designee direct. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, the designation of any lane or lanes of any street or roadway as reserved for HOVs only shall not apply to the use of such lanes by: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles such as fire-fighting vehicles, ambulances, and rescue squad vehicles and tow trucks for purposes of providing emergency service in the HOV lane. 
(2)  Vehicles operated by law enforcement agencies. 
(3)  Vehicles of public utility companies operating in response to an emergency call. 
(4)  City maintenance vehicles, such as street sweepers and snow plows, working on such lanes. 
(5)  Private vehicles that must utilize the HOV lane to permit a right-turn movement. 
(6)  School buses in the process of loading or unloading passengers. 
(c)  No operator of a vehicle shall operate that vehicle in a traffic lane designated for buses as described in this section unless otherwise authorized herein. A violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction, as provided for in this Code. 
(Code 2004,  66-305; Ord. No. 5-14,  1, 8-6-2014) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities,  12.1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. 7,  24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGE COLLECTION 

Sec. 70-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Existing public utility means and includes any and all sanitary sewer lines and water mains in the city, regardless of the means employed by the city for payment of the cost of such utilities. 
    Front foot charges means the cost per foot times the frontage measurement used to determine the front foot connection charge. 
    Frontage means actual or equivalent street frontage on an existing or proposed public or private street and includes the width of the connection property in cases where the property does not abut a public or private street. 
    Interest charge means the interest rate on the last city sewer or water main special assessment roll preceding the date of connection unless interest rates have changed so drastically that the city commission directs a different method be used to set such rate. 
    Present going rate means the average cost of public sanitary sewer and/or water mains installed by or under the direction of the city in the calendar year preceding the year of connection, excluding any part of such costs attributable to oversizing for transmission purposes. 
    Special assessment agreement means an instrument in recordable form whereby the owner of the connection property agrees to pay front foot connection charges over a period of time in annual installments, and in certain instances to subject the connection property to special assessments at such time as public utilities are installed to serve the connection property in standard fashion. 
(Code 2004,  70-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.402) 
Sec. 70-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the collection by the city of reasonable charges when properties in the city are connected to a public sanitary sewer and/or water utility system in situations where such property is not a part of an established special assessment district or a deferred benefit charge roll or payback agreement. 
(Code 2004,  70-32; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.401) 
Sec. 70-33. - Administration; review of decisions. 
    The city engineer shall administer this article and make all decisions incident thereto; provided, however, that any property owner aggrieved by such decision shall have the right to have such decision reviewed by the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  70-33; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.408) 
Sec. 70-34. - Connection charge computation method. 
(a)  Where a property is to be connected to an existing public utility paid for by special assessment, a developer payback agreement or as part of a deferred charge roll, the front foot charges shall be the same as paid in such case for the subject sewer line or water main as if the property was within the original district or comparable area to be served by the subject utility. 
(b)  Where the property is to be connected to an existing public utility paid for by means other than as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the owner shall pay the present going rate for the connection charge. 
(c)  Where the property is to be connected to an existing public utility not covering the frontage, but is accessible, the front foot charges shall be the present going rate, as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  70-34; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.403) 
Sec. 70-35. - Special assessment agreements. 
    In all cases where the city engineer determines there is an uncertainty that public utilities will be installed at a later date through special assessment proceedings or developer installed payback agreement, which would normally serve the property through a frontage utility, the property owner shall execute a special assessment agreement. 
(Code 2004,  70-35; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.404) 
Sec. 70-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to disposition of front connection charges was deleted. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.405 and Code 2004,  70-36. 
Sec. 70-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to reimbursement from the city trunkage fund was deleted. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.406 and Code 2004,  70-37. 
Secs. 70-38-70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-71. - Article considered part of contract. 
    The provisions of this article shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who shall take water furnished by the city, and each and every person so served shall be considered as having expressed his consent to be bound thereto. 
(Code 2004,  70-71; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.303) 
Sec. 70-72. - Water main interference. 
    No person, other than the authorized agents of the city, shall disturb, tap, change, obstruct access to, or interfere in any manner with the public water mains of the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-72; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.302) 
Sec. 70-73. - Construction specifications. 
    All water system construction shall be in accordance with the city standard construction specifications set by resolution of the city commission and such specifications shall be on file in the city engineer's office. 
(Code 2004,  70-73; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.305) 
Sec. 70-74. - Free access for inspections; refusal. 
    Any authorized officer, inspector or employee shall have free access at any reasonable time to any premises supplied with public water for the purpose of reading meters or making inspections of the water and plumbing systems on the premises. If an authorized agent of the city is refused admittance to any such premises, or being admitted, shall be hindered or prevented from making any such examination, the water may be turned off to such premises, after giving notice in writing to the owner or occupant thereof. 
(Code 2004,  70-74; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.308) 
Sec. 70-75. - Right to shut off water; turn-on charge; liability for damages. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to shut off the water to any premises where all proper charges for the use of sewers have not been paid. When the water has been shut off for any such cause, it shall not be turned on again until all proper charges have been paid, together with such additional charge as the city may by resolution establish to cover the cost of shutting off and turning on the water. 
(b)  The city reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water, decrease or increase the pressure for the making of repairs, extensions or other purposes whatsoever, and the city shall not be held liable for any damage arising therefrom. 
(Code 2004,  70-75; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.307, 25.312) 
Sec. 70-76. - Claims for interrupted water service invalid. 
    No claim shall be valid if made against the city or any official or agent thereof for reason of interrupted water service. 
(Code 2004,  70-76; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.313) 
Sec. 70-77. - Waste of water. 
    Excessive or unnecessary waste of water, whether by carelessness, or defective or leaky plumbing fixtures, is strictly prohibited. For disregard or repeated violation of this requirement, the water may be turned off by the city water department. 
(Code 2004,  70-77; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.310) 
Sec. 70-78. - Resale prohibited. 
    No water shall be sold by any subscriber. All water shall be taken or used through the service pipes under the jurisdiction of the city commission or authorized official, and no connection through which water may pass from one property to another shall exist, even though the ownership of both properties or premises may be the same. 
(Code 2004,  70-78; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.310) 
Sec. 70-79. - Authority to turn on water. 
    Where the water has been turned off by the city for any reason, no person, except authorized employees or agents of the city, may turn it on again. When this section is violated, the violator shall be liable to penalties provided in this Code, and, in addition, the water may be shut off at the corporation stop at the main, in which case, the owner shall, before it is turned on again, pay in advance such charges as the city by resolution may require. 
(Code 2004,  70-79; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.311) 
Sec. 70-80. - Water shortages. 
(a)  The use of water for sprinkling or other purposes shall at all times be subject to the express condition that the city may at any time, when it shall determine the condition of the public water supply system demands it, limit the days and/or time of day during which water may be used for sprinkling or any other purpose, or the city may forbid the use of water for such purpose, for any period of time deemed necessary. 
(b)  The following restrictions will be implemented in times of water shortage or severe drought. The restrictions consist of four tiers or steps which will be exercised as conditions warrant. 
(1)  Tier 1, odd-even lawn sprinkling. Addresses ending in an odd number will be allowed to sprinkle any time on odd-numbered dates, and even-numbered addresses may sprinkle any time on even-numbered dates. 
(2)  Tier 2, odd-even sprinkling, midnight to noon. Tier 2 sprinkling shall be the same as set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section, except all permitted sprinkling activity must occur between the hours of midnight and noon. All sprinkling, regardless of the address, will be prohibited from noon to midnight. 
(3)  Tier 3, total ban on sprinkling. Tier 3 shall have a total ban on sprinkling, except new lawns. 
(4)  Tier 4, total ban on sprinkling and nonessential use of water. Tier 4 shall have a total ban on sprinkling and nonessential use of water, including: 
a.  Noncommercial car washes. 
b.  Hosing drives and walks. 
c.  Swimming pool refills. 
(c)  A restriction will be effective 24 hours after its publication in a newspaper of general distribution in the city, except in cases of extreme emergency, when the restriction will take effect immediately. 
(Code 2004,  70-80; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.314, 25.651-25.653) 
Sec. 70-81. - Interference with street valve or fire hydrant. 
    No person, without an express permit from the city commission or its authorized agent, shall in any manner open or interfere with any street valve or fire hydrant. 
(Code 2004,  70-81; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.315) 
Sec. 70-82. - Taps. 
    No tap shall be made at water mains unless a permit shall have been obtained in writing from the city inspections department or its authorized agent. No tap shall be made by any person other than an authorized agent of the city. All applications for such permits shall be made at least one day prior to the date on which the tap is desired to be made. 
(Code 2004,  70-82; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.316) 
Sec. 70-83. - Water service inspection and approval. 
    All water services shall be inspected and must be approved by the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-83; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.342) 
Sec. 70-84. - Plumber's license required. 
    Any plumber who may desire to do business in connection with the city water system shall be a licensed plumber under the laws of the state. 
(Code 2004,  70-84; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.341) 
State Law reference- State plumbing act, MCL 338.3511 et seq. 
Secs. 70-85-70-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERS 

Sec. 70-111. - Required; exception. 
    All service connections shall be metered, except hydrants on city streets or city property. 
(Code 2004,  70-111; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.304) 
Sec. 70-112. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section pertaining to water without meter during construction was deleted. It was derived from Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.329 and Code 2004,  70-112. 
Sec. 70-113. - Supply and ownership; connection charges. 
    All meters will be supplied, and owned, by the city. The property owner or applicant shall pay any and all charges in connection with the installation of meters in such amount as the city shall determine by resolution. 
(Code 2004,  70-113; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.319) 
Sec. 70-114. - Determination of size. 
    The city water department shall determine the proper size of meters. The size of meter granted shall be in accordance with the estimated water consumption. 
(Code 2004,  70-114; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.320) 
Sec. 70-115. - Location; remote readers. 
(a)  Meters shall be set in a convenient place, easy to access, near the entrance of the service pipe, located so as to control the entire water supply. 
(b)  Remote readers shall be required in each and every case where: 
(1)  A meter must be replaced; 
(2)  Property is sold or otherwise transferred, resulting in a change of the water customer; or 
(3)  There is new construction desiring water service. 
(Code 2004,  70-115; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.321) 
Sec. 70-116. - Control; interference. 
    Water meters shall be under the control of the city or its authorized agent at all times, and no person shall break the seal of a meter, or in any way interfere with the operation of a water meter, except under the direct supervision of the city agent. 
(Code 2004,  70-116; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.322) 
Sec. 70-117. - Custodian of sealing device and seals. 
    The city water department shall be the official custodian of the sealing device and meter seals. 
(Code 2004,  70-117; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.323) 
Sec. 70-118. - Protection from injury; liability for loss or damage. 
    The customer shall take all proper precaution to protect the meter from injury, frost, damage from hot water or steam, heat or any violence whatsoever, and the owner of the premises will be held liable for all loss or damage to the city from failure to properly care for and protect each meter. 
(Code 2004,  70-118; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.324) 
Sec. 70-119. - Notice of damage or failure to properly register; repair or replacement. 
    In case of damage to a meter or failure of a meter to properly register, the owner of the premises shall notify the city water department or its authorized agent at once, in which case, the meter shall be repaired or replaced by an accurate meter. The charges for water during such periods will be on the basis of ordinary use under similar conditions before the meter was affected. 
(Code 2004,  70-119; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.325) 
Sec. 70-120. - Testing. 
    Upon the deposit of the amount required by resolution and accompanied by a written form of any water customer requesting that a test be made of the meter, the water department will remove, examine, test and install another tested meter on the customer's service. A meter shall be considered accurate if it registers five percent or less, than the actual quantity of water passing through. If a meter registers in excess of five percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through, it shall be considered fast to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through, it shall be considered slow to that extent. If a meter has been tested and shall have been determined to register fast, the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent fast multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by the consumer within the two billing quarters prior to the test, and the deposit fee. If a meter has been determined to register slow, the city will retain the test deposit fee and collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent slow multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by the consumer within the prior two billing quarters. Testing fees will also be retained when test results show the meter registers five percent or less than the quantity of water passing through. 
(Code 2004,  70-120; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.331) 
Sec. 70-121. - Meter pits. 
    Meter pits will only be allowed if there is no reasonable means to contain the meter in a nearby home or business. All new meter pits shall be designed and installed according to the city standard construction specifications. A planned detail is required for review by the city water department prior to approval of installation. Any approved meter pit shall be installed in a readily accessible location outside of the ROW and owned and maintained by the property owner. A permit and inspection from the inspections department is required. 
Secs. 70-122-70-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 70-141. - Generally. 
    No person shall install or maintain, or permit the installation or maintenance, of any cross connection between the water supply of the city and any other source of water supply. 
(Code 2004,  70-141; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.340) 
Sec. 70-142. - Rules and cross connection control program adopted. 
(a)  Introduction. In accordance with the requirements set forth by the state department of environmental quality (DEQ), the city has officially adopted the state cross connection control rules to protect the city public water supply system. 
(1)  The term "cross connection" means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow could occur. 
(2)  The term "backflow" means water of questionable quality, waste, or other contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. 
(b)  Local ordinance. The authority to carry out and enforce a local cross connection control program will be in accordance with this division. 
(c)  Local inspection. The water department shall be responsible for making the initial cross connection inspections and reinspections to check for the presence of cross connections with the municipal water supply system. Individuals responsible for carrying out the cross connection inspections and reinspections shall have obtained necessary training through any available manuals on cross connection prevention, including the Cross Connection Rules Manual as published by the DEQ and attendance of any cross connection training sessions sponsored by the DEQ or other recognized agencies. 
(d)  Schedule for inspection. 
(1)  Known or suspected secondary water supply cross connections shall be inspected first (surface water, private wells and storage tanks, recirculated water, etc.) 
(2)  Known or suspected submerged inlet cross connections will be inspected next. 
(3)  All suspected high hazard establishments, including all industrial, commercial and municipal buildings will be inspected first, typically within six months following the approval of this program. All other buildings and water system connections shall be inspected in a logical sequence as time permits. 
(e)  Schedule for reinspection. In order to ensure against the hazards of cross connections, it will be necessary to periodically and systematically reinspect for the presence of cross connections. The schedule for reinspection shall be in accordance with the schedule as noted in the Cross Connection Rules Manual. Whenever it is suspected or known that modifications have taken place with piping systems serving a particular water customer, reinspections of the premises will be made. 
(f)  Protective devices. The methods to protect against hazards of cross connections as outlined in the Cross Connection Rules Manual will be incorporated into the city cross connection control program. 
(g)  Compliance time. The time allowed for correction or elimination of any cross connection found shall be as follows: 
(1)  Cross connections which pose an imminent and extreme hazard shall be disconnected immediately and so maintained until necessary protective devices or modifications are made. 
(2)  Other cross connections which do not pose an extreme hazard to the water supply system should be corrected as soon as possible. The length of time allowed for correction should be reasonable and may vary depending on the type of device necessary for protection. The water utility shall indicate to each customer the time period allowed for compliance. 
(h)  Testing. All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation or relocation and after any repair. In addition, all high hazard and reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be tested annually. All other assemblies shall be tested at least once every three years. Records of test results shall be maintained by the water utility. Only individuals that hold a valid state plumbing license and have successfully passed an approved backflow testing class shall perform such testing. Each tester shall also be approved by the city. Individuals performing assembly testing shall certify the results of their testing. 
(i)  Recordkeeping. The water utility shall maintain sufficient and accurate records of its local cross connection control program and report annually on the status of the program to the DEQ on a form provided by the department. 
Secs. 70-143-70-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 70-171. - Established by resolution. 
(a)  All water rates and charges shall be established by resolution of the city commission. They shall consist of: 
(1)  All water rate and meter service charges for water served or supplied by the city to any person, by or through any meter, service pipe or main, are due and payable quarterly. 
(2)  A quarterly readiness to serve charge shall be made, based on meter size. When a battery of more than one meter is used in the place of a large single meter the quarterly readiness to serve charge shall be the charge of the single sized meter, multiplied by the number of meters composing the battery. 
(3)  In addition to the readiness to serve charge, a charge for water consumed, as shown by the meter reading, shall be made and collected. 
(4)  In addition to the readiness to serve and water consumption charges, a quarterly debt service charge shall be made and collected. 
(5)  In addition to all other charges required in this section to be paid, each user who has not paid a trunkage shall pay a trunkage charge as established by the schedule of fees at the time that application for connection to the water system is made. 
(b)  Water rates shall be sufficient to provide for: 
(1)  The payment of the expenses of administration and operation, and such expenses for maintenance of the water system as are necessary to preserve the water system in good repair and working order; 
(2)  The payment of the interest upon, and the principal of, any applicable bonds as and when they become due and payable, and the creation of the reserve for such payment; and 
(3)  Such other expenditures and funds for the water system as may be required. 
(Code 2004,  70-171; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.327, 25.328) 
Sec. 70-172. - Free service. 
    No free service shall be furnished to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, but such service furnished shall be paid for in accordance with the schedule of fees as set by resolution. All houses, buildings and any other facilities used for occupancy, employment, recreation or any other purposes involving people where such property abuts the right-of-way and the structure is within 200 feet of the public water supply shall be required to connect thereto after a 90-day written notice by the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-172; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.326) 
Sec. 70-173. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  The city shall pay for each fire hydrant connected to the water system for fire protection as may be required by water bonding ordinances. 
(b)  For all connections maintained at any private premises for fire protection purposes, a readiness to serve charge shall be made and collected according to the size of the connection. 
(c)  Any loss or damage to a fire hydrant, operating nut or wrench will be charged to the applicant for service from the fire hydrant. On large construction projects, the city may require the setting of an appropriate meter and charge for water and service at the regular metered rates. 
(Code 2004,  70-173; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.330) 
Sec. 70-174. - Failure of supply. 
    In case of failure of the supply of water from any cause whatsoever, no reduction or abatement of water rates shall be made or allowed. 
(Code 2004,  70-174; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.318) 
Sec. 70-175. - Billing and collection. 
(a)  Water rates and charges shall be billed and collected quarterly, or, if deemed advisable by the city, large users may be billed monthly, and all bills shall be due and payable at the office of the city treasurer within 30 days after the billing date. For all bills not paid by the due date, a ten percent shall be added to the bill. 
(b)  Should the due date fall upon a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, such bill may be paid on the next regular business day without penalty. 
(Code 2004,  70-175; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.333, 25.336) 
Sec. 70-176. - Consumer's responsibility upon failure to receive bill. 
    Failure to receive a bill does not relieve the consumer of the responsibility to pay the bill when due. 
(Code 2004,  70-176; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.334) 
Sec. 70-177. - Postmark. 
    All remittances made by mail must be postmarked on or before the final due date to entitle the consumer to pay the bill without penalty. 
(Code 2004,  70-177; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.335) 
Sec. 70-178. - Failure to obtain meter reading on regular meter reading date. 
    Should it be impossible for any reason to obtain a meter reading at any premises on any regular meter reading date, a bill will be rendered based on the consumption shown by the reading for the same period during the previous year and such bill will be subject to the same payment provisions as specified in this division for regular billing. If the meter reader cannot obtain a reading for two consecutive water reading periods, a notice will be issued to the consumer of such condition and, if no arrangements are made so that the meter can be read within five days, the water supply will be shut off and not restored until the bill for water has been paid, plus an additional charge as determined by resolution of the city to cover the cost of shutting off and turning on the water supply. 
(Code 2004,  70-178; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.337, 25.338) 
Sec. 70-179. - Charges against owner; unpaid charges. 
    All charges for water shall be made against the owner of the premises supplied with water, and must be paid within 30 days after the charges become due and payable. If such charges are not paid in 30 days, the water may be turned off on the premises against which such charges stand and the amount of the unpaid bill shall become a lien on such premises until paid. When such water is turned off, the water will not be turned on again until the charges have been paid, together with such turn-on fee as provided by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  70-179; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.306) 
Sec. 70-180. - Lien for unpaid charges. 
    The charges for water service which are, under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), made a lien on all premises served thereby, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for a period of six months, the city commission shall certify on or before April 1 of each year to the city tax assessing officer the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such delinquent charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced. No further service shall be rendered to such premises until a cash deposit of a specified amount, as established by resolution, shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. 
(Code 2004,  70-180; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.339) 
Sec. 70-181. - Application for service by person in arrears. 
    If an applicant, at the time of making application for service, is in arrears on any bill due the city, water supply will be refused until such arrearages are paid in full, and no service will be granted to an agent or tenant of any person in arrears. 
(Code 2004,  70-181; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.332) 
Sec. 70-182. - Notice of desire to discontinue use of water required. 
    All persons who may desire to discontinue the use of water shall notify the city water department. Upon failure to make such notice, such persons shall be charged regular water rates until such notice shall be given. 
(Code 2004,  70-182; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.318) 
Sec. 70-183. - Billing disputes. 
(a)  Customers wishing to dispute their bill must contact the water department within 30 days of date of issuance of the bill at issue. The customer must first discuss the dispute with the water/sewer clerk and attempt to resolve the dispute. If the dispute is not resolved with the water/sewer clerk, the customer may then schedule a meeting with the water/sewer supervisor and/or utilities manager and attempt to resolve the dispute. If resolution is not achieved, the customer will be sent a "bill dispute" form which must be completed and returned to the water department within 30 days of its mailing/delivery by the city. Following review of the form for completeness, the water department will schedule a review/hearing before the director of the department of public works for the city and will notify the customer of the date, time and location of the review/hearing. While formal rules of evidence and procedure will not be followed, the notice will inform customers of their rights at the review/hearing to: 
(1)  Present evidence; 
(2)  Make arguments; and 
(3)  Be represented. 
(b)  The director of the department of public works has the authority to resolve all disputes based on the standards contained in this chapter and the city Charter. The decision of the director of the department of public works shall be final. 
(c)  To avoid service interruption, termination, and/or assessment of a lien against the premises, disputed bills must be paid in full according to the due dates indicated on the statement. 
(Code 2004,  70-183; Ord. No. 11-12,  1, 12-16-2012) 
Secs. 70-184-70-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL-GRAND RAPIDS SERVICE DISTRICT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance No. 6-11, effective September 2, 2011, repealed the former art. 4,  70-211-70-214, 70-216-70-220, 70-225, 70-226, 70-230-70-241, 70-245-70-254, 70-260, 70-261, 70-265-70-267, 70-270-70-275, 70-280-70-285, 70-290-70-295, and enacted a new art. 4 as set out herein. The former art. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance No. 01-06,  1, effective January 29, 2006. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-211. - Findings. 
    The city commission hereby finds the following: 
(1)  That there is a need to assure the quality of the wastewater discharged by the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to prevent the degradation of the Grand River; 
(2)  That there is a need to protect the biological systems, operation and infrastructure through the regulation of discharge into the POTW; 
(3)  That there is a need for the city to enhance its ability to regulate the discharge of wastewater to the POTW consistent with local, state and federal laws. 
(Code 2004,  70-211; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-212. - Purposes and objectives. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish standards, rules and regulations, with respect to the use of the POTW, to provide for rates and charges for connection to and use of the system, to establish limits for the discharge of pollutants into the system and to prevent the pollution of the environment. 
(1)  This article sets forth requirements for dischargers into the Grand Rapids wastewater collection and treatment systems, and enables the Grand Rapids system to protect the public health and environment in conformity with all applicable state and federal laws relating thereto. 
(2)  The objectives of this article are to: 
a.  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
b.  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system. 
c.  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system. 
(3)  This article provides for the issuance of permits, and discharge authorizations, for the regulation of discharges into the POTW. 
(Code 2004,  70-212; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-213. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized representative means, in general, as described in 40 CFR 403.12(l)(1), (2), (3) and (4). See below for details in regard to specific situations. 
(1)  In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; 
(2)  In the case of a limited liability company a principal managing member or the member in charge of the principal business functions; 
(3)  In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor; and 
(4)  An authorized representative of the individual designated above if: 
a.  Such a representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the POTW originates; 
b.  The authorization is in writing; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the POTW. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) is an empirical test in which standardized laboratory procedures are used to determine the relative oxygen requirements of wastewaters, effluents and polluted water. The approved laboratory procedures are listed in title 40, part 136 of the Code of Federal Regulations, specifically in the method for the "Five (5) Day BOD Test." 
    Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 70-217. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Building inspections means the Building Inspections Division of the Grand Rapids Department of Neighborhood Improvement. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards means National Pretreatment Standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged or introduced into a POTW by specific industrial dischargers. 
    City means the City of Grand Rapids. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Grand Rapids and any persons designated to act on behalf of the city manager in the administration or enforcement of this article. 
    Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended and applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Combined sewer means any sewer designed or intended to receive both stormwater and sewage. 
    Combined wastestream formula means the wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process. Where required by federal or state law, and only to the extent required by federal or state law, the combined wastestream formula provided in 40 CFR 403.6(e) and Rule 323.2311(7) MAC will apply to the limits applicable to a combined wastestream. 
    Commercial user means a person or entity whose premises are used to offer services and/or products such as retail and wholesale stores, gasoline stations, restaurants, schools, churches, hotels, motels, nursing homes, hospitals, warehouses, private clubs, theaters and governmental buildings. However, some commercial users may also be designated as significant industrial users (SUIT) should they meet the criteria established in 40 CFR 403.3(t), Rule 323.2302(cc) of the MAC and section 70-213(46). 
    Commodity rate means a variable unit charge payable by a user based on metered water consumption. 
    Compliance schedule means a schedule consisting of one or more milestone dates required for corrections, additions or modifications of treatment systems or related pollution prevention or control activities as a result of enforcement actions, expansions or changes in operations or changes in local or categorical treatment standards. Compliance schedules do not preclude additional enforcement actions due to violations of requirements of this article. 
    Confined space, permit required means space defined by reference to part 90 of Public Act No. 154 of 1974 (MCL 408.1001 et seq.). 
    Cross-media electronic reporting regulation (CROMERR) means an environmental protection agency approved system allowing states, tribes, and local governments that receive or plan to begin receiving electronic documents in lieu of paper documents to satisfy regulations under an authorized program. 
    Discharge authorization means written authorization provided by the city manager specifying the conditions for discharge of a one-time or short-term duration discharge, or other discharges not meeting the definition of significant industrial user, including, but not limited to, cooling tower water and silver recovery unit discharges. 
    Discharger means any person or entity owning, controlling or operating any real property which directly or indirectly utilizes the POTW. Discharger also means any employee, officer, director, partner, member, contractor or other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission which is a violation of this article or which results in a violation of this article. This definition shall be interpreted broadly to include any person or entity who participates in an act or omission that results in a violation of this article. 
    Domestic user means a person or entity whose premises are domiciles for single or multiple family use. 
    Effluent means waste material (as smoke, liquid, industrial refuse or sewage) discharged into the POTW. 
    Enforcement action means action taken by the city to return a user into a state of compliance with the standards established in this article of this Code. This may include, but is not limited to, fines, penalties and compliance schedules. 
    Garbage means animal and plant waste resulting from the handling, preparation and cooking of foods. 
    Industrial effluent means waste matter or material discharged into the POTW from any nondomestic source subject to regulation under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
    Industrial user means any person or entity that discharges into the POTW from any nondomestic source subject to regulation under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
    Industrial waste means solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Infiltration means the water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground, through such manner as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Inflow means the water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm drains and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwater, surface run-off, street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
    Interceptor sewer lines means those lines whose basic function is to collect wastewater from two or more separate trunk sewer lines and to transport such wastewater to the sewage treatment plant. 
    Interference means a discharge, which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW collection, treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes or operations, use, disposal, and causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lateral sewer line means a sewer pipe beginning at the local collector sewer or other connection point and extending to the premises actually served. The lateral sewer includes the stub to which a user connects. 
    MAHL means the maximum allowable headworks loading expressed in pounds per day that the POTW can accept without experiencing: fire or explosion hazards, fume toxicity, pass through, sludge quality impairment, treatment inhibition or cause a violation of state water quality standards. 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Monthly service charge means a fixed monthly charge payable by a user based on the size of the water meter servicing the user. 
    New source means any building, structure, facility or installation of which the construction commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) (33 USC) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section provided that: 
(1)  The construction is a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)  The process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source is totally replaced; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
Reference 40 CFR 403.3(k)(2-3) or Rule 323.2302(r) of the Michigan Administrative Code for further information. 
    North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) means a six-digit code used by business and government to classify and measure economic activity. 
    NPDES National Pollution Discharge Elimination System means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342), as amended. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTWs NPDES permit (including an increase of the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person or entity means an individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, limited liability company or public agency or instrumentality. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant includes, but is not limited to, any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean Water Act. 
    POTW (publicly owned treatment works) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act, including any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage and industrial waste. The systems include sewers, pipes and equipment used to convey wastewater to the treatment facility. The term also includes the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works. 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land or building having any connection to the POTW of the city. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction in the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means. Dilution is not considered pretreatment unless expressly authorized by an applicable national pretreatment standard for a particular industrial category. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment other than a National Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Property owner means any person having legal or equitable title to real property or any person having or exercising care, custody or control over any real property. 
    Public sewer means local collector, trunk and interceptor sewer lines including lift stations and all appurtenances that are owned or controlled by the POTW. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities of a user which causes them to become all or partially inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Sewage means any liquid or water-carried waste received from domestic, commercial and industrial customers, including any infiltration or inflow as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewer means any pipe or conduit for the conveyance of sewage. 
    Significant change means any change in a discharger's effluent which causes the constituents of the discharge to be different and/or increases in the concentration or flow by 20 percent over those reported on the discharger's permit application. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means any discharger to the POTW who: 
(1)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater per day (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater) or contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW, or as determined by the city manager under authority of 40 CFR 403.12(a) and in Rule 323.2302 of the Michigan Administrative Code on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(1)(6) and Rule 323.2306(h) of the Michigan Administrative Code); 
(2)  Is found by the city manager, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing users, on the wastewater treatment system the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system; or 
(3)  Is subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and Rule 323.2311 of the Michigan Administrative Code and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. 
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting subsection (1) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement the city manager may at any time, on his own initiative, or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or the POTW, and in accordance with 403.8(f)(6) and Rule 323.2306(h) of the Michigan Administrative Code, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance means any industrial user with a violation that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit, instantaneous limit, or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit, instantaneous limit, or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the city manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under section 70-234 to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any violation or group of violations, which the city manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. As required by federal regulations, the city shall at least annually publish a list of industrial users which during the previous 12 months were in significant noncompliance with applicable standards or pretreatment requirements; or 
(9)  Failure to meet BMP requirements. 
    Slug discharge means a slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits, or permit conditions. 
    Storm drain means any underground pipe or any facility intended to convey only stormwater runoff, street wash waters, groundwater and drainage. This term also includes discharges allowed by state or federal discharge permits. 
    Suspended solids means all matter existing in non-liquid state which is removable by filtration in accordance with 40 CFR 136 referenced as "residue, non-filterable", or an alternative method approved by the EPA Administrator in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5)(vi) and Rule 323.231O(e)(vi) of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
    System refers to the POTW. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307 of the Clean Water Act, or pursuant to part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.), or pursuant to any other applicable laws or regulations. 
    Uncontaminated industrial effluents means water which has not come into contact with any substance used in, or incidental to, industrial processing operations, such as non-contact cooling water and to which no deleterious or toxic substance has been added. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards (or other limits of this article) because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, and lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation. 
    User class means either a domestic, commercial or industrial group of users. 
    Wastewater means water, or any liquid, whether or not containing pollutants, which is discharged or permitted to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
    Water business office means the division of the Grand Rapids City Water Department System that is responsible for the reading of meters, submitting bills for water and/or sewer service, collection of payment for bills and the preparation and maintenance of the customer accounts including applications for service. 
(Code 2004,  70-213; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  1, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-213.1. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BTEX Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene CFR Code of Federal Regulations EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency MTBE Methyl tertiary butyl ether MAC Michigan Administrative Code mg/l Milligrams per liter TSS Total suspended solids MAHL Maximum allowable headworks loading  
(Code 2004,  70-213.1; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 70-214. - Management of the POTW. 
    The POTW shall be and remain under the management, supervision and control of the city manager. The city manager may make such rules, orders or regulations as are deemed advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system, subject, however, to the rights, powers and duties with respect thereto which are reserved by law to the Grand Rapids City Commission. 
(Code 2004,  70-214; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-214.1. - City manager's emergency authority. 
    When a necessary or advisable emergency protective measure or action is required, the city manager is authorized to cause such measures and actions to be taken as authorized by law. The cost of such protective measures or actions shall be at the expense of the property owner responsible for such measure or action. Failure to pay such cost will constitute a lien upon the property as provided for by law. 
(Code 2004,  70-214.1; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-214.2. - Inspection. 
(a)  Under current federal and state laws, rules and regulations, Grand Rapids is responsible for the discharge of wastewater into the POTW; therefore, Grand Rapids has the right and obligation to inspect connections and discharges to its system in order to confirm compliance with state and federal laws and provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of Grand Rapids bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person who uses, applies for use and/or is connected to the POTW under this article shall be deemed to have consented to inspections pursuant to this section, including entrance upon that person's property at reasonable times to make inspections. In the event that a violation of this article is identified the property owner shall be responsible for all costs of inspection and remediation if necessary. 
(Code 2004,  70-214.2; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-215. - Standards, rules, regulations and administrative reference guide. 
    The standards, rules and regulations established in, or pursuant to, this article are deemed to be the absolute minimum consistent with the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent pollution of the environment and to fulfill the obligations of Grand Rapids with respect to state and federal law, including all rules and regulations adopted in conformance thereto. All such additional standards, rules and regulations not contained in this article shall be approved by the Grand Rapids City Commission. The discharge into the POTW of any substance which exceeds the pretreatment requirements contained herein, or in any manner fails to conform hereto, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of the Code. 
(Code 2004,  70-215; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-216. - Use of the POTW. 
    Any person or entity conforming to the standards, rules and regulations established in, or pursuant to, this article shall be permitted to discharge effluent into the POTW provided adequate sewer service is available to which he can connect. 
(Code 2004,  70-216; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 70-217. - General discharge conditions and prohibitions. 
(a)  All premises connected to the POTW shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum size of the building drain/sewer, including required cleanouts, shall be four inches or greater in diameter; 
(2)  A grease interceptor, with a maintenance cleaning schedule appropriate for its intended use, shall be required to receive the drainage from fixtures and equipment having grease-laden waste, located in food preparation areas such as in restaurants, commercial kitchens, bars, clubs or similar facilities. The grease interceptor shall not be less than a three-compartment, 1,000-gallon system, or equivalent, unless the city manager approves an alternative system. Food waste grinders shall not discharge to the building drainage system through the grease interceptor, unless the interceptor is appropriately sized to handle the solids loading and approved per the plumbing code. Grease interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. At no time shall the level of grease and sludge in any compartment of the trap be greater than 25 percent of the tank liquid level. Proof of maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon request. 
(3)  Sand traps and similar interceptors for removal of heavy solids by commercial users, as determined by the city manager, shall be designed and installed, according to the city sand trap for garages design specifications. They shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and shall have a water seal of not less than six inches. Sand traps and similar interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. Proof of maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon request. 
(4)  Oil/water separators are required at repair garages, gasoline stations with grease racks, grease pits or work racks and at factories, or other facilities, where oily and flammable liquid wastes are produced. Separators shall be installed into which all oil-bearing, grease-bearing or flammable wastes shall be discharged before emptying in the building drainage system or other point of disposal. Oil separators shall have a depth of not less than two feet below the invert of the discharge drain. The outlet opening of the separator shall not have less than an 18-inch water seal. An alternative design may be approved by the plumbing inspector, as provided for by the plumbing code. Oil/water separators shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with BMP. Proof of maintenance and cleaning shall be available for review upon request. 
(b)  No discharger shall introduce into the POTW any pollutants) which cause pass through or interference. The following general and specific prohibitions of this section apply to each discharger introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the discharger is subject to any national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(c)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts that will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW or results in interference. 
(3)  Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.0 or a pH greater than 10.5. These pH limits will be evaluated annually as part of the rate study and the limits set forth in this section will be revised as deemed necessary. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly, or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, may cause a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit or any applicable state or federal water quality standards or interferes with any treatment process, or causes treatment residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation or reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Clean Water Act, any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state standards applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(8)  Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but, in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the headworks of the POTW exceeds 40 degrees Celsius 104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), upon the request of the POTW, approves the alternative temperature limits. 
(9)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(10)  Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, noncontact cooling water, unless a discharge authorization is approved by the city manager. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration except as set forth in 10 CFR part 20. Introduction of radioactive wastes that interfere with the operation of the POTW including, but not limited to, the use and disposal of sludge, the recycling of any and all waste products, or if the discharge causes the POTW to violate any local, state or federal laws. 
(12)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(13)  Any discharge of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, animal fat, vegetable fat, oil, grease, products of mineral oil or any combination thereof at a concentration of greater than 100 milligrams per liter, unless it can be demonstrated that matrix interference is responsible for levels greater than this amount, but, in no case in amounts that will cause an obstruction, interference or pass through in the POTW. 
(14)  Any substances not identified in subsection (c)(13) of this section, that will become solid or viscous after entering the POTW. 
(15)  Any effluent having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the POTW's average daily flow. The city manager, upon review, may approve greater discharges subject to conditions as authorized by this article or special conditions he deems necessary in order to preserve and protect public health, safety and welfare, subject to conformance with the applicable state and federal law. 
(16)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city manager. 
(17)  Any detectable level of mercury using EPA Method 245.1 or 245.2 with a detection limit not to exceed 0.2 g/L unless the user can demonstrate that matrix interference prevents the attainment of this level. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA Method 245.1 or 245.2. In the event that mercury is detected, the user shall develop and implement a mercury elimination plan including elements deemed necessary by the city manager to progress toward the goal of no detectable discharge of mercury. For users whose operation and discharge characteristics are substantially similar a group mercury elimination plan may be acceptable. Dental facilities shall comply with Public Act No. 503 of 2008 (MCL 333.16631), and all best management practices promulgated by the state department of community health in conjunction with the state department of environmental quality. 
(18)  There shall be no discharge to the POTW of groundwater that has been contaminated with gasoline and related petroleum products that would qualify for a state general discharge permit for gasoline and related petroleum products in accordance with Rule 2191 promulgated pursuant to part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.), except where no other discharge option exists. If discharge to the POTW is desired under these conditions, the discharger must submit a wastewater discharge permit application as specified in section 70-219 which may be approved by the city manager. Upon approval a permit will be issued with appropriate conditions as set forth in section 70-223. The total BTEX concentration shall not exceed 20 micrograms per liter and the MTBE concentration shall not exceed 20 micrograms per liter. 
(19)  Disposal of septage waste into the POTW is prohibited, except as in accordance with the septage waste receiving plan, the city manager may authorize disposal of portable containers of domestic waste, including waste from recreational vehicles. Septage wastes are to be discharged only at designated locations in accordance with the septage waste receiving plan. 
(20)  Sludge from an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall not be placed into the POTW. Such sludge shall be disposed of by a licensed hauler in a site approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). 
(21)  Any substance that causes excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(22)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized according to part 138, Medical Waste Regulatory Act of the Michigan Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.13801 et seq.). 
(23)  Any detectable level of PCB using EPA Method 608 with a detection limit not to exceed 0.1 g/L unless the user can demonstrate that matrix interference prevents the attainment of this level. PCB sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA Method 608. 
(24)  Bacteriological, chemical or enzymatic products shall not be added to facility discharge or be used to maintain or clean grease interceptors or grease traps, unless approved by the city manager. 
(d)  Bypass is prohibited, except in cases where the bypass was unavoidable to prevent a loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage, and where there are no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance. In cases where a bypass may occur it would be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Anticipated bypass. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if possible, at least ten days before the date of the bypass. Upon notification, the city manager shall make a determination whether to allow the discharge. 
(2)  Unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall immediately notify the city manager of the occurrence of any unanticipated bypass. The city manager shall make a determination whether to allow the discharge to continue. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of becoming aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the dates and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass. 
(e)  Any discharger shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general and specific prohibitions established in subsection (c)(2), (8), (9), and (13) of this section, where the discharger can demonstrate that: 
(1)  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and 
(2)  Either: 
a.  A local limit designed to prevent pass through or interference was developed for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference and the user was in compliance with each such local limit immediately before and during the pass through or interference; or 
b.  A local limit was not applicable and immediately before and during the pass through or interference the user's discharge did not substantially change in volume or constituents from the user's previous discharges when the POTW was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of interference, all applicable requirements for sludge use or disposal. 
(Code 2004,  70-217; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  2, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-218. - Limitations on wastewater strength. 
(a)  Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subpart N. A new source shall install, and have in operation at start-up, all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards before beginning discharge. When the applicable categorical pretreatment standards are expressed in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the city manager may convert these limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as a mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2-7) and Rule 323.2311(5) of the MAC. In situations in which non-regulated wastestreams are intermixed with the regulated wastestream, the city manager may use the combined wastestream formula to develop equivalent discharge limits. Whenever equivalent limits are used, they shall be deemed pretreatment standards in determining compliance with the standards. The city manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12 and Rule 323.2310 of the MAC. An application for modification of the categorical pretreatment standards may be considered for submittal to the regional administrator of EPA by the city manager when the system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 CFR 403.7 and Rule 323.2313 of the MAC. 
(b)  No industrial user shall increase the use of water or dilute a discharge as a substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(c)  Supplementary limitations. 
(1)  Supplementary limits were established in accordance with EPA guidance and Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) approval criteria. Specific permit limits for BOD, total suspended solids, total phosphorous, and ammonia as NH3-N, are specified by individual discharge permits and were derived from the industrial allocable portion of the MAHLs listed in Table 1. 
TABLE 1. MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HEADWORKS LOADINGS 
Materials Loading 
(pounds/day) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 160,800 Total suspended solids (TSS) 141,300 Total phosphorus (TP) 6,990 Ammonia nitrogen (NH 3 -N) 15,100  
(2)  Table 2 contains a list of technically based local limits derived from the industrial allocable portion of the non-compatible pollutant MAHLs shown above as well as limits for toxic pollutants. For users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, which include the following parameters, the following limits, if more restrictive, shall apply, both to the categorically regulated process flow as well as any other flows not specifically regulated by categorical pretreatment standards. For all other dischargers these limits shall apply to the total flow from each connection to the POTW, except silver which is a process discharge limit as noted. All measurements to determine compliance with these limits shall be performed in accordance with EPA approved methods found in 40 CFR 136. The monthly average shall be the average of all samples analyzed by EPA approved methods during a calendar month. 
LOCAL LIMITS 
Inorganic Daily Maximum 
(mg/l) Monthly Average 
(mg/l) Total arsenic 1.46 NA Total cadmium 0.817 NA Total chromium 4.0 NA Hexavalent chromium 0.72 NA Total copper 1.5 NA Total cyanide 1.0 NA Total lead 1.5 NA Total mercury ND 1 NA Total molybdenum 3.4 NA Total nickel 1.5 1.1 Total selenium 2.3 1.67 Total silver 620 2 NA Total zinc 2.6 2.0  
  
Organic Daily Maximum 
(mg/l) Monthly Average 
(mg/l) Total phenols 3.26 NA Polychlorinated biphenyls ND 3 NA Tetrachloroethylene 0.25 NA Trichloroethylene 0.16 NA MTBE 0.02 NA  
  
NA Not applicable 1 Non-detectable or as specified in subsection 70-217(c)(17). 2 Process discharge limit for photo processors and x-ray machines sampled for discharge of silver recovery unit. The analysis of these sample matrixes, photo processing and x-ray machine wastes for silver shall be performed on an unpreserved and undigested sample or an alternative preservation and analytical method that does not interfere with the measurement of silver. 3 Non-detectable per EPA Method 608 with a detection limit not to exceed 0.1 g/L unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference.  
(3)  For compatible pollutants, the city manager shall establish specific concentration limits, when necessary, that are adequate to ensure that the industrial allocable portion of the MAHL listed herein is not exceeded. Any requests for specific limits must be made at the time of permit application or renewal and such a determination will be made solely by the city manager. The establishment of any such limits shall not create any vested right or property rights for the user. Accordingly, no right of appeal from such a determination will exist and the approval may be terminated, modified or subjected to special condition either at time of approval or thereafter, at the discretion of the city manager. 
(4)  The city manager may implement a system for setting special alternative specific limits for batch discharges. Special alternative specific limits may be approved when all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The user requests a special alternative specific limit through the special alternative limit process. 
b.  The city manager makes a determination that adequate treatment capacity exists to allow this special alternative specific limit consistent with the MAHL for those pollutants present. 
In no event shall a special discharge permit be granted or effective which authorizes a discharge in excess of the limitations imposed by any applicable final federal or state pretreatment standard or discharge limit. In addition the city manager shall not consider any request for an increase above any limits that were calculated based on health or safety criteria. 
(5)  The city manager may develop BMPs by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits and the requirements of section 70-217. 
(d)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Prevention plan. 
a.  Industrial and commercial users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the POTW by developing spill prevention plans. If the materials of concern are listed in Table 1 of Rule 324.2009 of the MAC, as amended, a pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) pursuant to part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.), and Rule 324.2006 of the MAC, as amended, shall be developed and maintained. A copy of the PIPP must be made available upon request of the city manager. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial or commercial user's expense. 
b.  Industrial and commercial users who store hazardous substances shall not discharge to the POTW after the effective date of this article until a state required PIPP has been submitted. Receipt of such plan shall not relieve the industrial or commercial user from complying with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage and transportation of hazardous substances. 
(2)  The city manager shall evaluate each significant industrial user at least once every two years, and other industrial users as necessary, to determine whether such user needs a plan to control slug discharges. If the city manager decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain at a minimum the following elements: 
1.  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
2.  Description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under sections 70-217 and 70-218, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
4.  When deemed necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(3)  Any upset or accidental discharge shall be reported to the city manager immediately upon occurrence. A detailed report shall be filed within five days. The report shall include location of the upset or discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration, volume and corrective actions. Failure to file a report shall be a separate violation of this article. 
(4)  Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on discharger's premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug, upset or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause, or discover such upset or discharge, with respect to emergency notification procedure. 
(5)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the city manager prior to any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Code 2004,  70-218; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  3, 12-17-2013) 
DIVISION 4. - DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 70-219. - Permit application. 
(a)  All new nondomestic users connecting to, or discharging to, the POTW, and all existing nondomestic users connected to, or discharging to, the POTW, shall complete a wastewater discharge survey to establish whether a nondomestic user should be classified as a significant industrial user or require a discharge authorization as defined in the City of Grand Rapids Code section 2.62 and require a discharge permit. New water service will not be initiated until a complete survey is submitted. In the case of a transfer account, water service will be disconnected if a complete survey is not submitted within ten days of the transfer. If, upon review, the city manager determines a permit may be required, the nondomestic user shall file a permit application which may include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, e-mail address and location of the discharger. 
(2)  North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) number according to the North American Industry Classification System manual, Office of Management and Budget, 1997, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, toxic pollutants as determined by bona fide chemical and biological analyses. Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended. 
(4)  Time and duration of discharges. 
(5)  Average daily and maximum daily wastewater flow rates in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All flows shall be measured, unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the city manager. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sanitary and storm drain systems, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are, or may be, discharged to the POTW. 
(8)  The nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this article in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this article on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the discharger to comply with this article. 
(9)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this article by an existing source, the discharger shall enter into a consent agreement consistent with the law, and approved by the city manager, of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. The compliance date for such a schedule shall not be later than the compliance date for any applicable standard. A new source (40 CFR 403.3(k) and Rule 323.2302(r) of the Michigan Administrative Code)), or an expansion of an existing source, must have in place all necessary equipment to abate pollution. For a new source this will be prior to the commencement of the discharge. For an expansion of an existing source this shall be before any additional wastewater is introduced to the system. 
a.  The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, dates related to hiring a Michigan licensed professional engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article. 
b.  Under no circumstance shall the city manager permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds six months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the city manager, including a statement as to whether or not they complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which they expect to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(11)  The type and amount of raw materials utilized. 
(12)  All permit applications shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger, and a state licensed professional engineer, where pretreatment facilities are required. 
(13)  When required by the city manager, the discharger shall provide an inspection and sampling manhole or structure, non-permitted confined space where feasible, with an opening of no less than 24 inches diameter and an internal diameter of no less than 36 inches containing flow measuring, recording and sampling equipment as required by the city manager to assure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Nondomestic users who have previously submitted a survey, as prescribed in this section, are also required to complete a wastewater discharge survey periodically, at a frequency to be determined by the city manager. 
(Code 2004,  70-219; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  4, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-220. - Significant changes. 
    All industrial users shall promptly notify the control authority (and the POTW if the POTW is not the control authority) in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) and chapter 27, subsection 2.75(4) of the City of Grand Rapids Code. 
(Code 2004,  70-220; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  5, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-221. - Permit issuance (significant industrial users). 
    The city manager will evaluate the completed application and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. Within 30 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city manager shall make a determination as to whether the applicant is a significant industrial user or authorized discharger. For every applicant, the city manager shall issue or deny a discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(Code 2004,  70-221; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-222. - Permit modifications. 
    The city manager shall have the right to amend any discharge permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the POTW with applicable laws and regulations and prevent a violation of any NPDES limit, water quality standards or interference with residuals management as specified in section 70-217(b)(6). Upon the promulgation of a federal categorical pretreatment standard, the significant industrial user discharge permit of each discharger subject to such standards will be revised to comply with such standards. Where a discharger, subject to a federal categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a significant industrial user discharge permit as required by section 70-219, the discharger shall apply for a significant industrial user discharge permit from the city manager within 30 days after the promulgation of the applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard and provide the information required. The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in the discharger's permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit may include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, which does not exceed any compliance dates set by 40 CFR 403.6(b) and Rule 323.2311(3) of the MAC. 
(Code 2004,  70-222; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-223. - Permit conditions. 
    Significant industrial user discharge permits shall specify the following: 
(1)  Statement of duration (not more than five years) including issuance and expiration dates; 
(2)  Effluent limitations based on the more stringent of categorical pretreatment standards, BMPs, or local limits as established by this article and state law; 
(3)  General and specific discharge prohibitions as established by sections 70-217 and 70-218; 
(4)  Requirements and specifications for monitoring programs including sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(5)  Requirements for collecting, retaining and providing access to plant records relating to the user's discharge and for providing entry for sampling and inspection; 
(6)  Requirements for notification of spills, bypass or potential problems to the POTW including slug loadings, upsets or violations; 
(7)  Requirements to develop and implement spill and slug control plans; 
(8)  Requirements for notification and approval of changes prior to discharge. The POTW shall be notified of any proposed substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) and Rule 323.2310(15) of the MAC and operational shift changes of greater than four hours; 
(9)  Special conditions as the city manager may reasonably require under particular circumstances of a given discharge to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(10)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(11)  Statement of nontransferability; 
(12)  Conditions for modification or revocation of permit; 
(13)  Schedule of fees and charges; 
(14)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics, including BMP: based on applicable pretreatment standards or local limits; 
(15)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(16)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(17)  Compliance schedules; 
(18)  Requirements for submission of special technical reports, discharge reports or certification statements. These include any reporting requirements contained in a Federal Categorical Standard or Pretreatment Requirements. 
(Code 2004,  70-223; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-224. - Permits duration. 
    All discharge permits shall be issued for up to five years, subject to amendment or revocation as provided in this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-224; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-225. - Permit changes. 
(a)  Permit transfer. Individual discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the city manager and the city manager approves the individual discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city manager must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator have no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit; and 
(4)  Includes all modifications. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(b)  Permit renewal/reissuance. SIUs with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 70-219, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the SIU's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 2004,  70-225; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-226. - Baseline monitoring report. 
(a)  Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination request, or 90 days prior to the commencement of discharge in the case of a new source, the industrial user shall submit a baseline monitoring report, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b) and Rule 323.2310(2) MAC, for any discharge subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements signed by an authorized representative. 
(b)  Ninety-day report on compliance with Federal Categorical Standards. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a new source following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any discharger subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit a report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d) and Rule 323.2310(3) MAC signed by an authorized representative. 
(c)  Significant noncategorical user compliance report. For dischargers who are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, but discharge or have the potential to discharge substances which could adversely affect the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, a report is to be submitted 30 days following the commencement of discharge and every six months thereafter to the city manager. The report shall specify the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in their discharge as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(h) and Rule 323.2310(7) MAC and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if additional pretreatment is necessary, to bring the discharge into compliance with the requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(l) and Rule 323.2310(11) MAC, of the discharger and certified to by a Michigan licensed professional engineer. 
(d)  Hazardous waste notification. 
(1)  Any industrial or commercial user, except as specified in subsection (d)(5) of this section, who discharges any substance to the POTW which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a listed or characteristic hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261, shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and the state hazardous waste authorities as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(p) and Rule 323.2310(15) of the MAC in writing of such discharge. 
(2)  All hazardous waste notifications shall include: 
1.  The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR, part 261; 
2.  The EPA hazardous waste number; 
3.  The type of discharge (continuous, batch or other); and 
4.  A certification that the user has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(3)  In addition to the information submitted in subsection (d)(2) of this section, the reports from industrial and commercial users discharging more than 100 kilograms of hazardous waste per calendar month to the POTW shall contain the following information: 
1.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the waste; 
2.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; 
3.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
(4)  Hazardous waste notifications shall be submitted no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or prior to the discharge of listed or characteristic hazardous waste for discharges commencing after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, as required in section 70-220. Any notification under this provision need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged, although notifications of changed discharge must be submitted under section 70-220. This section does not apply to pollutants already reported as part of a significant industrial user discharge permit self-monitoring requirement. 
(5)  Industrial and commercial users are exempt from the hazardous waste notification requirement when they discharge 15 kilograms or less of nonacute hazardous wastes per calendar month. Discharge of any quantity of acutely hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification. 
(6)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of Resource Conservation and Recovery Act identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of the regulations. 
(Code 2004,  70-226; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-227. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  Reporting requirements. 
(1)  Significant industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the city manager a report, as required in 40 CFR 403.12(e), indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent. The reports shall be submitted for the six-month periods of January through June and July through December. Reports are due within 30 days of the end of the reporting period. If the sampling performed indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city manager immediately upon becoming aware of the violation. At a minimum, the SIU shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the city manager or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the SIU. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in section 70-219(a)(5). Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement provided, however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the city manager may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The city manager, for good cause shown, considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other extenuating factors, may authorize the submission of said reports on months other than those specified above. 
(2)  SIU with discharges that are not subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards but are subject to local limits shall follow the same sampling and reporting requirements as in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Reports of permittees shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow, nature, concentration, production and/or mass, where required by the city manager. Reports required by discharge permits will be accepted in an electronically submitted format only through an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approved Cross Media Electronic Reporting Regulation (CROMERR) system compliant with the CFR title 40, part 3. CROMERR is an Environmental Protection Agency approved system allowing states, tribes, and local governments that receive or plan to begin receiving electronic documents in lieu of paper documents to satisfy regulations under an authorized program. 
(Code 2004,  70-227; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  6, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-228. - Inspection, sampling and analysis. 
(a)  The city manager may inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. The discharger shall allow the city manager to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours, for the purposes of inspection, sampling or records examination. The city manager shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations and have access to examine and copy any records. All costs associated with this monitoring requirement shall be borne by the discharger. 
(b)  The reports required by sections 70-226 and 70-227 shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or as specified in the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. 
(c)  The frequency of monitoring shall be specified by the city manager to assess compliance by industrial and commercial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3) and Rule 323.2310(6)(d) MAC. Where EPA 40 CFR, part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedure set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments thereto or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator of the EPA. Where the POTW performs all the required sampling and analyses and collects all the information required for the reports required in sections 70-226 and 70-227, the SIU will not be required to submit the report. 
(d)  If sampling performed by an SIU indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. At a minimum, the user is required to resample and analyze within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation. The city manager may, with the issuance of a modified permit, require more frequent sampling and analysis. Re-sampling by the SIU is not required if Grand Rapids performs sampling at the user's facility between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the SIU or Grand Rapids receives the results of this sampling, or if Grand Rapids has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the SIU. 
(e)  If an SIU, subject to the reporting requirement in sections 70-226 and 70-227, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(f)  The reports required by sections 70-226 and 70-227 shall include the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of the law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information submitted, it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of penalty and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(g)  Signatory requirements for industrial user reports. The reports required by sections 70-226 and 70-227 shall include the certification statement as set forth in subsection (f) of this section, and shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports required by sections 70-226 and 70-227 is a corporation. For the purpose of this subsection, a responsible corporate officer means: 
a.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports required by sections 70-226 and 70-227 is a partnership, or sole proprietorship respectively. 
(3)  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (g)(1) or (2) of this section if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection (g)(1) or (2) of this section; 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the director. 
(4)  If an authorization under this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Code 2004,  70-228; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-229. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  When deemed necessary by the city manager, each discharger shall provide and operate, at the discharger's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, representative sampling and flow measurement of each discharge to the POTW. Sampling requirement shall be flow proportional unless time proportional composite sampling is authorized by the control authority. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the discharger's premises, except where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the city manager may concur with the facility being constructed in the public right-of-way providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. Upon appropriate notice by the city manager for monitoring facilities, a compliance schedule may be issued as a permit condition. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition, at the expense of the discharger. 
(c)  All required monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications (non-permitted confined space structure where feasible). 
(Code 2004,  70-229; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  7, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-230. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data furnished to the city manager with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public unless required by law, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing the report. 
(b)  Where a discharger has mass based limits as allowed by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards on a production basis, the production data necessary to determine compliance shall also be available to the public. Where application of the combined wastestream formula is necessary to apply Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards to a discharger, the flow measurements and other data used in the calculation shall be available to the public. 
(Code 2004,  70-230; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  8, 12-17-2013) 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND LIABILITIES 

Sec. 70-231. - Enforcement. 
    Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this article, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the city's POTW, shall be liable to Grand Rapids for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. This shall include, but not be limited to, penalties levied upon Grand Rapids by the EPA or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) for violation of its NPDES permit caused by any violation by a discharger, including all actual costs, court, attorney and other related legal fees plus an additional charge of 100 percent of the total costs and/or penalties. 
(Code 2004,  70-231; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  9, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-232. - Recovery of costs incurred by Grand Rapids. 
    Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this article, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the city's POTW, shall be liable to Grand Rapids for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. This shall include, but not be limited to, penalties levied upon Grand Rapids by the EPA or DNRE for violation of its NPDES Permit caused by any violation by a discharger, including all actual costs, court, attorney and other related legal fees plus an additional charge of 100 percent of the total costs and/or penalties. 
(Code 2004,  70-232; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-233. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person or entity who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in section 70-241. 
(Code 2004,  70-233; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-234. - Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits. 
    The city manager may for good cause shown, suspend the sewage disposal system service and/or the discharge permit of a discharger when it appears that an actual or impending discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the operation of the POTW, violates any pretreatment limits or conditions imposed by this article or any discharge permit issued pursuant to this article. Any discharger notified of the suspension of sewage disposal system service and/or the discharger's discharge permit, shall cease all discharges immediately upon notification or as directed by the city manager. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the city manager may take whatever steps are deemed necessary to eliminate the discharge, including cessation of city water service and/or shall commence judicial proceedings for injunctive relief immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's compliance with such order. The city manager may reinstate the discharge permit and/or sewage disposal system service and terminate judicial proceeding upon presentation of proof by the discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above. 
(Code 2004,  70-234; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  10, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-235. - City manager's authority to issue administrative orders. 
    Whenever the city manager determines that any discharger has violated this article, or any other applicable laws or regulations which the city is authorized to enforce, the city manager may issue administrative orders of the type listed below, as deemed appropriate under the circumstances. Multiple orders may be issued simultaneously or in combination as a single order with respect to a single discharger. 
(1)  Cease and desist order. A cease and desist order directs the noncomplying user to cease illegal or unauthorized discharges immediately or to terminate its discharge altogether. Any person who uses, applied for use and/or is connected to the POTW under this article shall be deemed to have consented to inspection pursuant to this section, including entrance upon that person's property by the city manager to take such steps as are necessary to eliminate the discharge should the discharger fail to comply with such order. Such order shall be final and in effect until a hearing, if requested by the user, is conducted and a final decision is made by the city manager. A written request for such hearing shall be made within ten calendar days after receiving the order. 
(2)  Consent order. An agreement between the city manager and the user which may contain compliance schedules, requirements for reimbursement of the city and/or Grand Rapids for damages and costs incurred or remedial actions, fines and administrative penalties and signatures of the city manager and the authorized representative. A consent order shall address every identified and potential deficiency in the user's compliance status at the time of the order. 
(3)  Show cause order. Where the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the city manager may order any discharger who causes or allows prohibited conduct, to show cause before the city manager why a proposed permit revocation action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city manager regarding the violations, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the discharger to show cause before the city manager why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer or authorized representative of the discharger. The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by the city manager who shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger. Appeal of such order may be taken by the discharger in accordance with applicable state law. 
(4)  Compliance order. A compliance order directs the discharger to achieve compliance by a date specified in the order. Compliance orders require industrial users to develop management practices, spill prevention programs and related POTW industrial pretreatment program requirements. 
(5)  Stop work order. Where there is work in progress that constitutes causes or is causing a violation of any provision of this article, the city manager may issue a stop work order to prevent further violations or damage. 
(6)  Administrative fines. Administrative fines, as specified in section 70-241. 
(Code 2004,  70-235; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-236. - Publishing noncompliance list. 
    A list of all dischargers in significant noncompliance for the NPDES industrial pretreatment program annual reporting period shall be published by Grand Rapids in The Grand Rapids Press by the date specified in Grand Rapids' NPDES permit. 
(Code 2004,  70-236; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-237. - City manager's authority to require financial assurances. 
    Pursuant to the city manager's authority to issue administrative orders, the city manager may require a noncomplying industrial or commercial user to post a performance bond sufficient to cover expenses which might reasonably be incurred as a result of future violations. Industrial or commercial users who have, in the prior two years, been responsible for causing an upset at the POTW, may be required to obtain liability insurance sufficient to cover the reasonable costs of restoring the POTW in the event of another such incident. These requirements may be made conditions of the significant industrial user discharge permit. 
(Code 2004,  70-237; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-238. - Judicial proceedings. 
    Following the entry of any order by the city manager with respect to the conduct of a discharger contrary to the provision of this article, the attorney for Grand Rapids or his designee may, following the authorization of such actions by the city manager, commence a civil infraction or criminal action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the court of competent jurisdiction. Such relief may include, but is not limited to, the following: injunctive relief against an industrial user for failure to comply with pretreatment standards and requirements; suit for damages and costs including legal expense; municipal civil infraction actions and criminal prosecution seeking fines and imprisonment as permitted by section 70-241 and state law. 
(Code 2004,  70-238; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-239. - Right of appeal. 
    Any discharger shall have the right to request, in writing, an interpretation or ruling by the city manager on any matter covered by this article and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. 
(Code 2004,  70-239; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-240. - Operating upsets. 
(a)  Any discharger experiencing an upset in operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this article, or a discharge permit issued pursuant hereto, shall inform the city manager immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. The city manager shall make a determination whether this discharge can continue. Upon the city manager allowing the discharge to continue, a written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the city manager within five days. The report shall include: 
(1)  A description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status; 
(2)  The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and time of noncompliance, and if noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur; and 
(3)  All steps taken, or to be taken, to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(b)  A documented and verified operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the city manager against a discharger for any noncompliance with this article or any discharge permit issued pursuant hereto, which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. It will not, however, be a defense to an action for damages to the POTW or to persons, property or natural resources caused by the upset. An upset will be considered "documented and bona fide" only if the discharger complies with subsection (a) of this section and with 40 CFR 403.16(c) and Rule 323.2315 of the MAC. In any enforcement proceeding the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(c)  The user shall have controlled production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility, until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(d)  Conditions necessary for the demonstration of a bona fide upset. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of an operating upset shall demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and appropriate manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The user notified the city manager immediately upon becoming aware of the upset; and 
(4)  A written submission, containing the following information, was provided within five days of commencement of the upset: 
a.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance was expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps taken to reduce eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(Code 2004,  70-240; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 6. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 70-241. - Criminal and civil liability. 
(a)  Any person in violation of this article, or of any permit issued pursuant hereto, or standards, rules and regulations, any order of the city manager issued pursuant to those rules and regulations or this article, shall be: 
(1)  Subject to the municipal civil infractions provisions of the city Code, which the city manager is hereby authorized to enforce citations pursuant thereto; and 
(2)  For such violations not covered by the civil infractions provisions of the city Code, shall, if convicted, be subject to a criminal penalty for violation of a misdemeanor. Each act of violation and every day upon which any violation is permitted or suffered to exist, shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate penalty. The city manager may issue a notice of violation calling for corrective action prior to issuing a citation pursuant to the Code. In the case of a conviction pursuant to this section of a discharger who is not a natural person, any officer or director of a corporation, any officer or partner of a partnership, or any member of a limited liability company, or any officer or owner of a proprietorship is hereby deemed to be a proper person to serve any term of imprisonment imposed by the court as a result of the conviction. 
(b)  In addition to, and expressly not in lieu of the foregoing, any discharger who violates this article, or any permit issued pursuant hereto, or the standards, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, or any order of the city manager issued pursuant to this article, shall be subject to civil penalties, and to the payment of any damages and costs which may be awarded, by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In addition to any applicable state and federal penalties, any person who: 
(1)  At the time of a violation knew or should have known that a pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this article, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the city manager under this article; 
(2)  Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in an application for, or form pertaining to, a permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this article, or in any other correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the POTW regarding matters regulated by this article; 
(3)  Intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this article; or 
(4)  Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days: shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2004,  70-241; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 7. - RECORD RETENTION 

Sec. 70-242. - Record retention requirement. 
(a)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with BMP established under section 70-218(c)(5). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. 
(b)  Any and all records which pertain to matters which are the subject of a notice of violation, administrative order, show cause hearing, or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant to this article, shall be retained and preserved for five years, or until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired, whichever is later. 
(Code 2004,  70-242; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 8. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 70-243. - Removal credits. 
    Where applicable, the city manager may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of this article to reflect the POTW's ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7 and Rule 323.2313(a) of the MAC. 
(Code 2004,  70-243; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-244. - Net/gross calculations. 
    The city manager may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15 and Rule 323.2313(c) of the MAC. 
(Code 2004,  70-244; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 9. - USER CHARGES 

Sec. 70-245. - Purpose of charges. 
    Charges for the installation of, connection to and use of the POTW are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, operation and replacement of the system. Such charges shall be made in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth and shall be made against all users of the system. 
(Code 2004,  70-245; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-246. - Local collector sewer line installation charges. 
(a)  Whenever a local collector sewer line is constructed either through a special assessment project or as may be ordered or required by law, the property owners for whom the line is designed to serve shall each pay their share of the cost of installation. Similarly, any property owner requesting service that has not previously paid his share of the cost of constructing the local collector sewer shall pay those costs before service is permitted. 
(b)  The charge shall be known as the front foot rate and be determined by multiplying the rate per foot by the number of feet the property owner has fronting on the local collector sewer line from which he will receive service. The front foot rate shall be as follows: 
(1)  Domestic user: $60.00; 
(2)  Commercial or industrial user: 
a.  The same as a domestic user if the connection is made to a local collector sewer line eight inches or less in diameter. 
b.  For a line larger than eight inches diameter: $81.00. 
This charge will be annually reviewed and may change to reflect the current average cost of installation of local collector sewer lines. 
(c)  If the city commission shall determine that it is not advisable to collect the front foot rate at the time of construction or connection (if not previously paid at the time of construction), it may direct that the cost be borne initially by the system and subsequently be collected from the property owner in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Upon completion of construction or at the time connection is requested (if this cost has not been paid at the time of construction), the city engineer shall certify to the city treasurer the cost to be charged to the property owner. The city treasurer shall bill the owner of the premises affected advising him that unless the amount so billed is paid within 30 days from the date of mailing that the same shall be presented to the city commission at the first meeting thereof after the expiration of 30 days for assessment against said premises as a special assessment. In the event the bill for such installation and connection is not paid within 30 days from the date said notice is mailed, the city treasurer shall report the same to the city commission which shall examine the same and if found by it to be correct shall confirm it as a special assessment against the premises affected, at which time the city commission shall also direct the number of installments into which the same shall be divided, and shall direct the city assessor to extend the same upon the tax roll as a special assessment in the manner provided in this Code. All collection procedures for special assessments established in this Code shall be applicable to assessments made hereunder. 
(e)  In lieu of the procedure above described, such costs may be made at the expense of the system when the owner of the premises signs a written agreement agreeing to pay the cost upon terms agreeable to the city manager and that the unpaid balance shall constitute a lien upon his property of the same character and subject to the same methods of collection as prescribed for special assessments in this Code. 
(Code 2004,  70-246; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-247. - Integrated sewer connection fee schedule. 
(a)  When a property owner or user is requested or required to connect to the system and has not previously paid or been assessed a connection fee, the following connection fee schedule shall apply: 
2010 INTEGRATED SEWER CONNECTION BASE FEE SCHEDULE 
Water Meter (or equivalent) 
Size (inches) Base Fees 3/4 or less $  2,650.00 1 4,400.00 11/2 8,750.00 2 14,050.00 3 30,750.00 4 55,300.00 6 and over 122,950.00  
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a) of this section, the foregoing integrated sewer connection base fee schedule for single-family and multi-family residential dwelling units shall be adjusted upward and downward as follows: A single-family residential dwelling unit located on a parcel containing 20,000 square feet shall pay the applicable integrated connection fee in accordance with the forgoing schedule. When determining the square footage of a residential parcel for the purposes of determining the appropriate integrated connection fee, parcel size may be adjusted downward to take into consideration such things as wetlands, lakes, streams and other unusual characteristics of the parcel in accordance with policies approved from time to time by the utility advisory board. To the extent the size of a parcel, as adjusted, is greater than or less than 20,000 square feet, one-half the applicable integrated connection fee will increase or decrease by the same percentage increase or decrease in the parcel above or below 20,000 square feet. In the case of multi-family residential dwellings, in order to determine the size of the parcel assigned to each dwelling unit for purposes of calculating the integrated connection fee to be paid by each multi-family residential dwelling unit, the total square footage of the parcel, as adjusted, on which the multi-family residential dwelling is located shall be divided by the total number of residential units. Notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection, the integrated connection fee for a single-family residential dwelling unit or multi-family residential dwelling unit shall not exceed 41/2 times the applicable base integrated connection fee set forth in forgoing schedule. 
(c)  There shall be no upward adjustment in the integrated sewer service connection fee payable for a single-family residential dwelling unit connecting to the sewer system if: 
(1)  Each of the following conditions is met: 
a.  A building permit shall have been obtained; 
b.  The dwelling unit shall have been constructed; and 
c.  A certificate of occupancy shall have been issued prior to January 1, 2000; or 
(2)  Local building permit fees have been paid to the local governmental unit prior to January 1, 2000, for a single-family residential dwelling unit to be constructed on or after January 1, 2000. 
(3)  When connecting to the sewer system, users living in or owning such single-family residential dwelling units shall pay the applicable base integrated connection fee set forth in the integrated connection base fee schedule adjusted downward, if applicable, in accordance with the subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(d)  Effective January 1, 2005, and January 1 of every year thereafter, the integrated sewer connection base fees shall be adjusted by a percentage, which is determined by the annual change in the consumer price index (the "index") calculated as follows: 
(1)  The consumer price index shall be that index referred to as the Consumer Price Index, U.S. City Average, All Urban Consumers, published by the U.S. Department of Labor-Bureau of Statistics [(1982-84)=100]. In the event the method of determining the index is substantially altered, the basis for determining the annual change thereafter shall be the index which is most comparable to the index described above. 
(2)  For the purpose of computing the percentage change each calendar year, the index for the month of August for the prior calendar year shall be subtracted from the index for the immediately preceding August. The result so obtained (if positive) shall be divided by the index for the month of August for the prior calendar year to obtain the percentage increase which shall be applied to the then current integrated sewer connection base fee schedule to determine the new calendar year schedule. 
(e)  The foregoing integrated connection fee is due and payable at the time a user receives a permit to connect to the sewer system. A permit issued by the city to connect to the sewer system shall expire 180 days from the date the permit was issued. 
(f)  The user receiving services who applies for a larger water meter than the one presently in service shall pay an integrated connection fee which is the difference in cost between the meter size in service and the one applied for in accordance with the integrated connection fee in effect at the time of application. No credit or rebate shall be made in the case of application for a smaller meter size. 
(Code 2004,  70-247; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-248. - Use charges. 
    Rates and charges for sewage disposal service furnished by the system shall be charged to all persons or entities within or without the city limits using the system. Such charges shall reflect the proportionate costs of providing the service within the city limits. For those users of the system outside the city limits, charges shall be based on the proportionate actually incurred costs to provide service to the users within the governmental unit in which they reside. Each unit of government customer class in which users receive treatment services from the system shall adopt a system of user charges in accordance with the EPA regulations and shall incorporate such user charge system in their appropriate ordinances or resolutions. 
(Code 2004,  70-248; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-249. - User classes. 
    For the purposes of determining user charges, three user classes are established: Domestic, commercial and industrial. 
(Code 2004,  70-249; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-250. - Determination of user charges. 
    The charges herein established shall be based upon the water consumption of the user's premises, including water from public and private supplies, as determined by this article and the standards, rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, or at the election of the user upon the actual amount of sewage discharge into the system. However, a monthly service charge shall be based upon the size of the water meter and as determined by this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-250; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 10. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 70-251. - Applicability. 
(a)  Users of the system complying with the provisions of this article shall pay rates and charges as set forth below. Such rates and charges shall be designed to produce revenues which are proportionate to the cost of providing service to each user class of each customer class. Such cost shall include, but not be limited to, operation, maintenance, replacement, depreciation and a reasonable rate of return of the system's investment. Any bulk user of the system must establish a similar schedule of rates and charges to assure that its individual users are paying proportionate share of the cost of providing service in conformance with EPA regulations. 
(b)  A surcharge will also be imposed on those users who exceed normal BOD, TSS, phosphorous or ammonia concentrations established as provided here. 
(Code 2004,  70-251; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  11, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-252. - Rates and charges for retail users within the city. 
    The following rates and charges for sewage disposal service shall apply for users within the city: 
2010 COMMODITY RATE PER 100 CUBIC FEET 
Domestic $3.33 Commercial 3.33 Industrial 3.33  
2010 MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE 
Water Meter Size 
(inches) Charge 3/4 or less $ 13.70 1 21.94 11/4 32.54 11/2 45.50 2 78.48 3 172.70 4 304.61 6 or larger 681.50  
(Code 2004,  70-252; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-253. - 2012 surcharges, permit, and discharge authorization fees. 
(a)  If the city manager determines that a discharge will not cause pass through or interference as defined in this article, industrial or commercial users whether they are located within a retail service area or a bulk service area shall be charged a surcharge if the concentration of their discharge exceeds a five-day BOD of 250 mg/l, and/or TSS of 250 mg/l, or any phosphorus of 15 mg/l. That charge shall be $0.231 per pound of BOD and $0.285 per pound of TSS and $1.16 per pound of phosphorus in excess of the above limits. In addition, all industrial or commercial users shall be charged a surcharge for ammonia concentrations exceeding 38 mg/l. The charge shall be $0.298 per pound of ammonia in excess of the above limit. Discharge concentrations of these substances and the resulting surcharge shall be based on at least three composite samples per quarter. This sampling shall be performed by either Grand Rapids or the industrial user as determined by the city manager. 
(b)  The fee for a significant industrial user discharge permit or discharge authorization as provided for in section 70-221 whether they are located within a retail service area or a bulk service area shall be $400.00 per year and an analytical fee based upon this section. 
(c)  The following schedule of charges shall apply to any analysis which may be required as part of a discharge permit: 
Analysis 2010 Charge Each 
(except where noted otherwise) Metals $  7.00 TSS    7.00 BOD   14.00 Total phosphate   13.50 pH    5.00 EPA 624   60.00 EPA 625  115.00 BTEX/MTBE   35.00 Sulfide   12.00 Oil and grease   25.00 Total cyanide   15.00 Hexavalent chromium   10.00 Fecal coliform   45.00 Labor, per hour   56.16 Sampler, per day   35.00 Vehicle, per hour     3.18  
(d)  These charges will be reviewed annually and may change to reflect the current cost of providing these services. 
(Code 2004,  70-253; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  12, 13, 12-17-2013) 
Editor's note- Section 12 of Ordinance No. 12-13, effective December 17, 2013, changed the title of  70-253 from "2010 surcharges and permit fees" to "2012 surcharges, permit, and discharge authorization fees." 
Sec. 70-254. - Review of rates and charges. 
    Annually, after the close of the fiscal year and prior to the adoption of the system's budget, there shall be a review of rates and charges. Upon completion of the review, a report shall be prepared and presented to the Grand Rapids City Commission summarizing the review and recommending rates and charges which assure that all the costs of the system will be recovered from customer and user classes proportionately to the cost of providing service to them. 
(Code 2004,  70-254; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-255. - Enforcement. 
    Delinquent bills shall be collected as provided for in section 70-258. 
(Code 2004,  70-255; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-256. - Effective date. 
    The rates and charges set forth in sections 70-246, 70-252, and 70-253 shall be effective on January 1, 2010. The rates and charges are subject to annual review. 
(Code 2004,  70-256; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
DIVISION 11. - SEWER USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 70-257. - Sewer service applications and notification. 
(a)  A user desiring to obtain sewer service shall make application on forms prescribed by Grand Rapids. In the event that sewer service at premises is continuous through a change of ownership, the new owner must file a notification of change of ownership within ten days. Failure to complete an application or notification may result in discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Whenever a condominium has a single sewer connection servicing the premises, the account shall be made in the name of the condominium association. Sewer service shall not be provided until the condominium association has filed with the Grand Rapids Water Business Office written proof that it has the authority to enter into such an arrangement. 
(Code 2004,  70-257; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-258. - Billing practice. 
    The current water system rules and regulations shall be utilized for billing practices. 
(Code 2004,  70-258; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  14, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-259. - Sewer lines. 
(a)  The term "oversizing" shall mean the enlargement of a local collector sewer so that the enlargement will serve as a trunk or interceptor sewer. When the system requires a local collector sewer line to be oversized, it will pay the cost of such oversizing as computed in the following manner: 
(1)  In a residential assessment district or a new residential plot, the oversizing share is the material difference in cost of the oversized sewer; 
(2)  In a commercial, industrial or high density residential development assessment district, the oversizing share is the material difference in the cost of the oversized sewer; 
(3)  In cases where the larger than normal size sewer line is required solely to provide adequate service to a local service area and is not used as part of the larger network, then the entire cost of the enlargement will be treated in the same manner as a normal sized local collector line and the system will not participate in the oversizing cost. 
(b)  All extensions of the local collector sewer line are normally paid for by the affected users through special assessment or front footage charges. However, the Grand Rapids City Commission may authorize the extension of a local collector sewer line to serve an existing structure when the owner of the property requests sewer service because of failure of his present system causing an emergency situation and constituting a public health hazard. The POTW, at its own expense, may extend the sewer line to serve said properties under the following conditions: 
(1)  The requesting property is within 500 feet of an existing local collector sewer line; 
(2)  As shown by a poll of the other properties affected by the proposed extension, a majority of the owners having front footage are opposed to the project; 
(3)  There is a reasonable expectation, as determined by the Grand Rapids City Commission, that newly constructed or existing properties not presently desiring service will request such service in the foreseeable future. 
(c)  When an extension specified in subsection (b) of this section is made in the instances cited, the requesting property owner shall agree to pay the prevailing front footage rate and other applicable charges in the Code at such time that the extension is made. When property owners connect who have not shared in the expense of the sewer line extension, they shall then pay the front footage and other applicable charges as provided in section 70-246. 
(d)  All new sewer lines shall conform to the City of Grand Rapids Standard Construction Specifications and shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter in most residential areas and a minimum of 12 inches in diameter in commercial, industrial or high-density residential areas. The city manager reserves the right to determine the minimum acceptable sewer lateral size in those cases where drainage problems exist. 
(Code 2004,  70-259; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-260. - Sewer laterals and appurtenances. 
(a)  The property owner shall maintain, at his expense, the sewer lateral to ensure continuous flow of sewage from the structure to the local collector, trunk or interceptor sewer, and shall be responsible for replacement of lateral sections existing between the structure and the property line or public easement boundary. Grand Rapids shall be responsible only for the replacement of lateral sewers existing within the street right-of-way or public easement. 
(b)  Whenever a sewer lateral is to be extended into the premises, the plumber or contractor may obtain location measurements from Grand Rapids. However, neither Grand Rapids nor the city shall assume responsibility for the accuracy of such location measurements. 
(c)  Every structure with plumbing fixtures shall have an independent, owner-maintained building sewer lateral to the local collector sewer line when the system is available. There shall not be more than one structure served by a single sewer lateral connection, except with approval of the city manager. 
(d)  When a structure is to be demolished, satisfactory arrangements shall be made with Grand Rapids to disconnect and seal the sewer lateral at the property line or at the point designated by Grand Rapids. The lateral disconnection shall be inspected by Grand Rapids prior to sealing. Failure to make arrangements for inspection and the proper termination of the connection shall cause the city manager to order excavation of the lateral for the required inspection with all associated costs to be assessed against the bond required by the demolition permit as provided for in this Code. 
(e)  Roof drains shall not be connected to the system. The city manager shall order the immediate disconnection of all such connections. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for any and all costs associated with these disconnections and all costs including, but not limited to, legal and inspection service required to enforce provisions of this article. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. Roof drains not disconnected shall be subject to the same monthly charge as footing drains except the dry weather flow (DWF) and wet weather flows (WWF) shall be calculated on an individual basis. The calculation shall be the roof area in square feet multiplied by the normal rainfall (3.2 feet) multiplied by 7.48 gallons/cubic foot to determine the gallons per year. 
(f)  Footing drains shall not be connected to the system on any structure built after 1968. The city manager shall order the immediate disconnection of such connections. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for any and all costs associated with these disconnections and all costs including, but not limited to, legal and inspection service required to enforce provisions of this article. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(g)  Basement waterproofing systems shall not be connected into the system or discharged in such a manner as to cause a public or private nuisance. Prior to installation of a basement waterproofing system the property owner, or the owner's contractor, must obtain a permit from Grand Rapids. The waterproofing system must be inspected and approved by Grand Rapids prior to putting the system into operation. Given due cause, the city manager may order the owner to discontinue the discharge of water from a basement waterproofing system. Each day the owner fails to comply with such order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(h)  Disposal of garbage into the POTW shall be permitted only after it has been pulverized by an installed food-waste-grinder unit. Such units shall be installed in accordance with the current plumbing code, adopted by the city and enforced by the city. 
(i)  Storm drains shall not be connected into the system or discharged in such a manner as to cause a public or private nuisance. 
(Code 2004,  70-260; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  15, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 70-261. - Connection permits. 
    Persons authorized shall obtain a permit for sewer lateral connection from the city in accordance with the plumbing code. Said permits shall be obtained before any such work may begin. 
(Code 2004,  70-261; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-262. - Sewer connections. 
(a)  If at any time it is found that any sewer lateral connection has been installed contrary to or in violation of the city Code or rules or regulations governing such installation, the city manager shall issue an order requiring compliance within 30 days after notification. If compliance has not been obtained, including payment of all fees and charges, within 30 days of the notice, the city manager may authorize termination of Grand Rapids' water/sewer service until the corrections are made. The owner or user will not have redress for any such charges occurring because of shut-off or termination. In addition, the violator may be subject to a municipal civil infraction action. 
(b)  Each new sewer lateral installation, or repair of an existing sewer lateral, shall be inspected and approved by Grand Rapids prior to backfilling. 
(c)  If a piece of property that has an existing sewer lateral serving more than one building is subdivided into separate lots or parcels, then the owner of the building that does not have direct sewer service must install his own sewer service across his property or on an easement and the original sewer lateral to the adjoining subdivided property must be disconnected. Any required easements shall be recorded by the county clerk. 
(d)  Whenever a new sewer lateral is installed or repaired by a contractor or plumber, it shall be guaranteed to be free from any defective material or poor workmanship, in the public right-of-way, for a period of one year from the date of installation. 
(e)  Wastewater metering facilities may be installed by a user or as required by the city manager to measure sewage discharge from the user's premises to the sanitary sewer. All such arrangements shall be made subject to acceptance by the city manager and the expense thereof, including the installation, maintenance and operation, shall be borne by the user. Plans and specifications for the installation of any wastewater meter must be sealed by a state licensed professional engineer and submitted to the city before actual installation begins. Such metering facilities shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  A state licensed professional engineer must develop installation plans. Drawings of the location of the primary measuring device and the meter, the location of the meter's data output and specifications for the meter, including its manufacturer, model and logging frequency, must be included with the plans. 
(2)  A plan location map, which accurately shows where the primary measuring device, flow meter and flow meter totalizer are located in relation to the facility building and shall be submitted as part of the drawings. 
(3)  Meter reading provisions shall be convenient meter installation sites or any existing water meter reading location. 
(4)  Underground structure, and all associated piping, which contains the primary measuring device and the meter shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code. 
(5)  If possible, the primary measuring device must be located in an open or non-permitted confined space. The recording device may not be located in a confined space. 
(6)  The meter must include a data logger capable of recording and displaying continuous flow data. The data must be inspected each business day, by the user, with documentation of the inspection in the form of the inspector's initials, date and time. All data records must be maintained for a minimum of three years and be available for inspection by the city. 
(7)  The meter installation must be inspected and found to be acceptable by the city manager before any data from the meter will be used for billing purposes. 
(8)  The user must maintain a meter service contract provided by the manufacturer or the manufacturer's approved representative. The meter shall be checked and calibrated quarterly, or as per manufacturer's recommendation, by the service provider. All calibration records must be maintained for a minimum of three years and be available for inspection by the city. 
(9)  If failure of the meter occurs, the user must notify the city manager within three business days. Repairs to the meter, which are the responsibility of the owner, must be completed within five business days. If repairs cannot be completed within five business days, a timetable for completion of repairs must be submitted to the city manager. If, as a result of failure, or suspected failure, the sewer meter readings are in dispute, the volume of water indicated by the city's water meter during the disputed time will be used as the wastewater volume. 
(10)  The city, at its discretion, must be allowed to inspect the meter and all records pertaining to the meter. At the city manager's discretion, the acceptance of any wastewater metering device and/or data may be revoked. 
(Code 2004,  70-262; Ord. No. 6-11,  1, 9-2-2011; Ord. No. 12-13,  16, 12-17-2013) 
Secs. 70-263-70-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL-WYOMING SERVICE DISTRICT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance No. 5-11, effective September 2, 2011, repealed the former art. 5,  70-341-70-355, 70-381-70-393, 70-411-70-450, and enacted a new art. 5 as set out herein. The former art. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1987 Compiled Ordinances,  25.501-25.524, 25.526-25.535. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-341. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Twenty-five percent rule means that the combined depth of oil and grease and other solids (floating and settled) in any chamber of a trap shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of a trap is determined by measuring the internal depth from the water outlet invert elevation to the inside bottom of the trap. 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act, Public Law 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended on February 4, 1987, as amended. 
    Alternative discharge limit means limits set by the city in lieu of the promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for Integrated Facilities in accordance with the combined wastestream formula, as established by the EPA. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, a responsible corporate officer such as: 
a.  President, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president in charge of principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making processes for the corporation. 
b.  A manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars). 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individuals designated in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition if: 
a.  The authorization made in writing by the individuals described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition; 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures (without the addition of nitrification inhibitors, and expressed in terms of milligrams per liter). 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the drainage from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building official means the director of public works, building inspector, the city engineer or another designated agent of the city including, without limitation, the city manager of the City of Wyoming or his designee. 
    Building sewers means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other places of disposal. 
    Cesspool means an underground pit into which raw sewage or other untreated liquid waste is discharged and from which the liquid seeps into surrounding soil or is otherwise removed. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. It is also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact and temperature. 
    City means the City of Kentwood. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Combined wastestream means the wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process. Where required by federal or state law, and only to the extent required by federal or state law, the combined wastestream formula provided in 40 CFR 403 will apply to the limits applicable to a combined wastestream. 
    Commission means the city commission of the City of Kentwood. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and grease of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Composite sample means a series of representative samples taken over a specific time period and combined into one sample. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which only heat is added. 
    Council means the city council of the City of Wyoming. 
    Debt service charges means the charges levied to customers of the wastewater system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the sewage works. 
    Director means the city's director of public works or his authorized deputy, agent or representative including, without limitation, the city manager of the City of Wyoming or his designee. 
    Domestic users means all users of the sewage works where the discharge into the system is primarily household and human waste. 
    Dosing chamber means a watertight tank or receptacle used for the purpose of retaining the overflow of effluent from a septic tank, pending its automatic discharge to a selected point. 
    Dosing siphon means a mechanical device which will automatically cause a liquid entering a receptacle to be siphoned away until a second predetermined lower level has been reached, at which time the flow from the receptacle ceases until the high-water level has again been attained. 
    Dry well means a seepage pit. 
    Dwelling unit means the same as found in Appendix A to this Code. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, administrator or other duly authorized official. 
    Footing drain means a pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits groundwater. 
    Garbage means liquid and solid wastes from the storage, preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the growing, handling, storage or sale of produce or other edible products. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
    Grease trap means a device designed to separate and retain fats, oils, and grease from liquid waste and permit the liquid waste to discharge into the sewer system. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks or vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not compatible with biological treatment or removal of which is not designed into the treatment process. 
    Industrial wastes means the wastewater discharges from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharge from any structures with these characteristics. 
    Integrated facilities means industrial facilities where wastestreams are combined prior to treatment. 
    Interference means any discharge which alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW and any of its process or operations, or its sludge use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal. 
    Laboratory determination means the measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition at the time of any such measurement, test or analysis of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water, a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation or in accordance with any other method prescribed by or approved by EPA or MDEQ. 
    National Categorical Pretreatment Standard means any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342), as amended. 
    National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5, as amended. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source will be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or (1)c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities, administration and other efforts required to operate and maintain the sewage works including the cost of replacement. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Penalty means a charge for discharge of noncompatible substances including pH in violation of the wastewater discharge permit. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any of various chemicals, substances and refuse materials such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes which impair the purity of the water or soil. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    Premises means a lot, parcel or plot of land including the buildings or structures thereon or any part thereof. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, the alteration of the nature of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d), as amended. 
    Pretreatment facilities means devices or structures for use in treating industrial waste prior to entry into public sewers. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement for treating of a waste prior to discharge to the sewers. 
    Pretreatment standards means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, alternative discharge limits or other federal, state or local standards, whichever are applicable. 
    Private sewage works means any sewage works or part thereof not connected to a public sewer and shall include, but not be limited to, septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits. 
    Properly ground garbage means garbage or vegetable wastes that has been ground to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-eighth of an inch in any dimension. The use of garbage grinder installations are restricted to locations where food is prepared for consumption on the premises. Installation of a garbage grinder with a three-fourths horsepower motor or greater shall be subject to approval by the director. 
    Property from which sanitary sewage emanates means any parcel of land as described in the last recorded deed of conveyance pertaining thereto on which there is located a structure in which water is used or is available for use to household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. 
    Public nuisance means anything which is injurious to health, is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with human comfort or enjoyment of life or property, whether affecting individual interests per se or affecting at the same time an entire community or neighborhood of any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance, interference or damage may not be inflicted equally upon the persons therein. 
    Public sewer means a city sewer or any part thereof. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act, which is owned by the City of Wyoming. This definition includes any devices and systems used in storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Quality control means a formal program designed to monitor the reliability (accuracy and precision) of reported analytical results. 
    Replacement means the replacement, in whole or in part, of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer designed to carry sewage only. 
    Seepage pit means an underground enclosure constructed of concrete blocks, bricks or similar material loosely laid with open joints so as to allow the septic tank overflow or effluent to be absorbed directly into the surrounding soil. 
    Septic tank means a receptacle receiving sewage and having an inlet and outlet designed to permit the separation of solids in suspension from such wastes and to permit such retained solids to undergo decomposition therein. 
    Sewage or wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the sewage works. 
    Sewage works means the sanitary sewage collection system any part thereof and the wastewater treatment facility. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer connection permit means, as set forth in section 70-348, a written permit issued by the city prior to using, connecting, altering or opening any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. 
    Sewer service charge means any applicable user charges, surcharges and debt service charges. 
    Significant industrial user means, except as provided in subsection (3) of this definition: 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement; and 
(3)  Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance means one or more of the following: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit (or grab sample limit) or average limit (or composite limit) for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit (or grab sample limit) or the average limit (or composite limit) multiplied by the applicable TRC value (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the wastewater discharge permit or other enforcement orders for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slugload means any pollutant, including compatible pollutants, released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the sewage works. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer designed to carry stormwater and surface water and drainage only. 
    Subsurface disposal field means a system for the distribution of septic tank overflow or effluent below the ground surface through a line or a series of branch lines, of drain tile laid with open joint to allow the overflow or effluent to be absorbed by the surrounding soil throughout the entire field. 
    Superintendent means the City of Wyoming wastewater treatment plant superintendent, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Surcharge means a charge to cover the cost of treating sewage which exceeds limits as established in this article. A surcharge is appropriate to cover costs of treating extra strength compatible waste which are authorized by order of determination. A surcharge is not acceptable as a sole remedy for violations of limits. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toilet device means a privy, outhouse, septic tank, septic toilet, chemical closet or other device designed for the disposal of human excreta. 
    Total toxic organics (TTO) means total toxic organics, which is the summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for toxic organics listed in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or as defined by the director. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to the public health, treatment or environment, including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts, as amended. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of facts beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewage works. 
    User charge means a charge levied to users of a treatment works for the cost of sewage works including operation, maintenance and capital charges. 
    User class means the kind of user connected to sanitary sewers including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Residential. A user of a dwelling unit discharging domestic waste. 
(2)  Industrial. Any nondomestic user which also contributes, causes or permits the contribution or introduction of wastewater or pollutants into the POTW, whether intentionally or unintentionally, and whether directly or indirectly. For purposes of this article, industrial users may also meet the definitions of governmental, commercial or institutional users. 
(3)  Commercial user. Commercial users are divided into two categories, namely commercial domestic and commercial industrial. Commercial industrial means any commercial user where there is or can be any discharge into the sewage system other than normal domestic waste because of the particular type of operation including, but not limited to, carwashes, bakeries and restaurants. All other commercial users shall be called commercial domestic. 
(4)  Institutional. Any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious or educational function which, based on a determination by the director discharges primarily domestic waste. 
(5)  Governmental. Any federal, state or local governmental unit or agency. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions including, without limitation, contaminated groundwater and landfill leachate, whether treated or untreated, that is contributed, introduced or discharged into the POTW. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means as set forth in section 70-390, a written permit issued by the director to nondomestic users of the POTW. 
    Watercourse means a channel, natural or artificial, in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Code 2004,  70-341; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-342. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD, biochemical oxygen demand; 
(2)  CFR, Code of Federal Regulations; 
(3)  COD, chemical oxygen demand; 
(4)  EPA, Environmental Protection Agency; 
(5)  L, liter; 
(6)  MDEQ, state department of environmental quality; 
(7)  mg, milligrams; 
(8)  mg/l, milligrams per liter; 
(9)  NPDES, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; 
(10)  SIC, standard industrial classification; 
(11)  SS, suspended solids; 
(12)  TTO, total toxic organics; 
(13)  USC, United States Code; 
(14)  O&M, operation and maintenance; 
(15)  CWA, Clean Water Act; 
(16)  g, micrograms; 
(17)  POTW, publicly owned treatment works; 
(18)  ppm, parts per million; 
(19)  ppb, parts per billion; 
(20)  MG, million gallons; 
(21)  gpd, gallons per day; 
(22)  Cd, cadmium; 
(23)  Cr, chromium; 
(24)  Cu, copper; 
(25)  Pb, lead; 
(26)  Ni, nickel; 
(27)  Zn, zinc; 
(28)  CN, cyanide; 
(29)  Ag, silver; 
(30)  Hg, mercury; 
(31)  As, arsenic; and 
(32)  Be, beryllium. 
(Code 2004,  70-342; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-343. - Water pollution. 
    No person shall discharge or allow to be discharged into any natural outlet or watercourse within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage, industrial waste or other pollution. 
(Code 2004,  70-343; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-344. - Abatement of water pollution. 
    Whenever the building official determines from any investigation that there is a health or environmental hazard caused by sewage from any property being exposed to the surface of the ground or being permitted to drain under the surface of the ground or into any ditch, storm sewer, lake or stream, or that the presence of any sewage on the property has an obnoxious or detrimental odor or creates a public nuisance, the owner of such property must connect to the public sewer forthwith, whenever such property abuts any public right-of-way in which a public sanitary sewer is located, and the structure is within 200 feet of the sanitary sewer. If such property does not abut a public right-of-way in which a public sanitary sewer is located within 100 feet from an intersection of any line of the property with such right-of-way, the owner of such property shall immediately construct, repair or replace the private sewage works so that the conditions which led to the determination by the building official are abated. 
(Code 2004,  70-344; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-345. - Private sewer system. 
    Whenever property does not meet the 100-foot requirement of section 70-344, the building sewer of the property shall be connected to a private sewage works which shall be operated in a sanitary manner at all times. At such time as the property is connected to the public sewer, the property owner is responsible for all maintenance that is required for that portion of the connection located outside the city right-of-way or easement. 
(Code 2004,  70-345; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-346. - Disposition of private system upon connection to public sanitary sewer. 
    Whenever any property is connected to a public sanitary sewer and there exists on the property a septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other similar private sewage facility, any sewage in the septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other similar private sewage facility shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner, and the septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other private sewage facility shall be filled with sand or gravel. 
(Code 2004,  70-346; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-347. - Construction, repair or enlargement of private sewage works. 
    No private sewage works may be constructed, repaired or enlarged if any part of a residential structure, excluding any attached garage, on said property is within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer, except as provided for in section 70-344. 
(Code 2004,  70-347; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-348. - Sewer connection permit-Generally. 
    No person shall uncover or make any connections with, or openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without obtaining a written permit from the city. All permit applications for industrial connections shall contain information outlined in section 70-392. Information submitted shall be approved by the director prior to issuance of a permit. Any sewer connections or work done within the city's right-of-way shall require a street opening permit from the city engineer or his designee. 
(Code 2004,  70-348; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-349. - Same-Classification. 
    There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Residential and commercial domestic; and 
(2)  Commercial industrial and industrial. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on the form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent by the city. Applications for an industrial or commercial industrial permit shall be submitted with a copy to the wastewater department. Permit and inspection fees shall be paid in the amounts specified by resolution of the city council from time to time and on file in the city hall. 
(Code 2004,  70-349; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-350. - Multiple sewer connection system. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each building. However, where any existing building is so located on an interior lot so that no private sewer is available nor can one be constructed to the building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, more than one building may be served with the same building sewer subject to approval by the city. In areas where laterals have not been constructed to the property and complete street improvements have been made or where unusual lot splits have occurred leaving only one lateral for two properties, joint use of this lateral may be approved by the city engineer with the connection being made to the city sewer if there is no health or other danger. All discharge limits contained in this article apply to that portion as the lateral emanating from a single building. Compliance with pretreatment standards or local discharge limits prescribed by this article shall be determined within each tributary to the common lateral prior to commingling with other wastewater. 
(Code 2004,  70-350; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-351. - Existing building sewer examination. 
    Existing sewers shall meet all requirements of this article. Whenever any examination determines that an existing building sewer does not meet the requirements of this article and the building official determines that the connection is creating a health hazard, odor or public nuisance, or environmental hazard the sewer shall be reconstructed at the owner's expense. 
(Code 2004,  70-351; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-352. - City of Grand Rapids sanitary sewer system. 
    In the event a significant industrial user located in the city is connected to the sanitary sewer system of the City of Grand Rapids, the terms of chapter 70, article 4, of the city Code as amended, and the Interjurisdictional Agreement (IJA) executed by both the City of Grand Rapids and City of Wyoming pursuant to MCL 124.1 et seq., as amended, shall apply and are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Code 2004,  70-352; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Secs. 70-353-70-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 70-360. - Rates, surcharges and penalties to be set by city commission. 
    Rates, surcharges and penalties shall be paid by the user as set by resolution of the city council from time to time and on file in the city hall. 
(Code 2004,  70-360; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-361. - Surcharge calculation and billing; penalty for violation of wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  Calculation formula. All nondomestic users of the city sewage works shall pay a surcharge for effluent containing the compatible pollutants in excess of baseline concentrations specified in section 70-411. For suspended solids, BOD, COD, phosphorus, grease and oil, or other specific compatible pollutants, the city may accept payment in lieu of the user meeting baseline concentration limits, subject to section 70-411. The city may use the test results from a COD analysis as an alternative means of surcharging for BOD. Surcharges for compatible pollutants shall be calculated as follows: 
(Average - Baseline) (mg/l)  Flow (Mgal)  Rate ($/lb)  8.34 
(b)  Sampling methods and billing. The director shall collect three composite or grab samples quarterly and base the surcharge cost upon such samples. If the user does not agree with the sampling or testing method of the director, the director may agree to an independent company, approved by the city, taking such samples, at the user's expense, under conditions and standards as determined by the City of Wyoming. The surcharge shall be calculated and billed quarterly by the city unless another time period is designated by the director (e.g., monthly). Neither City of Kentwood nor City of Wyoming employees or officials shall not be involved directly or indirectly with any company performing tests on any samples where such tests are to be used by the City of Wyoming. 
(c)  Penalties for violation of discharge permit. Penalties listed in a resolution set by the city council from time to time and on file in city hall shall be assessed for violation of the wastewater discharge permit. Penalties may be based on either a grab, composite or in the case of pH, on the basis of results from a pH recorder. Penalties will be assessed for any sample exceeding limits listed in a resolution set by the city council from time to time and on file in city hall. Unless otherwise specified in a resolution set by the city council from time to time and on file in city hall, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, or permits issued under this article, shall be penalized in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 (or the maximum penalty allowed under state law). Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Payment of penalties does not constitute compliance with the permit. In addition to these penalties, continued, habitual or gross violations or those caused by negligence or failure to install and operate property pretreatment units will be enforced under sections 70-364, 70-366 and 70-416. 
(Code 2004,  70-361; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-362. - Delinquent accounts. 
    Should any monies owed for the use of the public sewer system be unpaid, the city may collect same by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Litigation; 
(2)  Shutting off and discontinuing sewer or water or both services to the premises; or 
(3)  Certifying such charge to the city assessor who shall assess the charge against the lot or parcel of land upon which is situated the premises served. The assessment shall then be collected or returned in the same manner as real property taxes. 
(Code 2004,  70-362; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-363. - Public nuisance abatement. 
    The building official may require the abatement of any public nuisance under this article by giving the owner of such property notice to eliminate such conditions. The time limit shall be stated in the notice commensurate with the type of nuisance. The building official shall have the power to discontinue water and sewage service to the property if the owner fails to abate such nuisance. All work required to abate such nuisance shall be performed in compliance with this article at the owner's expense. 
(Code 2004,  70-363; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-364. - Harmful contributions. 
    The director may suspend sewer and water service when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, cause interference to the sewage works or cause the City of Wyoming to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a possible suspension of water or wastewater treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to voluntarily comply with any discharge permit, the City of Wyoming may take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate suspension of sewer and water service, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewage works or endangerment of any individuals. The director shall reinstate the sewer and water and service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City of Wyoming within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Code 2004,  70-364; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-365. - Official determination of hazard. 
    Whenever the building official determines that there is a health or welfare hazard created by the emanation of sewage by being exposed to the surface of the ground or draining of sewage from the property under the surface of the ground or into any ditch, storm sewer, lake or stream and that the continuance of the use of the private sewage works by the property poses an immediate threat to humans, the building official may order and require the occupants to vacate any structure on the property forthwith. 
(Code 2004,  70-365; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-366. - Notification of violation of article. 
    Whenever the City of Wyoming finds that a user has violated or is violating any provision of this article, the City of Wyoming or its designee may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction of all violations shall be submitted by the user to the City of Wyoming for approval. A shorter notice commensurate with the danger to the health and welfare of persons or environment may be given. Failure to respond in 30 days, or shorter notice, or to develop a satisfactory plan shall constitute a violation of this article, and the City of Wyoming shall take such action as deemed necessary, including suspension of water or sewer service, or both. 
(Code 2004,  70-366; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-367. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  Request for hearing. Any user subject to enforcement action under the provisions of this article may request a hearing before the director within ten days of receipt of notification of such action. A hearing is to be held by the director concerning the violation, the reasons for the action, any proposed enforcement actions and directing the user to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be implemented. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. The director may conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any officer or employee to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the director notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; and 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
(c)  Testimony; transcription. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken may be under oath and recorded stenographically. Any such transcript will be made available to any member of the public or any part to the hearing upon payment of charges for copying. 
(d)  Issuance of orders and directives. After the director has reviewed the evidence, an order may be issued to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless acceptable treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities and that such devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(e)  Surcharges and fees. The director may also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the city for the additional cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment works due to any violations of this article. 
(f)  Judicial review. Any party may seek judicial review of a director decision in circuit court. The circuit court shall uphold the director's decision if it is based on competent, material and substantial evidence. 
(Code 2004,  70-367; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-368. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney or other counsel designated by the city may commence an action for appropriate relief. 
(Code 2004,  70-368; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-369. - Falsifying information. 
    No person shall knowingly make any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article nor shall falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-369; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-370. - Affirmative defense. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions of this article and the specific prohibitions in section 70-410(2), (4), (7), (8), (10) and (12) where the user can demonstrate that: 
(1)  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and 
(2)  Either: 
a.  A local limit designed to prevent pass through or interference was developed for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference and the user was in compliance with each such local limit immediately before and during the pass through or interference; or 
b.  A local limit was not applicable and immediately before and during the pass through or interference the user's discharge did not substantially change in volume or constituents from the user's previous discharges when the POTW was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of interference, all applicable requirements for sludge use or disposal. 
(Code 2004,  70-370; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-371. - Publication of list of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
    As required by federal regulations, 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii), the City of Wyoming shall at least annually, before April 1, publish in a newspaper of record a list of industrial users which during the previous calendar year were in significant noncompliance of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For the purposes of this section significant noncompliance is defined in section 70-341. 
(Code 2004,  70-371; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-372. - Conflicts. 
    Should any existing agreements, orders or permits be in conflict with this article, then they shall be revised so as to comply with this article. Any conflict with this article would be in violation of 40 CFR 35.929 which requires a users charge system under which each user bears a portion or share of wastewater treatment plant operation and maintenance cost. 
(Code 2004,  70-372; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-373. - Municipal civil infraction; penalty. 
    Any violations of the provisions of article 5 of this chapter not specifically designated a misdemeanor shall be a civil infraction for which the user shall be responsible for a civil fine in the amount of $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(Code 2004,  70-373; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Secs. 70-374-70-376. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS 

Sec. 70-377. - Material specifications. 
    All materials used on construction of laterals and building sewers shall be of the type approved by the applicable plumbing or building code. 
(Code 2004,  70-377; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-378. - Pipe size. 
    The size of a residential building sewer shall not be less than four inches in diameter. All other sewer sizes shall be determined by the city based upon the type of facility and the applicable plumbing or building code. 
(Code 2004,  70-378; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-379. - Sewer slope. 
    Building sewers shall be constructed to slopes consistent with the provisions of the applicable plumbing code, but not less than one-eighth of an inch per linear foot. 
(Code 2004,  70-379; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-380. - Location and elevation. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. Building sewers shall not be laid parallel to nor within three feet of any bearing wall. The depth shall be sufficient to be protected against frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in alignment shall be made only with properly curved pipe or long radius fittings. Changes in direction having bends of 45 degrees or more shall have a cleanout. 
(Code 2004,  70-380; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-381. - Floor drains. 
    Floor drains which are connected to the building sewer shall be required for all basements or cellars if the elevation of the public sanitary sewer will service the building. 
(Code 2004,  70-381; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-382. - Lift pump. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the building sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by means of a sump pump or other approved means and discharged into the building sewer. 
(Code 2004,  70-382; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-383. - Construction procedures to be in accordance with city's standard construction specifications; exception. 
    All construction procedures shall be in accordance with the city's standard construction specifications, with the exception that tunneling of laterals will be allowed if it is determined that the proper alignment and slope can be maintained on the lateral. 
(Code 2004,  70-383; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-384. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  All establishments where food is manufactured, sold or prepared, except for small areas designated as employee break areas or the equivalent, discharging wastewater containing fats, oils, and grease (FOG) to the City of Wyoming sewage works and/or the POTW shall install, operate, and maintain a sufficiently-sized oil and grease, water and solids separator (hereinafter called grease trap) necessary to achieve and maintain compliance with the limits indicated in section 70-411. 
(b)  Unless otherwise authorized by the director, all grease traps shall be of the outdoor, inline variety. With special authorization by the director, grease traps of the indoor, under-counter, stand-alone variety may be allowed. In this case, maintenance of indoor grease traps shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the "25 percent rule" as defined herein. Under no condition shall an indoor grease trap be cleaned at intervals less than once every 14 days. 
(c)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(d)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(e)  Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained by the owner and shall be operated continuously in an efficient manner whenever the facility is in operation. The director shall have the right to inspect maintenance and disposal records related to the operation of grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(f)  The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of the grease trap waste. All waste removed from each grease trap must be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste. No grease trap pumpage may be discharged to the city sewer system. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floatable materials, wastewater, sludges and solids and jet flushing to remove measurable build-up on tank walls. Top skimming of outdoor grease traps, decanting or back flushing of the grease trap or its wastes for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is prohibited. 
(g)  There shall be ample room and reasonable access to interceptors to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for transport and analysis. 
(h)  Grease traps and other interceptors shall be installed in compliance with the current plumbing codes adopted by the city. The director shall make final determination and approval of a grease trap's size. If additional pretreatment and/or maintenance is required to meet the provisions in this section, the director, may require that the establishment in existence prior to the effective date of this section upgrade to the requirements provided. 
(i)  Maintenance of an outdoor grease trap shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the "25 percent rule" and at intervals no less than once every 90 days. 
(j)  Use of any bacteriological, chemical or enzymatic addition for the purpose of maintaining a grease trap is prohibited unless written approval is obtained from the director. 
(k)  The user shall be responsible for maintaining records and/or manifests as to the dates of service, quantity and waste hauler name at the user's location for a period of three years, which records shall be subject to review by the city without prior notification. 
(l)  Should any user fail to properly clean and maintain a grease trap as required herein, the City of Wyoming or its designee, at its option may contract for appropriate cleaning and maintenance by a licensed contractor, the cost of which shall be collectable by the city from the user at a charge of actual cost plus 100 percent. 
(Code 2004,  70-384; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-385. - Tests. 
    All tests of building sewers shall be made in conformance with the applicable plumbing code. 
(Code 2004,  70-385; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-386. - Completion notification. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the plumbing inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city's plumbing inspector or his designee. 
(Code 2004,  70-386; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-387. - Notice and claim procedures applicable to overflow or backup. 
    In accordance with Public Act No. 222 of 2001 (MCL 691.1416 et seq.), the city shall follow the notice and claim procedures contained in the city's adopted Sanitary Sewer Damage and Claims Policy, as amended ("policy"), with respect to claims for damages or injuries purportedly arising from and overflow or backup of the public sewer system (a "sewage disposal system event") to afford the city and public greater efficiency, certainty and consistency in the provision of relief for damages or injuries caused by a sewage disposal system event. Copies of the city's adopted policy are available and can be obtained in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 70-388, 70-389. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC SEWER USE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 70-390. - Wastewater discharge permits-Generally. 
    The director shall by written permit establish the maximum relative strength of sewage and industrial waste to be discharged into the public sewer by nondomestic users. Prior to the initial issuance of a permit or 90 days prior to the expiration of an existing permit, nondomestic users shall submit the information outlined in section 70-392. Wastewater discharge permit fees shall be paid in the amount as set by resolution of the city council from time to time and on file in city hall. Permits shall contain, at a minimum, the following conditions: 
(1)  A statement of duration (in no case more than five years); 
(2)  A statement of nontransferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator; 
(3)  Effluent limits based upon applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based upon general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule; and 
(6)  A statement to enable authorized representatives of the POTW, state, and EPA to enter and inspect the premises of nondomestic users. 
(Code 2004,  70-390; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-391. - Same-Review and adjustment. 
    Any permit issued by the director may be periodically reviewed and adjusted. 
(Code 2004,  70-391; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-392. - Wastewater contribution information. 
(a)  Information required. All nondomestic users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the sewage works shall submit information on their processes and wastewater to the director before connecting to or contributing to the sewage works. All existing industrial users connected to or contributing to the sewage works shall submit this information upon request of the director. At least 90 days prior to the commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall be required to submit to the director a report which contains the information in this section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (a)(4) and (a)(7) of this section. The information submitted shall be sufficient for the director to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the sewage works and the need for pretreatment. Any statements or information submitted in connection with this section shall be signed by an authorized representative of the company. The user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name of the operator and owners, facility name, address, e-mail address and location. 
(2)  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(4)  Measurement of pollutants. For industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by standard or control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. 
a.  A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The director may waive flow proportional sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases samples must be obtained through time proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
b.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this section. 
c.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula. 
d.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the director determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties approved by the director. 
e.  If this report is a baseline report, the director may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling; the methods of analysis; and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(5)  Average rate of production. 
(6)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(7)  Average daily and maximum wastewater flow rates from all regulated process streams and other wastestreams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
(8)  Industries identified as significant industries or subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards or alternative discharge limits or those required by the City of Wyoming must submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. For industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, a schematic process diagram identifying the location of points of discharge from all regulated processes as well as the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated point of discharge shall also be submitted. 
(9)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials or pollutants which are or could be discharged. 
(10)  The user shall submit a certification statement reviewed and signed by an authorized representative indicating whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(11)  If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user will provide the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. 
b.  No such increment shall exceed nine months. 
c.  No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress; the reason for delay; and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such increments of progress. 
(12)  Type and amount of raw materials. 
(13)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(14)  Location of sampling manhole. 
(15)  Any other information as may be deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage works. 
(b)  Hazardous waste information requirement. Any industrial user must inform the appropriate authorities upon discharge of hazardous waste as follows: 
(1)  Any industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of the constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. Industrial users shall provide this notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste commences. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements in this article. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 40 CFR 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous wastes or listing any additional substances as hazardous wastes, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substances within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under subsection (b) of this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(c)  Maintenance of records. All users shall be required to maintain records of wastewater contribution information for a period of at least three years. 
(Code 2004,  70-392; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-393. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user and that such information need not be disclosed in accordance with any applicable Freedom of Information Act or any other applicable law. When requested by the person furnishing a report which might disclose trade secrets, such report shall be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law except that the report shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit or any pretreatment programs, and it shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(b)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. If any applicable state or federal law, rule or regulation conflicts with any provision in this article by requiring a greater degree of disclosure, that state or federal law, rule or regulation shall govern. 
(Code 2004,  70-393; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-394. - Wastewater discharges. 
    No person shall discharge into the waters of the state within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city or to the sewage works any wastewater except as authorized by the director in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-394; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-395. - Liquid discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any type of liquid into any sanitary sewer unless specifically permitted by the director. 
(Code 2004,  70-395; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-396. - Waste hauler discharges. 
    Waste haulers who are authorized to discharge into the POTW shall be required to pay fees as established by resolution of the city council from time to time and on file in the city hall, in addition to any surcharges. Discharge shall be allowed only at such points as designated by the city. Waste haulers applying for discharge authorization shall submit the information requested in section 70-392 prior to receiving authorization. 
(Code 2004,  70-396; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-397. - Discharge regulations, charges and fees. 
    Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city council. In addition, the city council may: 
(1)  Establish unit charges, surcharges or a schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged into the sewage works; 
(2)  Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Establish compliance schedules; 
(7)  Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the City of Wyoming, and affording the director access thereto, and copying thereof; 
(9)  Require notification of the City of Wyoming of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Require notification of slug discharges; 
(11)  Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-397; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-398. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The director may require a user to provide, maintain and operate monitoring facilities at the user's expense. Such facilities may include any or all of the following: a source of power, a sampling manhole meeting the specifications required by the city, an approved sampler, and flow monitoring devices as required by the director to allow for inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and internal drainage systems. Such facilities shall be kept free of snow, parked vehicles or other obstructions. The monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises in an area accessible to a vehicle, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in a public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the director of requiring such facilities unless the completion date is extended by the director at his discretion. 
(b)  Flow measurement devices on building sewers shall be checked and necessary repairs made on an annual basis. Such maintenance and checks shall be performed by the equipment manufacturer or an authorized designee who shall certify in writing to the director as to the accuracy of the equipment. 
(Code 2004,  70-398; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-399. - Meters required. 
    All users shall have meters on all water sources that ultimately discharge into the sewage works or shall meter the liquid wastes at the point of discharge into the sewage works. All meters shall be approved by the director. 
(Code 2004,  70-399; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-400. - Inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The City of Wyoming or the City of Kentwood may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the requirements of this article are being met. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the cities' representatives access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, record copying or any other task necessary in the performance of their duties. Nondomestic users shall be subject to inspection fees as stipulated by resolution of the city council from time to time and on file in city hall. 
(b)  The City of Wyoming or the City of Kentwood shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require property identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City of Wyoming or the City of Kentwood will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(c)  Refusal to allow duly authorized representatives entry shall be considered a violation of this article and may be considered grounds for discontinuing of sewer or water services, or both. 
(Code 2004,  70-400; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-401. - Refusing entry for inspection; issuance of search warrant. 
    Whenever the building official or director deems it necessary to enter upon any property at a reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of enforcement in accordance with the provisions of this article, and is refused such entry, the official who is refused such entry may make an affidavit in writing, under oath to the district court stating the facts of the case so far as it may be known to the complainant. The court may issue a search warrant or inspection or other order allowing the director, building official or his representatives to enter upon such property to the extent and time necessary to enforce and carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-401; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-402. - Sampling and analytical fee. 
    Industrial users may be charged a sampling and analytical fee in cases where the director must utilize the analytical capabilities of a private laboratory in order to determine compliance with pretreatment standards. This fee shall be equal to the actual costs incurred by the City of Wyoming or the City of Kentwood plus an additional administrative fee. 
(Code 2004,  70-402; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-403. - Self-monitoring. 
    The director may require industrial users to conduct self-monitoring. The directory shall determine the frequency of self-monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The director may require the industrial user to provide a split of self-monitoring samples. The director shall require appropriate reporting from industrial users required to conduct self-monitoring. 
(Code 2004,  70-403; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-404. - Sampling and analysis procedures and methods. 
    All sampling and analyses conducted shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and methods detailed in the most current version of: 
(1)  "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," American Public Health Association. 
(2)  "Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes," United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(3)  Any other method as may be approved by the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-404; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-405. - Laboratory utilized by industry conducting self-monitoring to be approved by city; quality control documentation required. 
(a)  Each laboratory utilized by industries conducting self-monitoring as required by the director shall be approved by the director and required to operate a formal quality control program as outlined in the most current version of: 
(1)  "Handbook for Analytical Quality Control in Water and Wastewater Laboratories," United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(2)  "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," American Public Health Association. 
(b)  Laboratories conducting analyses for industrial users must submit a copy of the formal quality control documentation prior to approval by the director. Approval of laboratories shall be subject to periodic review. The director shall have the right to issue blind standards to be analyzed by other laboratories being utilized for self-monitoring. In the case of resolving disputes between analytical data generated by the director and another laboratory, any data without documented supporting quality control data will be rejected. 
(Code 2004,  70-405; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-406. - User notification to POTW of spills, etc., or change in volume or character of discharge; requirements. 
    All industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of any accidental spills, unusual discharges, or slugloads. All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) or 40.24(2) or this article. If self-monitoring performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the City of Wyoming within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results to the City of Wyoming within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if: 
(1)  The City of Wyoming performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month. 
(2)  The City of Wyoming performs sampling at the industrial user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Code 2004,  70-406; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-407. - Pretreatment compliance reporting. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new user, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage works, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director information requested in section 70-392. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. This report shall include the certification statement as required in section 70-392. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 70-341. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. Periodic compliance reports shall be submitted by users as follows: 
(1)  Any user discharging into the sewage works shall submit to the director semiannually, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standards or by the director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in section 70-392. The reports required in this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The director shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and ensure compliance by the industrial user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. At the discretion of the director, the director may alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. This report shall include the certification statement as required in section 70-392. This report shall be signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 70-341. In the case of significant noncategorical industrial users, where the POTW itself collects all the information required for the report, the noncategorical significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. 
(2)  The director may also impose mass limitations on users using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall also indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. 
(Code 2004,  70-407; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Secs. 70-408-70-409. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Prohibited Discharges and Pretreatment Standards 

Sec. 70-410. - General discharge prohibitions. 
    No person shall contribute nor cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any of the following substances into the sewage works: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion hazard in the POTW (including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21) or be injurious in any other way to the sewage works or to the operation of the sewage works. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer to other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0, or other than that range established by the wastewater discharge permit, or any wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works. In any event, a minimum pH of 5.0 is necessary in order to comply with 40 CFR 403.5. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either alone or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage works or exceed any limitation set forth in the EPA categorical pretreatment standard, or any other applicable federal, state or county standards. 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(9)  Any substance which may cause the sewage works' effluent, or any other product of the sewage works such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(10)  Any substance which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or other discharges, causes pass through as defined in section 70-341. 
(11)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dyes, wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(12)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage works. Wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewage works which exceeds 49 degrees Celsius (120 degrees Fahrenheit) or is lower than 0 degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) is prohibited. 
(13)  Any slugload. 
(14)  Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(15)  Any wastewater which can cause any hazardous situation or creates a public nuisance. 
(16)  Any wastewater containing noncompatibles in excess of the limits contained in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(17)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants except, at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(18)  Any wastewater having a pH of greater than 10.5 except, where the discharge is monitored by continuous on-line pH measuring and recording devices, the following pH may be discharged over a period not exceeding the indicated time duration: 
Duration 
(hours/day) Maximum pH 
(s.u.) 0.0 to 0.25 12.2 0.25+ to 0.50 11.8 0.50+ to 1.0 11.5 1.0+ to 2.0 11.2 2.0+ to 4.0 10.9 = 4.0 10.5  
(Code 2004,  70-410; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-411. - Discharge standards and limits. 
(a)  All nonresidential users who discharge compatible pollutants shall be subject to the requirements itemized below. 
(1)  Background standards. Unless specially authorized via approval of the director and issue of a wastewater discharge permit, no wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the following background levels shall be discharged: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) 5-day BOD 240 Suspended solids 220 Phosphorus 6.4 Fats, oil and grease 51 Ammonia nitrogen 22.9  
(2)  User-specific maximum limits. Upon approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, and if the discharge complies with the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section, wastewater not in excess of user-specific maximum mass limits may be discharged. These limits will be established by the director by an appropriate allocation of the wastewater treatment plant's approved maximum allowable headworks loadings for the following parameters: 
Parameter MAHL 
(lb/day) 5-day BOD 68,000 Suspended solids 51,600 Total phosphorus  1,800  
(3)  General maximum limits. Upon approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, wastewater containing pollutants not in excess of the following maximum concentration limits may be discharged: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) Single Grab Concentration 
(mg/l) Fats, oils and grease 470 830  
(4)  Surcharge threshold standards. Discharges of compatible pollutants shall also be subject to a surcharge in accordance with section 70-361 when exceeding any of the following baseline levels: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) 5-day BOD 340 Suspended solids 355 Phosphorus 9.1 Fats, oil and grease 96  
(b)  All nonresidential users who discharge incompatible pollutants shall be subject to the requirements itemized below. 
(1)  Primary toxic pollutants. 
a.  Background standards. Unless specially authorized via approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, no wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the following background levels shall be discharged: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) MAHL 
(lb/day) Arsenic, total 0.00716 9.99 Cadmium 0.00 2.03 Chromium, total 0.00175 43.9 Copper, total 0.0595 87.6 Lead, total 0.00544 70.0 Mercury, total 0.000121 0.00214 Molybdenum, total 0.002 10.6 Nickel, total 0.003 27.1 Selenium, total 0.0112 8.33 Silver, total 0.0118 11.5 Zinc, total 0.127 187.0 Cyanides, total 0.00282 4.01  
b.  General maximum limits. Upon approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, wastewater not in excess of the following limits may be discharged: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) Single Grab Concentration 
(mg/l) Arsenic, total 0.29 1.3 Cadmium, total 0.094 0.33 Chromium, total 2.1 5.4 Copper, total 2.4 5.3 Lead, total 2.5 4.6 Molybdenum, total 0.51 1.4 Nickel, total 1.3 2.6 Selenium, total 0.33 1.4 Silver, total 0.37 2.7 Zinc, total 5.0 6.0 Cyanides, total 0.18 0.91  
Notes: Based on discharge of any or all of the following phenolic compounds: 2-Chlorophenol; 4-Chlorophenol; 2,4-Dichlorophenol; 2,4-Dimethylphenol; 2,4-Dinitrophenol; 2-Methylphenol; 4-Methylphenol; 2-Nitrophenol; 4-Nitrophenol; and phenol. Discharge of other phenolic compounds is prohibited, except as specifically authorized by the director. If a discharge exceeds this total phenols limit, the affected user may petition the director for an alternative individual phenolic limit in accordance with subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(2)  Secondary toxic pollutants. 
a.  Background standards. Unless specially authorized via approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, no wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the following background levels shall be discharged: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) Acetone(2-Propanone) 0.0758 Bromodichloromethane 0.00159 Butylbenzylphthalate 0.00668 di-n-Butylphthalate 0.00406 Chloroform 0.00623 Dibromochloromethane 0.00199 1,4-Dichlorobenzene 0.00279 bis 2-Ethylhexyl Phthalate 0.0265 4-Methylphenol (p-Cresol) 0.0908 Phenol 0.0158 Toluene 0.000938  
Notes: Where background levels in normal tap water exceed any of the indicated concentrations, the city may grant an exemption to requiring a wastewater discharge permit if it is adequately demonstrated that no other discharge of the corresponding substance occurs from the discharger's facility. 
b.  General maximum limits. Upon approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, wastewater containing pollutants not in excess of the following limits may be discharged: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) Acetone(2-Propanone) 620 Benzene 0.61 Bromodichloromethane 0.71 2-Butanone (Methyl ethyl ketone) 650 di-n-Butylphthalate 0.91 Carbon Tetrachloride 0.13 Chlorobenzene 2.4 Chloroform 0.64 4-Chloro-3-methyl phenol (p-Chloro-m-Cresol) 0.86 Dibromochloromethane 0.75 1,2-Dichlorobenzene 2.1 1,3-Dichlorobenzene 0.31 1,4-Dichlorobenzene 0.40 1,2-Dichloroethane 0.35 1,1-Dichloroethylene 1.9 1,2-Dichloroethylene 4.5 1,2-Dichloropropane 0.34 2,4-Dimethylphenol 4.3 Ethylbenzene 0.98 bis 2-Ethylhexyl phthalate 0.16 Isophorone 30 Methylene chloride 1.1 2-Methylphenol (o-Cresol) 6.5 4-Methylphenol (p-Cresol) 3.1 Naphthalene 2.0 Phenol 32 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane 0.12 Tetrachloroethylene (Perchloroetylene) 0.05 Toluene 3.5 1,1,1-Trichloroethane 2.0 1,1,2-Trichloroethane 0.23 Trichloroethylene 0.54 Vinyl chloride 0.05 Xylenes, total 0.94  
(3)  Tertiary toxic pollutants. 
a.  Background standards. Unless specially authorized via approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, no wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the following background levels shall be discharged: 
Parameter Daily Average 
Concentration 
(mg/l) Benzoic acid 0.0166 Diethylphthalate 0.00873 2-Methylnaphthalene 0.0178  
b.  User-specific maximum limits. Upon approval of the director and issuance of a wastewater discharge permit, and if the discharge complies with the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, wastewater not in excess of user-specific maximum limits may be discharged. These limits will be established by the director via an appropriate mass allocation of the wastewater treatment plant's approved maximum allowable headworks loadings for the following parameters: 
Parameter MAHL 
(lb/day) Benzoic acid 15.9 Carbon disulfide 4020 Chloroethane 167 Diethylphthalate 111 1,1-Dichloroethane 23 Ethyl ether (Diethyl ether) 107 2-Hexanone (Methyl-n-butyl ketone) 5.420 Hexone (Methyl isobutyl ketone; 4-Methyl-2-pentanone) 0.178 2-Methylnaphthalene 244 N-Nitrosodiphenylamine 0.743 Phenanthrene 4.79 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol 2.65  
(4)  Individual phenolic compounds. If a discharge exceeds the total phenols limit of subsection (b)(1) of this section, the affected user may petition the director for an alternative individual phenolic compound limit. Included with this petition shall be a "phenol characterization plan" that shall aim to identify and quantify the specific phenolic compounds present in the discharge. If the director deems the plan approvable and concurs with the results of the subsequent study, if the specific compounds present in the discharge are included in those authorized herein, and if the discharge complies with the requirement of subsection (c) of this section, the total phenols limit may be replaced with one or more of the following alternative user-specific maximum limits that will be established by the director via an appropriate mass allocation of the wastewater treatment plant's approved maximum allowable headworks loadings: 
Parameter MAHL 
(lb/day) 2,4-Dimethylphenol 543 2-Methylphenol (o-Cresol) 248 4-Methylphenol (p-Cresol) 75 Phenol 1440  
(c)  All discharges with user-specific maximum limits established in accordance with subsections (a)(2), (b)(3)b, and (b)(4) of this section will be subject to all of the following additional requirements: 
(1)  The discharge shall be monitored by continuous on-line flow measuring and recording devices, including the capability to calculate actual average daily flow. 
(2)  The discharge shall be monitored via an automatic sampler that is controlled via an input signal from the flow measuring device of subsection (c)(1) of this section, so as to produce a flow-proportioned composite sample. 
(3)  The associated wastewater discharge permit shall include both average daily flow and concentration limits (daily average and single grab) as enforceable conditions. 
(Code 2004,  70-411; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-412. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of any national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits or other federal or state limitations, for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for uses in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article and shall be considered part of this article. Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. Direct dischargers with NPDES permits modified or reissued to provide a variance pursuant to section 301(i)(2) of the Act shall be required to meet compliance dates set in any applicable categorical pretreatment standard. Existing sources which become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the definition of new source as defined in section 70-341. New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. The director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements. 
(Code 2004,  70-412; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-413. - Equivalent mass and concentration limits. 
    When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the City of Wyoming may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The City of Wyoming shall calculate equivalent mass-per-day limitations and equivalent concentration limitations in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)-(4) and 40 CFR 403.6(c)(6)-(7). Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with these sections shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of section 307(d) of the Act and this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards for which the equivalent limitations were derived. Any industrial user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based standard shall notify the City of Wyoming within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the City of Wyoming of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its wastewater discharge permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate. 
(Code 2004,  70-413; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-414. - Net/gross calculation. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 2004,  70-414; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-415. - Discharge modifications. 
    Within six months of the promulgation or revision of any applicable pretreatment standard, all affected users must submit to the City of Wyoming the information required by section 70-392(a)(8) and (a)(9). 
(Code 2004,  70-415; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-416. - Application of state requirements or limitations. 
    State requirements or limitations on discharges shall apply whenever they are more stringent than national categorical pretreatment standards or limitations provided in this article. State and national requirements are not subject to any appeal procedures. 
(Code 2004,  70-416; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-417. - Compliance with pretreatment standards. 
    Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards within the time limitations specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations, state regulations and as required by the City of Wyoming. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to and approved by the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City of Wyoming under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable by the City of Wyoming prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(Code 2004,  70-417; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-418. - User to initiate construction of facilities necessary to comply with discharge limitations. 
    Where pretreatment facilities are necessary to comply with wastewater discharge permit limitations, industrial users shall initiate construction of such facilities within six months and complete construction within 18 months from the date of notice of noncompliance by City of Wyoming. 
(Code 2004,  70-418; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-419. - Increase of process water to dilute excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits or in any other pollutant-specific limitation adopted by the city or state. 
(Code 2004,  70-419; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-420. - Procedures for prevention of accidental and slugload discharges; notification if discharge occurs. 
    When required by the director, a user shall provide protection from slugload discharges or accidental discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. If necessary, the director may require the user to implement procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. Facilities to prevent slugload discharges or accidental discharges of prohibited material shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and expense. Detailed information and plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection, including descriptions of discharge practices and stored chemicals, shall be submitted to the director for review and approval before construction. All users shall complete construction of required facilities within the time period specified by the director. New users shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until approved accidental discharge facilities have been constructed. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of a slugload discharge or an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to notify immediately the director of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. Accidental discharge shall also include any discharge where such discharge has the possibility of entering into any waters of the state. 
(1)  Written notice. Within five working days following a slugload or accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to correct the situation and to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, penalty, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works treatment process, nor any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(2)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of the persons to notify in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall advise all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 2004,  70-420; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-421. - Upset to constitute affirmative defense. 
(a)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (b) of this section are met. 
(b)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the causes of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken or planned to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(d)  In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion, the City of Wyoming's enforcement personnel should review any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of this review constitute final city action subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(e)  The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Code 2004,  70-421; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-422. - Bypass. 
    For the purpose of this section, bypass shall mean the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of the industrial user's treatment facility. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, if possible, at least ten days before the date of the bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the director within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(2)  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage. Severe property damage shall mean substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; 
c.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (2) of this section. 
(Code 2004,  70-422; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Secs. 70-423-70-426. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIQUID WASTE 

Sec. 70-427. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Liquid waste means any liquid, gaseous or waterborne waste or sludge materials resulting from or incidental to any process of industry, manufacturing, mining or agricultural operations or any mixture of these waste materials with water or domestic sewage and domestic sewage. 
    Liquid waste disposal system means any facility primarily designed or operated for the purpose of processing or storing liquid waste. 
    Structure means the area in which the liquid industrial waste or liquid waste is stored on the premises for treatment or processing and shall include holding tanks. 
(Code 2004,  70-427; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-428. - Storage, removal, transfer, unloading, offering for sale, trade or exchange restricted to areas zoned for such dealings. 
    No person shall engage in the storage, removal, transfer, unloading, offering for sale, trade or exchange, or in any manner dealing in liquid wastes in the city except at such locations as are provided for in the zoning provisions of this Code. 
(Code 2004,  70-428; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-429. - Accumulations and deposit. 
    No person shall deposit, cause to be deposited or permit to accumulate any liquid waste or liquid industrial waste upon any public or private premises within the city in such a manner so as to emit noxious or offensive odors or dust or to become unsanitary or injurious to public health. 
(Code 2004,  70-429; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-430. - Storage and treatment. 
    The following provisions shall govern the operation for storage and treatment of all liquid waste on any property, excluding industries generating such liquid wastes which do not store or treat such liquid wastes: 
(1)  Whenever liquid wastes are placed into any area for the purpose of removing liquids or portions of liquids from such waste, such liquid waste shall be placed in structures according to provisions as stated in this section. 
(2)  None of the liquid waste shall be allowed to spill outside of the structures, and, if it is spilled outside, it shall be removed immediately. 
(3)  No liquid waste shall be allowed to discharge on or into the groundwaters or surface waters. 
(4)  Any liquid waste which has spilled onto the apron around the structure shall be washed into the structure or removed from the apron immediately after the spillage. 
(5)  The entire area in which the structures are located shall be enclosed by a chain link fence and a chain link gate which shall be locked so as to prevent entrance by any unauthorized person when the area is unattended. 
(6)  No liquid waste shall be allowed to dry to the extent that the waste would generate dust. 
(7)  All liquid waste placed into any open structure shall be a minimum of six inches below the top of the structure at all times. 
(8)  Reasonable means shall be used to prevent any spillage from any vehicles while they are carrying any liquid waste on any street to and from the location of the liquid waste site. If there is any spillage, the spillage shall be removed immediately. 
(9)  Any person operating a facility handling liquid wastes shall have provisions for accumulating data so as to measure any dust being generated from the property because of the liquid waste. Such equipment shall be capable of monitoring the air on a 24-hour basis and shall be approved by the city, which approval shall be based upon the ability of the equipment to perform as required. Upon request, such information shall be furnished to the city. 
(10)  Every person operating a liquid waste disposal system shall be required to obtain a license and pay the fee as set by resolution of the city council from time to time and on file in city hall. 
(11)  All liquid wastes placed into the city sewer system shall meet all requirements of this article pertaining thereto. 
(12)  There shall be no storage of any liquid waste except for the purpose of treatment. All liquid wastes shall be treated within a reasonable time after being brought to the site. 
(Code 2004,  70-430; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-431. - Transporting vehicle standards. 
    All vehicles used for transporting liquid waste shall be completely sealed and shall be in good repair and free from any leaks so as to prevent spillage or discharge any place. All such vehicles shall be clean and odor free prior to any movement on any city streets. 
(Code 2004,  70-431; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-432. - State approval required for deposit or storage on city lands. 
    When required, no person shall engage in the pickup or disposal of liquid waste material to deposit, discharge, store or stockpile such waste material on any lands in the city unless such land has been approved as a site for the disposal of such liquid waste by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 2004,  70-432; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-433. - Use of storm drains, inlets, streets or lands. 
    No person shall deposit or discharge any liquid waste material into any public or private storm drains, inlets, streets or lands. 
(Code 2004,  70-433; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-434. - Storage or treatment facilities require pollution prevention plan. 
    Any person desiring to operate a new facility for the storing or treating of liquid waste shall submit a pollution prevention plan to the director for approval at the time application is made for a building permit for the construction of any structures to be used primarily for the treatment, storage, transfer or handling of industrial wastes. The following shall be included: 
(1)  Chemical composition of the liquid wastes to be processed or treated, including estimated volumes or quantities and identification of all toxic elements. 
(2)  Chemical composition of the expected resultant effluent, subsequent to treatment, to be discharged to the city sewer, including estimated volumes per day and quantities of heavy metals. 
(3)  Complete technological description of the treatment process, including complete plans and specifications of all equipment and structures to be used in the process or at the site. 
(4)  Complete description of method of handling wastes, including transporting, loading and unloading, as well as a description of equipment and vehicles used for handling wastes. 
(5)  Location of approved disposal sites for any liquid wastes resulting from the company's processing that cannot be discharged into a city sewer. 
(6)  Proof of licenses and permits that may be required from other governmental agencies for the hauling and disposal of liquid wastes. 
(7)  List of the names and addresses of industries from which liquid wastes will be collected and transported to the facility for treatment, including estimated volumes of liquid waste from each industry and a description of such wastes. 
(8)  Methods and equipment that will be used to monitor effectively and measure on a regular basis the quality of the air, groundwater and surface waters, soils and discharge to the city sewer system. Sampling and testing procedures shall be included in the plan as well as the frequency of such sampling and testing. 
(Code 2004,  70-434; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Sec. 70-435. - Inspection of liquid waste businesses. 
    The director shall have the right at all reasonable times to make inspections of any business subject to the provisions of this division governing liquid wastes. 
(Code 2004,  70-435; Ord. No. 5-11,  1, 9-2-2011) 
Secs. 70-436-70-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT-WYOMING SERVICE DISTRICT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-451. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act (Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act) means PL 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended on February 4, 1987, as amended. 
    Alternative discharge limit means limits set by the city in lieu of the promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for integrated facilities in accordance with the combined wastestream formula as established by the EPA. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, a responsible corporate officer, such as: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president in charge of principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making processes for the corporation. 
b.  A manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 in second quarter 1980 dollars. 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, if the: 
a.  Authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition; 
b.  Authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  Written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures, without addition of nitrification inhibitors, and expressed in terms of milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the drainage from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building official means the director of public works, plumbing inspector, city engineer or another designated agent of the city. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Cesspool means an underground pit into which raw sewage or other untreated liquid waste is discharged and from which the liquid seeps into surrounding soil or is otherwise removed. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and, thus, does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Such term is also referred to as "oxygen consumed (OC)" and "dichromate oxygen consumed (DOC)," respectively. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact and temperature. 
    City means the City of Wyoming, the city council of the City of Wyoming or designated officials of the City of Wyoming. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Combined wastestream means the wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process. Where required by federal or state law, and only to the extent required by federal or state law, the combined wastestream formula provided in 40 CFR 403 will apply to the limits applicable to a combined wastestream. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant, such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit, if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorous and phosphorous compounds, nitrogen compounds and fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Composite sample means a series of representative samples taken over a specific time period and combined into one sample. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which only heat is added. 
    Director means the director of utilities or the authorized deputy, agent or representative of the city. 
    Domestic users means all users of the sewage works where the discharge into the system is primarily household and human wastes. 
    Dosing chamber means a watertight tank or receptacle used for the purpose of retaining the overflow of effluent from septic tanks, pending its automatic discharge to a selected point. 
    Dosing siphon means a mechanical device which will automatically cause a liquid entering a receptacle to be siphoned away until a second predetermined lower level has been reached, at which time the flow from the receptacle ceases until the high water level has again been attained. 
    Dry well means a seepage pit. 
    Dwelling unit has the same definition as found in section 60.1 of the Wyoming City Code. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, administrator or other duly authorized official. 
    Footing drain means a pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits groundwater. 
    Garbage means liquid and solid wastes from the storage, preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the growing, handling, storage or sale of produce or other edible products. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis, with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
    Grease trap means a tank of a size and material and designed so as to be capable of removing grease and oily wastes from the sewage. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks or vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not compatible with biological treatment or removal of which is not designed into the treatment process. 
    Industrial waste means the wastewater discharge from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharge from any structure with these characteristics. 
    Integrated facilities means where wastestreams are combined prior to treatment. 
    Interference means any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from another source, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW and any of its processes or operations, or its sludge use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal. 
    Laboratory determination means the measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the methods contained, at the time of any such measurement, test or analysis, in the latest edition of the Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water, a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation or in accordance with any other method prescribed or approved by the EPA or department of natural resources. 
    National Categorical Pretreatment Standard means any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342), as amended. 
    National Prohibitive Discharge Standard and prohibitive discharge standard mean any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 403.5, as amended. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source includes the following: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with such section, provided that the: 
a.  Building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  Building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  Production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether such production or processes are substantially independent, factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, will be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification, rather than a new source, if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source has commenced, if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavating or removing existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities, administration and other efforts required to operate and maintain the sewage works, including the cost of replacement. 
    Order of determination means a written order of the city establishing the allowable wastewater discharge characteristics or requirements for any given user. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from another source, causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Penalty means a charge for discharge of noncompatible substances, including pH, in violation of the wastewater discharge permit. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any of the various chemicals, substances and refuse materials, such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes which impair the purity of the water or soil. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment, including recycling and reclamation, of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Premises means a lot, parcel or plot of land, including the buildings or structures thereon, or any part thereof. 
    Pretreatment and treatment mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, the alteration of the nature of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d), as amended. 
    Pretreatment facilities means devices or structures for use in treating industrial waste prior to entry into the public sewers. 
    Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement for treating of a waste prior to discharge to the sewers. 
    Pretreatment standards means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, alternative discharge limits or other federal, state or local standards, whichever are applicable. 
    Private sewage works means any sewage works, or part thereof, not connected to a public sewer and shall include, but not be limited to, septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits. 
    Properly ground garbage means garbage or vegetable wastes that has been ground to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-eighth inch in any dimension. The use of garbage grinder installations are restricted to locations where food is prepared for consumption on the premises. Installation of a garbage grinder with a three-fourths horsepower motor or greater shall be subject to approval by the director. 
    Property from which sanitary sewage emanates means any parcel of land, as described in the last recorded deed of conveyance, on which is located a structure in which water is used or is available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act, which is owned, in this case, by the city. Such term includes any devices and systems used in storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. Such term also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances, if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. 
    Public nuisance means anything which is injurious to health, is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with human comfort or enjoyment of life or property, whether affecting individual interests per se or affecting, at the same time, an entire community or neighborhood of any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance, interference or damage may not be inflicted equally upon the persons therein. 
    Public sewer means a city sewer, or any part thereof. 
    Quality control means a formal program designed to monitor the reliability, accuracy and precision of reported analytical results. 
    Replacement means the replacement, in whole or in part, of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer designed to carry sewage only. 
    Seepage pit means an underground enclosure constructed of concrete blocks, bricks or similar material loosely laid with open joints so as to allow the septic tank overflow or effluent to be absorbed directly into the surrounding soil. 
    Septic tank means a receptacle receiving sewage and having an inlet and outlet designed to permit the separation of solids in suspension from such wastes and to permit such retained solids to undergo decomposition therein. 
    Sewage and wastewater mean the liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into, or permitted to enter, the sewage works. 
    Sewage works means the sanitary sewage collection system, or any part thereof, and the wastewater treatment facility. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer connection permit means, as set forth in section 70-511, a written permit issued by the city prior to using, connecting, altering or opening any public sewer, or appurtenance thereof. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR ch. I, subch. N; 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance means an industrial user whose violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, meaning those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit (or grab sample limit) or average limit (or composite limit) for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, meaning those in which 33 percent or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit (or grab sample limit) or the average limit (or composite limit), multiplied by the applicable TRC value (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the wastewater discharge permit or other enforcement orders for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load means any pollutant, including compatible pollutants, released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the sewage works. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended. 
    State means the State of Michigan. 
    Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer designed to carry stormwater, surface water and drainage only. 
    Subsurface disposal field means a system for the distribution of septic tank overflow or effluent below the ground surface through a line or series of branch lines of drain tile laid with open joints to allow the overflow or effluent to be absorbed by the surrounding soil throughout the entire field. 
    Superintendent means the Wyoming wastewater treatment plant superintendent or his duly authorized representative. 
    Surcharge means a charge to cover the cost of treating sewage which exceeds limits as established in this article. A surcharge is appropriate to cover costs of treating extra strength compatible waste which are authorized by order of determination. A surcharge is not acceptable as a sole remedy for violations of limits. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toilet device means a privy, outhouse, septic tank, septic toilet, chemical closet or other device designed for the disposal of human excreta. 
    Total toxic organics (TTO) means the summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for toxic organics listed in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or as defined by the director. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant, or combination of pollutants, which are, or can potentially be, harmful to public health, treatment or environment, including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts, as amended. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of facts beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. Such term does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewage works. 
    User charge means a charge levied to users of a treatment works for the cost of sewage works, including operation, maintenance and capital charges. 
    User class means the kind of user connected to sanitary sewers, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Commercial user means users divided into two categories, namely commercial domestic and commercial industrial. The term "commercial industrial" means any commercial user where there is, or can be, any discharge into the sewage system, other than normal domestic waste, because of the particular type of operation, including, but not limited to, car washes, bakeries and restaurants. All other commercial users shall be referred to as "commercial domestic." 
(2)  Governmental means any federal, state or local governmental unit or agency. 
(3)  Industrial means a user discharging industrial waste. 
(4)  Institutional means any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious or educational function which, based on a determination by the director, discharges primarily domestic waste. 
(5)  Residential means a user of a dwelling unit discharging domestic waste. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means, as set forth in section 70-552, a written permit issued by the director to nondomestic users of the POTW. 
(Code 2004,  70-451; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.701) 
Sec. 70-452. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
Ag Silver As Arsenic Be Beryllium BOD Biochemical oxygen demand Cd Cadmium CFR Code of Federal Regulations CN Cyanide COD Chemical oxygen demand Cr Chromium Cu Copper CWA Clean Water Act EPA Environmental Protection Agency gpd Gallons per day Hg Mercury L Liter MDEQ Michigan Department of Environmental Quality mg Milligrams MG Million gallons mg/l Milligrams per liter Ni Nickel NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System O&M Operation and maintenance Pb Lead POTW Publicly owned treatment works ppb Parts per billion ppm Parts per million SIC Standard Industrial Classification SS Suspended solids TTO Total toxic organics g Micrograms USC United States Code Zn Zinc  
(Code 2004,  70-452; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.702) 
Sec. 70-453. - Conflicts. 
    Should any existing agreement, order or permit be in conflict with this article, it shall be revised so as to comply with this article. A conflict with this article would be in violation of 40 CFR 35.929 which requires a user charge system under which each user bears a portion or share of wastewater treatment plant operation and maintenance costs. 
(Code 2004,  70-453; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.744) 
Sec. 70-454. - Meters. 
    All users shall have meters on all water sources that ultimately discharge into the sewage works or shall meter the liquid wastes at the point of discharge into the sewage works. All meters shall be approved by the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-454; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.712) 
Sec. 70-455. - Delinquent accounts. 
    Should any monies owed to the city for the use of the public sewer system be unpaid, the city may collect such amounts by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Litigation. 
(2)  Shutting off and discontinuing sewer or water services, or both, to the premises. 
(3)  Certifying such charge to the city assessor, who shall assess the charge against the lot or parcel of land upon which the premises served is situated. Such assessment shall then be collected or returned in the same manner as real property taxes. 
(Code 2004,  70-455; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.736) 
Secs. 70-456-70-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 70-481. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user and that such information need not be disclosed in accordance with any applicable Freedom of Information Act or any other applicable law. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report which might disclose trade secrets, such report shall be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law, except that the report shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit or any pretreatment programs, and it shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. If any applicable state or federal law, rule or regulation conflicts with any provision in this Code by requiring a greater degree of disclosure, that state or federal law, rule or regulation shall govern. 
(Code 2004,  70-481; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.707) 
Sec. 70-482. - Inspections and sampling; refusal to permit entry; fees. 
(a)  The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the requirements of this article are being met. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city's representatives access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination, record copying or any other task necessary in the performance of their duties. Nondomestic users shall be subject to inspection fees as stipulated in section 80.23 of the Wyoming City Code. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. Refusal to allow duly authorized representatives entry shall be considered a violation of this article and may be considered grounds for discontinuing of sewer or water services, or both. 
(c)  Whenever the building official or director deems it necessary to enter upon any property at a reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of enforcement in accordance with the provisions of this article, and is refused such entry, the building official or director who is refused such entry may make an affidavit in writing, under oath, to the district court, stating the facts of the case so far as it may be known to the complainant. The court may issue a search warrant, or inspection or other order allowing the director, building official or his representative to enter upon such property to the extent and time necessary to enforce and carry out the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Industrial users may be charged a sampling and analytical fee in cases where the city must utilize the analytical capabilities of a private laboratory in order to determine compliance with pretreatment standards. The fee shall be equal to the actual costs incurred by the city, plus an additional administrative fee. 
(Code 2004,  70-482; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.713-25.715) 
Sec. 70-483. - Self-monitoring. 
    The city may require industrial users to conduct self-monitoring. The city shall determine the frequency of self-monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The city may require the industrial user to provide a split of self-monitoring samples. The city shall require appropriate reporting from industrial users required to conduct self-monitoring. 
(Code 2004,  70-483; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.716) 
Sec. 70-484. - Sampling and analysis procedures and methods. 
    All sampling and analysis conducted shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and methods detailed in the most current version of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American Public Health Association, the Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, United States Environmental Protection Agency, or any other method as may be approved by the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-484; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.717) 
Sec. 70-485. - Laboratory quality control. 
(a)  Each laboratory utilized by industries conducting self-monitoring as required by the city shall be approved by the city and required to operate a formal quality control program as outlined in the most current version of the Handbook for Analytical Quality Control in Water and Wastewater Laboratories, published by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. 
(b)  Laboratories conducting analyses for industrial users must submit a copy of the formal quality control documentation prior to approval by the city. Approval of laboratories shall be subject to periodic review. The city shall have the right to issue blind standards to be analyzed by other laboratories being utilized for self-monitoring. In the case of resolving disputes between analytical data generated by the city and another laboratory, any data without documented supporting quality control data will be rejected. 
(Code 2004,  70-485; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.718) 
Sec. 70-486. - Industrial user notification requirements. 
    All industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of any accidental spills, unusual discharges or slug loads. All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) or section 70-554(b). If self-monitoring performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if the city performs sampling at the industrial user: 
(1)  At a frequency of at least once per month. 
(2)  Between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of the sampling. 
(Code 2004,  70-486; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.719) 
Sec. 70-487. - Falsifying information, monitoring devices and methods. 
    No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, nor shall any person falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-487; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.741) 
Sec. 70-488. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the city finds that any user has violated, or is violating, any provision of this article, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction of all violations shall be submitted by the user to the city for approval. A shorter notice commensurate with the danger to the health and welfare of persons or environment may be given. Failure to respond in 30 days, or shorter notice, or to develop a satisfactory plan shall constitute a violation of this article and the city shall take such action as deemed necessary, including suspension of water or sewer service, or both. 
(Code 2004,  70-488; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.738) 
Sec. 70-489. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  Any user subject to an order of determination or an enforcement action under the provisions of this article may request a hearing before the director within ten days of receipt of notification of such order or action. A hearing is to be held by the director concerning the order or violation, the reasons for the order or action, any proposed enforcement actions and directing the user to show cause why the proposed order or enforcement action should not be implemented. 
(b)  The director may conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any officer or employee to: 
(1)  Issue, in the name of the director, notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
(c)  At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken may be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of charges for copying. 
(d)  After the director has reviewed the evidence, an order may be issued to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless acceptable treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities and that such devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(e)  The director may also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the city for the additional cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment works due to any violations of this article. 
(f)  Any order or directive by the director may be appealed to a board of referees, consisting of two registered professional engineers, one of whom shall be selected by the city and one by the user. Neither of such referees shall be in the employ of the party making the selection. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the director within ten days of any order or directive resulting from the hearing before the director. Selection of the referees shall be made within ten days of the filing of the appeal. 
(g)  Within ten days after receiving notice of the selection of the referees, the director shall file with the referees a copy of his determination and the results of his investigation supporting such determination. Within ten days thereafter, the appellant shall file its reply, together with supporting documentation. The referees may thereafter require additional information and may, if they choose, hold a hearing at which both sides may present evidence and arguments. The referees shall render a written opinion within ten days after the last documents are filed, and such opinion shall be binding upon all parties. If the referees cannot agree, they shall select a third referee having the same qualifications, and a decision of the majority shall be binding. If the referees cannot agree to a third referee, the city commission shall select the third referee. The review by the referees shall be based on all evidence and information presented. 
(1)  The referees shall be entitled to reasonable compensation and expenses with the costs to be borne equally by the city and the user. 
(2)  Any party may seek judicial review of a referee's decision in circuit court. The circuit court shall uphold the decision if it is based on competent, material and substantial evidence. 
(Code 2004,  70-489; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.739) 
Sec. 70-490. - Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
    As required by federal regulation, 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii), the city shall at least annually, during the month of September, publish in the Grand Rapids Press a list of industrial users which, during the previous 12 months of the fiscal year (July-June), were in significant noncompliance of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. 
(Code 2004,  70-490; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.743) 
Sec. 70-491. - Affirmative defenses. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions of this article and the specific prohibitions in section 70-514(2), (4), (7), (8), (10) and (12), where the user can demonstrate that: 
(1)  It did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from another source, would cause pass through or interference; and 
(2)  Either: 
a.  Local limit designed to prevent pass through or interference was developed for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference and the user was in compliance with each such local limit immediately before and during the pass through or interference; or 
b.  Local limit was not applicable and immediately before and during the pass through or interference the user's discharge did not substantially change in volume or constituents from the user's previous discharges when the POTW was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of interference, all applicable requirements for sludge use or disposal. 
(Code 2004,  70-491; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.742) 
Sec. 70-492. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate relief. 
(Code 2004,  70-492; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.740) 
Sec. 70-493. - Surcharges and penalties. 
(a)  Surcharges and penalties shall be paid by the user as provided in subsections (b) and (d) of this section. 
(b)  All nondomestic users of the city sewage works shall pay a surcharge for effluent containing the compatible pollutants in excess of baseline concentrations specified in section 70-524. For suspended solids, BOD, COD, phosphorus, grease and oil, and other specific compatible pollutants, the city may accept payment in lieu of the user meeting baseline concentration limits, subject to section 70-524. The city may use the test results from a COD analysis as an alternative means of surcharging for BOD. Surcharges for compatible pollutants shall be calculated as follows: 
Pollutant Unit Surcharge 
:(per pound) Pollutant in 
Discharge 
 (ppm) Baseline 
Concentration 
Limit 
-(ppm) Conversion 
Factor 
 (pounds/gallon) Flow in 
MG Suspended solids :Amount  (SS -400)  8.34 MG BOD :Amount  (BOD -300)  8.34 MG Phosphorus :Amount  (P -20)  8.34 MG Oil and grease :Amount  (O & G -75)  8.34 MG COD :Amount  (COD -700)  8.34 MG  
(c)  The city shall, quarterly, collect three composite or grab samples and base the surcharge cost upon such samples. If the user does not agree with the sampling or testing method of the city, the city may agree to an independent company, approved by the city, taking such samples, at the user's expense, under conditions and standards as determined by the city. The surcharge shall be calculated and billed quarterly by the city. 
(d)  Penalties shall be assessed for violation of the wastewater discharge permit. Penalties may be based on either a grab or composite, or in the case of pH, on the basis of results from a pH recorder. Penalties will be assessed for any sample exceeding limits listed in section 70-515. Unless otherwise specified, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, or permits issued under this article, shall be penalized in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 or the maximum penalty allowed under state law. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Payment of penalties does not constitute compliance with the permit. Additional penalties, continued, habitual or gross violations or those caused by negligence or failure to install and operate proper pretreatment units, will be enforced under this section and sections 70-517 and 70-518. 
(Code 2004,  70-493; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.734, 25.735) 
Secs. 70-494-70-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGES 

Sec. 70-511. - Conditions. 
    The city may: 
(1)  Establish surcharges for the wastewater to be discharged into the sewage works; 
(2)  Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Establish compliance schedules; 
(7)  Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto and copying thereof; 
(9)  Require notification to the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Require notification of slug discharges; 
(11)  Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-511; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.710) 
Sec. 70-512. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city may require an industrial user to provide, maintain and operate monitoring facilities at the industrial user's expense. Such facilities shall include a source of power, a sampling manhole, an approved sampler and flow monitoring devices as required by the director to allow for inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and internal drainage systems. Such facilities shall be kept free of snow, parked vehicles or other obstructions. The monitoring facilities shall be situated on the user's premises in an area accessible to a vehicle, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed on a public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to, and approved by, the city and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city of the requirement of such facilities unless such completion date is extended by the director, at his discretion. 
(b)  Flow measurement devices on building sewers shall be checked and necessary repairs made on an annual basis. Such maintenance and checks shall be performed by the equipment manufacturer or an authorized designee, who shall certify in writing to the city as to the accuracy of the equipment. 
(Code 2004,  70-512; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.711) 
Sec. 70-513. - Wastewater. 
    No person shall discharge any wastewater into the waters of the state within the city or to the sewage works, except as authorized by the director of public works, and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  70-513; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.708) 
Sec. 70-514. - General prohibitions. 
    No person shall contribute, nor cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any of the following substances into the sewage works: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21, or be injurious in any other way to the sewage works or the operation of the sewage works. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a minimum pH of five, or other than that range established by wastewater discharge permit, or any wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works; however, a minimum pH of five is necessary in order to comply with 40 CFR 403.5. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either alone or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage works or exceed any limitation set forth in the EPA categorical pretreatment standard, or any other applicable federal, state or county standard. 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(9)  Any substance which may cause the sewage works' effluent or any other product of the sewage works, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or interfere with the reclamation process. 
(10)  Any substance which, alone or in conjunction with another discharge, causes pass through as defined in section 70-451. 
(11)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dyes, wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(12)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage works. Wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewage works which exceeds 49 degrees Celsius (120 degrees Fahrenheit) or is lower than zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) is prohibited. 
(13)  Any slug load. 
(14)  Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(15)  Any wastewater which can cause any hazardous situation or create a public nuisance. 
(16)  Any wastewater containing noncompatibles in excess of those contained in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(17)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(Code 2004,  70-514; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.721) 
Sec. 70-515. - Limit standards. 
    The following shall be the discharge limit standards: 
Material Composite Limit 
(mg/l) Grab Limit 
(mg/l) Arsenic 1.8 2.7 Beryllium 0.005 0.0075 Cadmium 0.7 1.0 Chromium 2.5 3.7 Copper 2.0 3.0 Cyanide 0.8 1.2 Lead 1.8 2.7 Mercury 0.0005 0.0005 Nickel 1.5 2.2 pH 5.0-10.5 Silver 0.72 1.00 Zinc 6.00 9.00 Total phenols 0.10 0.15 Chlorine demand 30 at 30 minutes contact time Temperature 0-49 degrees Celsius  
  
Material Baseline Concentration BOD 5 300 COD 700 Oil and grease 75 Phosphorus 20 Suspended solids 400  
(Code 2004,  70-515; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.722) 
Sec. 70-516. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of any national categorical pretreatment standard, alternative discharge limit or other federal or state limitation for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for uses in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article and shall be considered part of this article. Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR ch. I, subch. N. Direct dischargers with NPDES permits modified or reissued to provide a variance pursuant to section 301(i)(2) of the act shall be required to meet compliance dates set in any applicable categorical pretreatment standard. Existing sources which become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing industrial users, except where such sources meet the definition of the term "new source," as defined in section 70-451. New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. The director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements. 
(Code 2004,  70-516; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.723) 
Sec. 70-517. - Equivalent mass and concentration limits. 
    When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the city may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The city shall calculate equivalent mass per day limitations and equivalent concentration limitations in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)-(4) and 40 CFR 403.6(c)(6)-(7). Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with such sections shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of section 307(d) of the act and this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. Any industrial user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based standard shall notify the city within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the city of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its wastewater discharge permit that were based on the original estimate of the longterm average production rate. 
(Code 2004,  70-517; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.724) 
Sec. 70-518. - Categorical pretreatment standard adjustments. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 2004,  70-518; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.725) 
Sec. 70-519. - Modifications. 
    Within six months of the promulgation or revision of any applicable pretreatment standard, all affected users must submit to the city the information required by section 70-554(a)(8) and (9). 
(Code 2004,  70-519; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.726) 
Sec. 70-520. - State requirements and limitations. 
    State requirements or limitations on discharges shall apply whenever such requirements or limitations are more stringent than National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or limitations provided in this article. State and national requirements are not subject to any appeal procedures. 
(Code 2004,  70-520; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.727) 
Sec. 70-521. - Liquids. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any type of liquid into any sanitary sewer unless specifically permitted by the director of public works. 
(Code 2004,  70-521; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.709) 
Sec. 70-522. - Pretreatment required. 
    Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards within the time limitations specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and state regulations, and as required by the city. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to, and approved by, the city before construction of the facilities. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility, as necessary, to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be reported to, and be acceptable to, the city prior to initiation of the changes by the users. 
(Code 2004,  70-522; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.728) 
Sec. 70-523. - Construction of pretreatment facilities. 
    Where pretreatment facilities are necessary to comply with wastewater discharge permit limitations, industrial users shall initiate construction of such facilities within six months and complete construction within 18 months from the date of notice of noncompliance from city. 
(Code 2004,  70-523; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.729) 
Sec. 70-524. - Pretreatment compliance reporting. 
(a)  Compliance date reports. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new user, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage works, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director information requested in section 70-554(a)(4) and (7). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6, such report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, such report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. The report shall include the certification statement as required in section 70-554(a)(10). The statement shall be signed by an authorized representative as outlined in the definition of the term "authorized representative of industrial user," as set forth in section 70-451. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user discharging into the sewage works shall, semiannually, submit to the director, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standards or by the director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, the report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow reported in section 70-554(a)(7). The reports required in this subsection shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The city shall require that the frequency of monitoring be as is necessary to assess and ensure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in this subsection monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, the results of the monitoring shall be included in the report. The director, at his discretion, may alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted. The report shall include the certification statement as required in section 70-554(a)(10). The statement shall be signed by an authorized representative as outlined in the definition of the term "authorized representative of industrial user," as set forth in section 70-451. In the case of significant noncategorical industrial users, where the POTW itself collects all the information required for the report, the noncategorical significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. 
(2)  The director may also impose mass limitations on users using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall also indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. 
(Code 2004,  70-524; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.720) 
Sec. 70-525. - Excessive and diluted discharges. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, alternative discharge limits or in any other pollutant-specific limitation adopted by the city or state. 
(Code 2004,  70-525; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.731) 
Sec. 70-526. - Accidental and slug load discharges. 
(a)  Protection. When required by the city, a user shall provide protection from slug load discharges or accidental discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. If necessary, the city may require the user to implement procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency responses. Facilities to prevent slug load discharges or accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and expense. Detailed information and plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide such protection, including descriptions of discharge practices and stored chemicals, shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before construction. All users shall complete construction of required facilities within the time period specified by the director. New users shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until approved accidental discharge facilities have been constructed. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of a slug load discharge or accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the director of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Accidental discharges shall also include any discharge where such discharge has the possibility of entering any waters of the state. 
(b)  Written notice. Within five working days following a slug load or accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to correct the situation and to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, penalty, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works treatment process, nor any other damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees or persons whom to notify in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall advise all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur, of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 2004,  70-526; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.731) 
Sec. 70-527. - Upsets. 
(a)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (b) of this section are met. 
(b)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner, and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if the information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; 
c.  Steps being taken, or planned to be taken, to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(d)  In the usual exercise of persecutory discretion, the city's enforcement personnel should review any claim that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of the review constitute final city action, and are subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(e)  The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Code 2004,  70-527; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.372) 
Sec. 70-528. - Bypasses. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of the industrial user's treatment facility. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. Such bypasses are not subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city, if possible, at least ten days before the date of the bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the city within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, including the exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and the steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(c)  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Such term does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production; 
(2)  There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; 
(3)  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 2004,  70-528; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.733) 
Sec. 70-529. - Harmful contributions. 
    The city manager may suspend sewer and water service when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, cause interference to the sewage works or cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a possible suspension of water or wastewater treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to voluntarily comply with any discharge permit, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate suspension of sewer and water service, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewage works or endangerment of any individual. The city manager shall reinstate the sewer and water service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence of the harmful contribution. 
(Code 2004,  70-529; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.737) 
Secs. 70-530-70-550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 

Sec. 70-551. - Industrial connection permit applications. 
    All permit applications for industrial connections shall contain information as outlined in section 70-554. The information submitted shall be approved by the director prior to issuance of a permit. 
(Code 2004,  70-551; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.703) 
Sec. 70-552. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
    The director shall, by written permit, establish the maximum relative strength of sewage and industrial waste to be discharged into the public sewer by nondomestic users. Prior to the initial issuance of a permit, or 90 days prior to the expiration of an existing permit, nondomestic users shall submit the information outlined in section 70-554. Wastewater discharge permit fees shall be paid in the amount specified in section 80.23 of the Wyoming City Code. Permits shall contain, at a minimum, the following conditions: 
(1)  Statement of duration, in no case more than five years; 
(2)  Statement of nontransferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator; 
(3)  Effluent limits, based upon applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type, based upon general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(5)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule; 
(6)  Statement to enable authorized representatives of the POTW, the state and the EPA to enter and inspect the premises of nondomestic users. 
(Code 2004,  70-552; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.704) 
Sec. 70-553. - Review and adjustment. 
    Any permit issued by the director may be periodically reviewed and adjusted. 
(Code 2004,  70-553; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.705) 
Sec. 70-554. - Wastewater contribution information. 
(a)  Required submissions. All nondomestic users proposing to connect or contribute to the sewage works shall submit information on their processes and wastewater to the city before connecting or contributing to the sewage works. All existing industrial users connected or contributing to the sewage works shall submit such information upon the request of the director. At least 90 days prior to the commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information required in this subsection. New sources shall also be required to include in such report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information required in subsections (a)(4) and (7) of this section. The information submitted shall be sufficient for the city to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the sewage works and the need for pretreatment. Any statements or information submitted in connection with this subsection shall be signed by an "authorized representative of the industrial user," as such term is defined in section 70-451. The user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Names of the operator and owners, and the facility name, address, e-mail address and location; 
(2)  A list of any environmental control permits held by, or for, the facility; 
(3)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(4)  Measurement of pollutants. For industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, or mass where required by standard or control authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration, or mass where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. 
a.  A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques, where feasible. The city may waive flow proportional sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples must be obtained through time proportional composite sampling techniques or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
b.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
c.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula. 
d.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the director determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties approved by the director. 
e.  If the report is a baseline report, the city may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data as long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(5)  Average rate of production; 
(6)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(7)  Average daily and maximum wastewater flow rates from all regulated process streams and other wastestreams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of such flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations; 
(8)  Industries identified as significant industries or subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or alternative discharge limits, or those required by the city must submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. For industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, a schematic process diagram identifying the location of points of discharge from all regulated processes, as well as the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated point of discharge, shall also be submitted; 
(9)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials or pollutants which are, or could be, discharged; 
(10)  A certification statement reviewed and signed by an authorized representative, indicating whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(11)  If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. 
b.  No such increment shall exceed a period of nine months. 
c.  No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such increments. 
(12)  Type and amount of raw materials; 
(13)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation of the plant and the proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(14)  Location of the sampling manhole; 
(15)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage works. 
(b)  Hazardous waste information. 
(1)  Any industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information, to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 
a.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
b.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during the calendar month; and 
c.  An estimation of the mass of the constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
Industrial users shall provide such notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste commences. Any notification under this subsection (b)(1) need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. The notification requirement in this subsection (b)(1) does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements in this article. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharged no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). The discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 40 CFR 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous wastes or listing any additional substances as hazardous wastes, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substances within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this subsection, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Code 2004,  70-554; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.706) 
Secs. 70-555-70-559. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - CONSUMERS ENERGY ELECTRIC FRANCHISE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 70-560. - Term grant. 
    The City of Kentwood grants the right, power and authority to Consumers Energy Company, a Michigan corporation (the "grantee"), to construct, maintain and commercially use electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances for the purpose of transmitting, transforming and distributing electricity on, under, along and across the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and to do a local electric business in the City of Kentwood for a period of five years. 
(Code 2004,  70-560; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-561. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority granted by the city, the grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by this ordinance and shall further reimburse the city for actual expenses incurred by it for costs of publication payable within 30 days of the adoption of this ordinance by the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-561; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-562. - Conditions. 
(a)  Construction: No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway, or other public place used by the grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair (the "work") and must be restored to the same good order and condition as when such work was commenced. All towers, masts, poles and other supports must be set and all wires must be suspended or buried in a careful and proper manner so as not to injure persons or property. The grantee has the right to trim trees that are located within the public right-of-way, if necessary in the conducting of such business, subject, however, to the supervision of the city's department of public works. 
(b)  Condition of highways, streets and alleys: Grantee's electrical system and associated appurtenances must be neat and sightly and must not unnecessarily interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way. Grantee's electrical system must be suspended or buried so as not to endanger or injure persons or property in the public rights-of-way. All work performed by grantee must be done so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of public rights-of-way, and when completed, the public rights-of-way must be left in as good condition as when work was commenced. 
(c)  Notice: Grantee must give 48 hours written notice to the city before undertaking any work in the city involving public rights-of-way. The notice must state the intended duration of any right-of-way obstruction, which obstruction must not continue for more than four hours beyond the stated time unless an extension of time is granted by the city. 
(d)  Emergency: The grantee may immediately commencing construction or repair work resulting from a storm or other act of God or when deemed necessary to prevent danger to life or property, and in such case, the grantee must notify the city of the construction or repair work as soon as reasonably practical. 
(Code 2004,  70-562; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-563. - Grantee liability, indemnification and hold harmless. 
    Grantee must at all times keep and save the city and its officials, officers, employees and agents free and harmless from all claims for damages, costs and expense arising from or related to grantee's negligent or other legally actionable errors or omissions in the exercise of rights under this [article]. In case any action asserting a claim against the city on account of the permission herein given is commenced, grantee must defend the action and save the city and its officials, officers, employees and agents free and harmless from all costs, expenses, losses and damages of or awarded or incurred in the action. Grantee must reimburse the city for any costs incurred in responding to any emergency involving grantee's electric transmission or distribution facilities. Nothing in this section authorizes city to make or attempt to make alterations or repairs to grantee's electric transmission or distribution facilities, structures, and equipment. The city will promptly provide written notice to grantee of claims or actions believed to be the responsibility of grantee under this section. 
(Code 2004,  70-563; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-564. - Extensions. 
    The grantee may construct and extend its electric distribution system within the city, and may furnish electric service to applicants residing in the city in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Code 2004,  70-564; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-565. - Franchise not exclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority granted by this [article] are not exclusive. 
(Code 2004,  70-565; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-566. - Rates. 
    The grantee is entitled to charge the inhabitants of the city for electricity furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate electric rates and rules regulating such service in the city, are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. These rates and rules are subject to review and change at any time upon petition being made by either the city, acting by its city commission, or by the grantee. 
(Code 2004,  70-566; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-567. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this [article] is subject to revocation by either the city or grantee, upon the provision of 60 days written notice to the other. 
(Code 2004,  70-567; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-568. - Michigan Public Service Commission Jurisdiction. 
    The grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to electric service in the city. 
(Code 2004,  70-568; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-569. - Repeal of previous agreements. 
    This [article], when accepted and published in accordance with its terms, repeals and supersedes the provisions of a power service agreement adopted by the City on September 6, 2011, and amendments, if any, to such agreement whereby an electric franchise was granted to Consumers Energy Company. 
(Code 2004,  70-569; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-570. - No liability. 
    The city, and its agents, employees and contractors, are not be liable to grantee or to grantee's customers for any interference with or disruption in the operation of grantee's electrical system, or for any damages arising out of grantee's use of the public rights-of-way, except to the extent of the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the city, its agents, employees or contractors. 
(Code 2004,  70-570; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-571. - No assignment. 
    Grantee may not assign this agreement to any other person, firm or corporation without the prior written approval of the city except that assignment to a corporate affiliate of grantee, which corporate affiliate is controlled by grantee, will not be considered an assignment for the purposes of this agreement. The city may not unreasonably withhold its consent to an assignment if the assignee is financially able to carry out the grantee's obligations under this agreement. 
(Code 2004,  70-571; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Sec. 70-572. - Compliance with laws. 
    Grantee must comply with all applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations regarding the installation, construction, ownership or use of the grantee's electrical system, whether federal, state or local, now in force or which are later promulgated. Before any installation is commenced, grantee must secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from all appropriate departments, agencies, boards or commissions of the city or other governmental entity as is required by law. Nothing in this [article] is to be construed as a waiver by grantee or the city of any of their existing or future rights to contest any statute, ordinance or regulation which either believes is unlawful or invalid. 
(Code 2004,  70-572; Ord. No. 12-06,  1, 7-30-2006; Ord. No. 6-16,  1, 8-8-2016, eff. 8-18-2016) 
Chapter 74 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 2004,  74-1) 
Sec. 74-2. - Registration of electrical trades. 
    Pursuant to Public Act No. 217 of 1956 (MCL 338.881 et seq.), the city requires registration of all electrical or security contractors, sign specialists, fire alarm specialty technicians, well drillers, communication specialists and classes of electricians doing work in the city. 
(Code 2004,  74-2; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.122) 
State Law reference- Authority to require registration, MCL 338.886. 
Secs. 74-3-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State construction code, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

Sec. 74-31. - Enforcement. 
    The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the state construction code. Except as stated in this section, the building official is the enforcing agency. 
(1)  The electrical official is responsible for enforcement of the state electrical code. 
(2)  The mechanical official is responsible for enforcement of the state mechanical code. 
(3)  The plumbing official is responsible for enforcement of the state plumbing code. 
(Code 2004,  74-31; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.091, 22.131, 22.351; Ord. No. 10-01,  1, 6-19-2001) 
State Law reference- Local enforcement of state construction code, MCL 125.1508b. 
Sec. 74-32. - Construction board of appeals. 
    A construction board of appeals, consisting of five members and two alternates, is created. 
(Code 2004,  74-32) 
State Law reference- Construction board of appeals, MCL 125.1514. 
Sec. 74-33. - Fees. 
    The fees to be paid to the city for permits and certificates under the state construction code shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 2004,  74-33) 
State Law reference- Fees authorized, MCL 125.1510, 125.1513. 
Sec. 74-34. - Enforcement of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition. 
(a)  The city elects to and shall enforce the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, in the same manner and to the same extent that it enforces the Michigan Residential Code and the Michigan Building Code. 
(b)  The following local standards are adopted with respect to the city's enforcement of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert "The City of Kentwood" in place of "[Name of jurisdiction]." 
(2)  Section 103.5. Insert "Schedule of fees shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the City Commission of the City of Kentwood" in place of "[Jurisdiction to insert appropriate schedule]." 
(3)  Section 112.4. Insert "$250" in place of "[Amount]" in the first instance and "$500" in place of "[Amount]" in the second instance. 
(4)  Section 302.4. Insert "six (6) inches" in place of "[Jurisdiction to insert height in inches]." 
(5)  Section 304.14. Insert "March 1" in place of "[Date]" in the first instance, and "October 31" in place of "[Date]" in the second instance. 
(6)  Section 602.3. Insert "October 1" in place of "[Date]" in the first instance, and "May 1" in place of "[Date]" in the second instance. 
(7)  Section 602.4. Insert "October 1" in place of "[Date]" in the first instance, and "May 1" in place of "[Date]" in the second instance. 
(8)  Section 111, Means of Appeal, is deleted in its entirety. 
(Code 2004,  74-34; Ord. No. 16-02,  1, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 20-02,  1, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 17-05,  1, 10-23-2005; Ord. No. 8-09,  1, 12-4-2009; Ord. No. 3-11,  1, 5-13-2011; Ord. No. 6-12,  1, 7-25-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 74-35. - Violations. 
(a)  A person, including an officer, director or employee of a corporation, or a governmental official or agent charged with the responsibility of issuing permits or inspecting buildings or structures, who does any of the following is responsible for a municipal civil infraction: 
(1)  Knowingly violates Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) or the state construction code, or a rule for the enforcement of such act or code. 
(2)  Knowingly constructs or builds a structure or building in violation of a condition of a building permit. 
(3)  Knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by an enforcing agency, a construction board of appeals, a board or the state construction code commission pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(4)  Knowingly makes a false or misleading written statement, or knowingly omits required information or a statement in an inspection report, application, petition, request for approval or appeal to an enforcing agency, a construction board of appeals, a board or the state construction code commission. 
(5)  Knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(6)  Unreasonably interferes with an authorized inspection. 
(7)  Knowingly issues, fails to issue, causes to be issued or assists in the issuance of a certificate, permit or license in violation of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) or a rule promulgated under such act or other applicable laws. 
(8)  Having a duty to report violations pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) or a rule promulgated under such act or other applicable laws knowingly conceals a violation. 
(b)  With respect to subsection (a)(3) of this section, a person is guilty of a separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a stop construction order validly issued by an enforcing agency and for each week that the person fails to comply with any other order validly issued by an enforcing agency. With respect to subsection (a)(1) or (a)(4) of this section, a person is guilty of a separate offense for each knowing violation of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) or a rule promulgated under such act and for each false or misleading written statement or omission of required information or statement knowingly made in an application, petition, request for approval or appeal to an enforcing agency, a construction board of appeals, a board or the state construction code commission. With respect to subsection (a)(2) of this section, a person is guilty of a separate offense for each knowing violation of a condition of a building permit. 
(Code 2004,  74-35; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.091, 22.096, 22.131, 22.371; Ord. No. 10-01,  3, 6-19-2001) 
State Law reference- Authority to make violations municipal civil infractions, MCL 125.1523. 
Secs. 74-36-74-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - RENTAL DWELLING INSPECTION PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 20-06, adopted December 19, 2006, amended art. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. 3, which consisted of  74-71-74-77, pertained to rental unit registration and derived from  18.151-18.156 of the 1987 Comp. Ords. and Ordinance No. 17-02, effective July 2, 2002. 

Sec. 74-71. - Findings and purpose. 
    The city commission finds that there are rental dwellings in the city which have become deteriorated to the extent that they no longer provide safe, secure and sanitary living quarters. The city commission also finds that the elimination and prevention of the conditions such as those outlined in this article are necessary and in the best interest of the city and its citizens. The city commission recognizes a compelling interest in establishing standards for the maintenance and occupancy of sanitary and safe rental dwellings within the city. Such standards are an important factor supportive of the general health, safety and welfare of all of its citizens. This article is designed to promote the continuing maintenance of quality and safe rental dwellings, and to maintain and enhance property values. To accomplish these goals, it is the intention of the city commission to exercise its full powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare, whether the powers exercised are derived from the constitution, state law or the city Charter. 
(Code 2004,  74-71; Ord. No. 20-06,  1, 1-12-2007) 
Sec. 74-72. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means any person authorized by the owner who has charge, care or control of a rental dwelling or rental unit which is let or offered for occupancy. The owner must officially notify the city of any agent authorized to act on his behalf. The owner may authorize a tenant to act as agent for a rental dwelling or rental unit. 
    Applicable codes means the current fire prevention, building and property maintenance codes adopted by the city, including definitions and applicable terms, and other city ordinances. 
    Building official means the director of the inspections department or his authorized representatives or designees who perform rental inspections under this article. 
    Let for occupancy or let means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a rental dwelling or rental unit by a person who is not the legal owner pursuant to an oral or written rental or lease agreement or other valuable compensation. 
    Multiple family rental dwelling means a dwelling let for occupancy or let containing two or more rental units, each unit occupied as a single housekeeping unit by a single-family or functional family, as defined in the City of Kentwood Zoning Ordinance, chapter 2, section 2.02.F, as amended. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a dwelling unit is utilized or occupied. 
    Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a rental unit. 
    Owner means any person or legal entity having an equitable interest in a rental dwelling; or recorded in the official records of the county or city as holding title to the rental dwelling; or otherwise having control of the rental dwelling, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of a rental dwelling by a court. 
    Rental dwelling means any building or structure let for occupancy which is wholly or partly used or is intended to be used as habitable space. This shall include any area within the building that contains mechanical equipment for the rental unit, hallways or other spaces that serve the rental unit, and the premises of the rental dwelling. 
    Rental unit means a single housekeeping unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Single-family rental dwelling means a dwelling let for occupancy or let as a single housekeeping unit by a single family or functional family, as defined in the City of Kentwood Zoning Ordinance, chapter 2, section 2.02.F, as amended. 
(Code 2004,  74-72; Ord. No. 20-06,  1, 1-12-2007; Ord. No. 7-17,  1, 7-10-2017, eff. 7-20-2017) 
Sec. 74-73. - Scope. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any dwelling, in whole or in part, which is let for occupancy by persons pursuant to any oral or written rental or lease agreement or other valuable consideration, or to any occupant therein. 
(b)  This article shall be governed by the applicable codes currently adopted by the city, including definitions and applicable terms, and other city ordinances. 
(c)  This article does not apply to jails, hospitals, skilled care facilities, schools, assisted living facilities, retirement homes or foster care homes. 
(d)  This article shall apply to the inspection of hotels and motels as permitted under applicable codes. 
(e)  Compliance with the requirements imposed by this article shall not excuse compliance with other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations and compliance with other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations shall not excuse compliance with this article. 
(Code 2004,  74-73; Ord. No. 20-06,  1, 1-12-2007; Ord. No. 7-17,  2, 7-10-2017, eff. 7-20-2017) 
Sec. 74-74. - Rental registry. 
(a)  Owners shall provide to the city in writing the information described in this section for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a rental registry. The city shall maintain a registry of all rental dwellings and rental units, upon such form as may be prescribed by the building official containing, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Rental dwelling and rental unit address. 
(2)  Rental dwelling parcel number. 
(3)  Number and type of rental units in the rental dwelling. 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the owner. In a case in which the owner is not an individual, the owner information shall be that of the president, general manager or other chief executive officer of the entity. 
(5)  Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner and/or designated agent who is authorized to accept notices and calls from the city. A local agent is required for every rental unit where an owner does not reside in Kent County or any adjoining county. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article for an owner to fail to provide information required by the city for the rental registry, or to provide inaccurate information. 
(c)  Owners shall comply with the following rental registry requirements: 
(1)  All rental dwellings and rental units shall be registered under this article prior to use or occupancy as a rental dwelling or rental unit. 
(2)  All newly constructed rental dwellings shall register and receive a certificate of compliance prior to any use or occupancy as a rental dwelling. 
(3)  All existing non-rental structures which are converted to rental dwellings shall register and receive a certificate of compliance prior to any use or occupancy as a rental dwelling. 
(4)  Any change in the information required by this section shall be communicated in writing to the city within 30 days of the change. Failure to notify the city within 30 days of a change is a violation of this ordinance. 
(d)  Subsequent to the registration of a rental dwelling, the owner or designated agent shall contact the building official to schedule an initial compliance inspection under section 74-76. 
(Code 2004,  74-74; Ord. No. 20-06,  1, 1-12-2007; Ord. No. 7-17,  3, 7-10-2017, eff. 7-20-2017) 
Sec. 74-75. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  No rental dwelling, rental unit, or hotel or motel unit shall be let for occupancy or occupied unless there is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the city for that rental dwelling, rental unit, or hotel or motel unit. The city will issue a certificate of compliance for a rental dwelling, rental unit or the equivalent where the city finds that the structure, unit(s), accessory buildings and yards are in compliance with the provisions of this article and the applicable codes, including but not limited to the applicable building code(s) and the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by reference by the city. 
(b)  A certificate of compliance shall not be issued for rental dwellings with outstanding bills or liabilities to the city as required by section 2-1, including all fees as required by this article. 
(c)  A certificate of compliance shall be valid in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  Any rental dwelling or any dwelling containing at least one rental unit, hotel unit or rooming unit, shall be in substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No rental dwelling, rental unit, hotel unit or rooming unit shall be occupied prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance. 
(2)  The city shall issue a certificate of compliance for a rental dwelling where the city finds that the structure, rental dwelling, its units, accessory buildings and yards are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Validity of certificate of compliance. 
(1)  Six-year certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance shall be valid for no more than six years. Each certificate shall contain an expiration date. For any rental dwelling containing at least one rental unit, a six-year certificate of compliance shall be issued provided: 
a.  The property has been owned by the same owner since the last certification. 
b.  The property has no recorded or verified violations since the last certification. 
c.  The property owner contacts the city for a certificate of compliance inspection within 90 days prior to the expiration of the current certificate of compliance. 
(2)  Four-year certificate of compliance. For any rental dwelling containing at least one rental unit, a four-year certificate of compliance shall be issued provided: 
a.  The property owner contacts the city for a certificate of compliance inspection within 90 days prior to the current certificate of compliance expiration date. 
b.  The property is brought into compliance either prior to the certification expiration date or within the time frame provided in the notice of violation, including deferred due dates. The notice of violation shall be issued before the certificate of compliance expires and shall serve as a temporary certificate of compliance. 
(3)  Two-year certificate of compliance. For any rental dwelling containing more than one rental unit, or a non-owner occupied duplex, a two-year certificate of compliance shall be issued if all of the conditions of either a six-year certificate of compliance or four-year certificate of compliance have not been met. 
(4)  Certification of newly-constructed rental dwellings. A six-year certificate of compliance may also be granted for a newly-constructed rental dwelling, which has been granted a use and occupancy permit by the city. 
(5)  Certification inspections. All units shall be inspected in multiple dwellings that contain 20 or less units within a building and/or each multiple dwelling containing four or more buildings, except where: 
a.  The property owner contacts the city for a certificate of compliance inspection within 90 days prior to the expiration of the current certificate; and 
b.  The property owner registers the property prior to the current certificate of compliance expiration date. If both of the above conditions are met, only ten percent of the units or 20 units (whichever is greater) shall be inspected. The units inspected shall be chosen at random by the inspector. For each unit where a violation is discovered, an additional unit may be added to the total number of units inspected. 
(6)  Condominiums. For purposes of this chapter, a condominium is defined as a building or buildings that contain individually owned apartments, units, or homes where the interior maintenance is the responsibility of the unit owner and the exterior environment responsibility remains with the condominium association. 
For the purpose of certification, the following shall apply: 
a.  If the owner lives in the condominium unit of which he/she is the owner and occupant, no certification or registration is required. 
b.  If the owner owns an individual unit of which he/she is not the occupant, the condominium will be considered a single family rental and shall comply with all registration and certification requirements as that of other single family rentals. 
c.  When the developer has condominiums for sale that are not sold but are rented or vacant, for purposes of this article, shall be considered a multiple unit property for certification and registration purposes. 
(7)  Transfer of certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance is valid only while the owner that is applying for the certificate owns the property. A certificate of compliance may be transferred if: 
a.  The sale occurs within 90 days of the issuance of the certificate of compliance to the seller, and 
b.  The buyer notifies the city of the transfer of ownership within 30 days of the sale. Such transferred certificate will expire upon the date stated on the certificate. A six-year certificate of compliance shall not be transferred to a new owner. A six-year certificate, when transferred to a new owner within 90 days of the issuance of the certificate of compliance, shall revert to a two-year certificate of compliance. 
(8)  Suspension of certificate of compliance. 
a.  A certificate of compliance may be suspended when the city has cited a substantial violation of the provisions of this chapter, and shall be suspended if a hazard to health or safety is found to be present. If a certificate of compliance is suspended, the suspension shall be noted in the notice of violation. 
b.  Failure of a buyer to notify the city of the change in ownership shall result in suspension of the certificate of compliance. A new certificate issued subsequent to a suspension shall be retroactive to the date of sale, with the owner responsible for all applicable fees from that date. 
c.  Where a certificate of compliance has been suspended, or when the premises have not been issued a certificate of compliance, the city may seek to suspend payments of rent, with such rents paid into an escrow account established pursuant to state law. 
(9)  Expiration of certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance shall expire on the date stated on the certificate. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any unit in a rental dwelling to be occupied 60 days after the expiration of the certificate of compliance. 
(10)  Renewal of certificate of compliance. The owner shall be responsible for registering a rental dwelling and arranging a compliance inspection prior to the expiration date on the certificate of compliance. When a certificate of compliance is reissued in accordance with this chapter, it shall have a two-year, a four-year, or a six-year expiration date with the same month and day as shown on the previous certificate regardless of the date that the new certificate is actually issued at the discretion of the building official. 
(11)  Certificate of compliance not required. A certificate of compliance shall not be required for living or sleeping accommodations in jails, hospitals, skilled care facilities, school dormitories, assisted living facilities, foster homes, or where periodic inspections by the city are not otherwise required by law. 
(Code 2004,  74-75; Ord. No. 20-06,  2, 1-12-2007; Ord. No. 7-17,  4, 7-10-2017, eff. 7-20-2017) 
Sec. 74-76. - Compliance inspection. 
(a)  Subsequent to the registration of a rental dwelling, the owner or designated agent shall contact the building official to request an initial compliance inspection as follows: 
(1)  For all newly constructed rental dwellings and rental units, the owner or designated agent shall contact the building official to request the compliance inspection at least one day prior to the final inspection to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required under the building code. 
(2)  For all existing non-rental structures that are converted to rental dwellings or rental units, and for all rental dwellings and units that are added to the rental registry, the owner or designated agent shall contact the building official to request an initial compliance inspection within 14 days after submitting the rental registry information. 
(b)  The owner or designated agent shall contact the building official at least 30 days before expiration of an existing certificate of compliance to schedule a periodic inspection. Failure of the building official to conduct a periodic compliance inspection prior to the expiration of a certificate of compliance, which failure is not due to any actions of the owner, agent or tenant, shall result in the owner or agent being permitted to let for occupancy the rental dwellings and rental units until the building official has conducted an inspection. 
(c)  Failure to contact the building official to request an initial or periodic inspection as required under this article shall result in a fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city commission from time to time, and no initial or periodic rental inspections shall be conducted for a rental dwelling or rental unit until such fee is paid. 
(d)  Non-periodic compliance inspections will be scheduled as soon as practical by the building official: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a written complaint from an owner, agent, occupant or citizen who would have occasion to be aware that the rental dwelling or rental unit is in violation of this article. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a report or a referral from any city department, public or private school or other public agency. 
(3)  Upon receipt of knowledge that a rental dwelling is not registered with the city as required by this article. 
(e)  Nothing in this article prohibits the building official from initiating or scheduling or conducting any inspection authorized under this article. 
(f)  No person shall cause a compliance inspection to be made for the sole purpose of harassing any individual, corporation, or governmental agency when a violation is not present. 
(g)  If the building official is unable to schedule an inspection due to the owner or agent's action, failure to act, or refusal to permit an inspection after reasonable notice of the intent to inspect, the owner or agent shall not let the rental dwelling or rental unit for occupancy and, if occupants are utilizing the rental dwelling or rental unit, the building official may require vacation of the rental dwelling or rental unit. 
(h)  Reasonable entry and access to rental dwellings and rental units shall be granted to the building official or the building official's designated inspector(s) as follows: 
(1)  The building official is authorized entry and access to a rental dwelling or rental unit at reasonable times to inspect to ensure compliance with the terms of this article. 
a.  If entry or access is not made available by the owner, the building official is authorized to revoke the existing certificate of compliance, pursue administrative warrants or pursue other recourse as provided by law. 
b.  If entry or access is not made available by the tenant, the building official is authorized to pursue administrative warrants or pursue other recourse as provided by law. 
(2)  The owner or agent must accompany the inspector and allow full entry and access to the rental dwelling and rental unit. 
(i)  If a rental dwelling or rental unit should fail a compliance inspection, a subsequent re-inspection will be required with an additional fee. 
(1)  In the event an inspection discloses that a rental dwelling or rental unit is not in compliance with applicable codes, the building official will establish a record of the requirements that must be undertaken by the owner, and in what timeframe, in order to schedule a re-inspection. A certificate of compliance will be issued or confirmed only when those requirements have been met and all inspection fees are paid. 
(2)  In the event an inspection discloses that a rental dwelling or rental unit is not in compliance with applicable codes and the rental dwelling or rental unit is occupied, the building official will indicate whether the conditions are such that the rental dwelling or rental unit must be vacated, or whether steps to bring the rental dwelling or rental unit into compliance with applicable codes may continue while the rental dwelling or rental unit continues to be occupied. 
(3)  The city may revoke a certificate of compliance if a rental dwelling or rental unit fails any inspection. 
(Code 2004,  74-76; Ord. No. 20-06,  2, 1-12-2007; Ord. No. 7-17,  5, 7-10-2017, eff. 7-20-2017) 
Sec. 74-77. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  In addition to any penalties imposed by law, upon a finding of responsibility by the court for a violation of this article the city shall be entitled to immediately revoke an existing certificate of compliance and shall entitle the city to seek the issuance of a court order compelling the eviction of all persons and property upon the premises until a certificate of compliance is issued by the city. 
(Code 2004,  74-77; Ord. No. 20-06,  2, 1-12-2007; Ord. No. 7-17,  6, 7-10-2017, eff. 7-20-2017) 
Sec. 74-78. - Fees. 
(a)  The owner of a rental dwelling and rental unit will be assessed a fee for compliance inspections and re-inspections as required in this article. The fees will be in an amount as specified by resolution adopted by the city commission. 
(b)  A fee shall be assessed to cover the city's cost of handling an appeal as allowed in this article. That fee shall be waived if the committee of the whole of the city commission finds in favor of the appellant. 
(c)  If the rental dwelling or rental unit that undergoes a non-periodic compliance inspection passes the inspection, the fee shall be waived for the inspection. 
(d)  Fees as established by the city shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance. 
(Code 2004,  74-78; Ord. No. 20-06,  2, 1-12-2007; Ord. No. 7-17,  7, 7-10-2017, eff. 7-20-2017) 
Sec. 74-79. - Appeal. 
(a)  Appeal procedure. 
(1)  Any owner aggrieved by a notice of violation which has been issued under this article may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the committee of the whole of the city commission. The aggrieved person shall file a written appeal to the building official requesting the hearing. The appeal shall include the name, address, e-mail address and phone number of the appellant and a brief statement on the grounds for the appeal. 
(2)  An application for appeal shall be accompanied by a fee. 
(3)  The appeal must be filed within 21 days after the day the notice of the violation is served. Failure to file the written notice of appeal within the 21-day period shall be deemed a waiver of the person's right to a hearing or to otherwise contest the notice of the violation. Upon timely receipt of an appeal, the building official shall set a time for a hearing before the committee of the whole of the city commission and shall give the appellant notice of the date, time and location for the hearing. 
(b)  Hearings. 
(1)  Hearings shall be commenced within a reasonable time after an appeal has been filed. At such hearings the appellant shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn. A building official shall be given opportunity to provide information relative to and supportive of charging the violation. 
(2)  The committee of the whole of the city commission, acting as the appeal board for this article, shall meet in a fixed place and all meetings shall be open to the public. The city clerk shall keep a record of the proceedings, showing the actions of the committee. 
(3)  After a hearing, the committee of the whole of the city commission acting as the appeal board for this article, may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice of violation depending on its findings. In rendering these determinations, the powers of the committee shall be limited to making interpretation of the provisions of this article and applicable codes, to the applicability of its specific provisions to the specific case being heard, and to granting exemptions to the provisions of this article. In granting exemptions, the committee shall be allowed to grant an exemption if it clearly appears that, by reason of special condition, undue hardship not self-created would result from strict application of any section of the article. 
(c)  The decision of the committee of the whole of the city commission acting as the appeal board for this article shall be final. 
(Code 2004,  74-79; Ord. No. 20-06,  2, 1-12-2007; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Secs. 74-80-74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - MAINTENANCE OF DISABLED PERSON ACCESSIBILITY SIGNAGE AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 74-101. - Maintenance. 
    All disabled person accessibility signs and structures, of whatever nature, erected, placed or installed as required by the city's building code, zoning ordinance (appendix A of this Code) or state statute, shall be maintained so as to be clearly legible and visible at all times. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and the person in lawful possession of the premises to maintain the accessibility signs and structures. As used in this section, the term "maintenance" includes, but is not limited to, repainting, repairing or replacing sign surfaces to identify the international symbol of accessibility and ensuring that signs and structures are securely anchored to the ground, pole or other structure to which they are attached. 
(Code 2004,  74-101; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.421) 
Sec. 74-102. - Current standards. 
    The property owner and any person in lawful possession of the premises shall replace any existing disabled person accessibility signs with signs meeting current requirements of state law. For purposes of this section, the term "person in lawful possession" means, in addition to the owner, a tenant or lessee of the property, or any portion thereof. 
(Code 2004,  74-102; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.422) 
Sec. 74-103. - Visual obstructions. 
    No shrubs, trees, plantings or structure shall be located, erected, planted, installed or allowed to remain on property where the effect is to obstruct the view of an existing accessibility sign or structure. 
(Code 2004,  74-103; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.423) 
Sec. 74-104. - Physical obstructions. 
    Disabled person accessibility parking sites shall be maintained, free of obstructions located on or near the site, such that the site is accessible to a vehicle. The site shall be kept free of snow, construction waste, dumpsters, picnic tables and other objects that prevent accessibility to the site. 
(Code 2004,  74-104; Comp. Ords. 1987,  35.424) 
Secs. 74-105-74-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-141. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person issued a permit under this article to follow the prescribed route and observe all rules and regulations in force for the protection of paved streets and to move such building with all possible dispatch and in a manner least calculated to obstruct public travel on such occupied streets. 
(b)  No person shall leave any building, while in the progress of removal, standing over any street crossing at any time. If it shall be necessary for such building to stand over night in any street or public place, the person having charge thereof shall place good and sufficient lights, including a visible bright red light and such other lights as required by the city's traffic engineer, upon the building as a warning to persons passing over such street of the presence of the building, and such lights shall be kept burning during the night. 
(Code 2004,  74-141; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.207; Ord. No. 8-05,  1, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-142. - Lines, cables and wires. 
(a)  If it is found that in moving any building, the building will come in contact with the wires or cables of the public lighting system, other public electric wires, or will come in contact with the lines, cables or wires of any person holding franchise rights within the city limits or having authority to string such wires or cables in connection therewith, it shall be the permittee's duty to immediately notify the proper municipal officer or the principal local officer or agent of such franchise, or both, as the case may be, that the moving of the building will interfere with such wires or cables. 
(b)  It shall also be the permittee's duty to pay or arrange for the payment, to such officer or agent, of all actual expenses involved with removing and replacing such equipment, wires or cables. If such expenses are paid to a municipal officer, the payment shall be deposited with the city treasurer and credited to the proper funds. 
(Code 2004,  74-142; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.208; Ord. No. 8-05,  2, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-143. - Removal or trimming of trees. 
    If it is found that moving any building will result in contact with any trees located in a public place to such an extent as to require the trimming or removal of those trees, then the applicant for such permit shall arrange with the department of public works for such trimming and removal, and shall pay all costs of such trimming or removal and replacement. 
(Code 2004,  74-143; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.209; Ord. No. 8-05,  3, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-144. - Indemnity for injury. 
    As an express condition for the issuance of a permit under this article, an applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents from any and all the claims or liabilities arising out of or by reason of the carrying on of the activity of the applicant involved with moving a building as herein authorized. The applicant shall further indemnify the city for all loss, injury or damage to any tree, pavement, street, sewer, watermain, sidewalk, awning, wire, fire alarm, telephone or other pole or wires and cables or any other property of the city of any nature whatsoever, which loss, injury or damage arises out of or by reason of the carrying on of the activity involved with moving a building as herein provided. For purposes of indemnifying and reimbursing the city as herein provided, the insurance policy as hereinafter required shall provide for insurance against injuries or damage to the city's property, such insurance to be in the nature of contractual liability insurance and shall ensure the applicant and the city against the liabilities which this section requires the applicant to indemnify the city against. 
(Code 2004,  74-144; Ord. No. 8-05,  4, 5-1-2005) 
Secs. 74-145-74-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 74-161. - Required. 
    No person shall move any building without a permit issued by the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 2004,  74-161; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.204; Ord. No. 8-05,  5, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-162. - Applications. 
    To obtain a permit as required by this division, an application shall be filed with the city engineer, in which application, the following information shall be given: 
(1)  Name, address and e-mail address of the licensee proposing to move such building or structure; 
(2)  A photograph and description of the building to be moved; 
(3)  Present location and proposed new location, with a scale plan thereof; 
(4)  Scale drawing of any proposed changes of the building; 
(5)  Zoning district with area and yard requirements of the new location; 
(6)  Route over which it is proposed to move the building or structure; 
(7)  Estimated time required to move the building or structure; 
(8)  Documents evidencing that satisfactory arrangements have been made for the temporary removal of all electrical wires, cables or other encumbrances, if any, including those addressed in section 74-142; 
(9)  Documents evidencing that general liability insurance in an aggregate amount of not less than $2,000,000.00, to cover all activities authorized by the permit, has been obtained. The insurance policy shall meet all obligations set forth in section 74-144. The insurance policy and certificate shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the city attorney. 
(Code 2004,  74-162; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.204; Ord. No. 8-05,  6, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-163. - Route approval. 
    No permit to move any building shall be issued by the city engineer until approval of the proposed route has been secured in writing from the chief of police and fire chief. The approval shall be given only upon a showing that public safety will not be endangered. If it is determined that a different route would be more advantageous to public safety, the city engineer shall require such changed route as a condition to issuance of the permit. 
(Code 2004,  74-163; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.205; Ord. No. 8-05,  7, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-164. - Fee, guarantee and term. 
    Before the permit is issued by the city engineer, the licensee shall deposit with the city treasurer, in addition to all other fees, a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission, as payment for a house moving permit and place in escrow with the city treasurer an amount sufficient to cover all costs anticipated to be incurred by the city in providing assistance in the moving process. No permit shall be issued under this division, except to a licensed building mover, or his authorized agent or employee. Any permit issued under this division shall terminate after 90 days from the date of issuance. 
(Code 2004,  74-164; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.206; Ord. No. 8-05,  8, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-165. - Owner's bond; period of time for completion of work. 
    The owner of a building for which a permit is issued under this division shall deposit with the city treasurer a performance bond in an amount determined by the city, which shall be conditional upon payment to the city of all costs and expenses (including attorney fees) incurred by the city related to the building being moved, the diligent completion of all work, repairs, rejuvenation, structural changes or other activity necessary to place the building in its final state, fully conditioned for its new use or occupancy in full accordance with the requirements of the city building code, and rules and regulations of the city or prosecuting compliance with these requirements. Such work shall be completed within a period of time not to exceed 90 days, provided that, upon application, the city engineer may extend the time by one additional 30-day period. 
(Code 2004,  74-165; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.211; Ord. No. 8-05,  9, 5-1-2005) 
Sec. 74-166. - Certificate of approval. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued until the city engineer and the city planner shall certify that the building architecturally and structurally conforms with any buildings within 300 feet of the location to which the building is to be moved. In making such determination, the city engineer and city planner shall determine that the following conditions concerning the building are met: 
(1)  It is structurally sound; 
(2)  It conforms to the standards of the city building code; 
(3)  It will conform to all of the requirements of the city zoning ordinance (see appendix A of this Code) when placed on its new foundation; 
(4)  It architecturally conforms with the buildings within 300 feet of the location to which the building is to be moved taking into account the size, shape, architectural and structural design, and exterior appearance of the building as compared to the buildings within 300 feet of the site. 
(Code 2004,  74-166; Comp. Ords. 1987,  22.210; Ord. No. 8-05,  10, 5-1-2005) 
Secs. 74-167-74-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - FAIR HOUSING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Fair housing, MCL 37.2501 et seq. 

Sec. 74-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discrimination, discriminating and discriminate mean to render any difference in treatment to any person in the sale, lease, rental or financing of a dwelling or housing unit because of a person's race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income. 
    Housing includes any building, facility or structure, or portion thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more persons, groups or families and any vacant land offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of such building, facility or structure. 
    Lending institution means any bank, building and loan association, savings and loan association, insurance company or other persons whose business consists, in whole or in part, of the lending of money or guaranteeing loans. 
    Real estate agent includes any real estate salesman, or an agent thereof, or any other person, partnership, association or corporation who, for a consideration, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, leases, negotiates, offers or attempts to negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange, rent or otherwise transfer of any interest in real property. 
(Code 2004,  74-201; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.102) 
Sec. 74-202. - Designation of policy. 
    It is hereby designated to be the continuing policy of the city to do those things necessary and proper to secure for all its citizens their right to equal housing opportunities regardless of their race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income. 
(Code 2004,  74-202; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.101) 
Sec. 74-203. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all housing located within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Code 2004,  74-203; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.107) 
Sec. 74-204. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operating, supervised or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious organization, association or society, which limits the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or which gives preference to such persons, unless membership in such a religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex or national origin. 
(2)  A private club not in fact open to the public which, as an incident to its primary purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, and which limits the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or gives preference to its members. 
(3)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided, further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or served on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 74-206, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance, as necessary, to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(4)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied, or intended to be occupied, by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(Code 2004,  74-204; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.104) 
Sec. 74-205. - Unlawful housing practices. 
    It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this article: 
(1)  For any person or real estate agent to: 
a.  Discriminate against any person in the selling, leasing, subleasing, renting, assigning or otherwise transferring of any interest in housing. 
b.  Discriminate against any person by refusing to negotiate, refusing to transmit a bona fide offer, making false representations of the availability of, or withdrawing from the market, a housing unit which is for sale, lease, sublease or rent. 
c.  Include in their terms, conditions or privileges of any sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of any housing, any clause, condition or restriction discriminating against any person in the use or occupancy of such housing. 
d.  Discriminate in the furnishing of any facility, repair, improvement or service or in the terms, conditions, privileges, or tenure or occupancy of any person. 
(2)  For any lending institution to: 
a.  Discriminate in lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting a deed, trust or mortgage, or otherwise making available funds for purchasing, constructing, improving, altering, repairing, rehabilitating or maintaining any housing or to discriminate against in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms, conditions or provisions of any such financial assistance. 
b.  Discriminate in the lending of money, guaranteeing loans, accepting a deed, trust or mortgage, or otherwise making funds available on the basis of the geographic location. 
(3)  For any person, real estate agent or lending institution, with respect to any prohibited act specified in this article, to publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice, statement, listing or advertisement, or to announce a policy or make any record in connection with the prospective sale, lease, sublease, rental or financing of any housing which indicates reliance, determination or decision based on race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income. 
(4)  For any person or real estate agent to assist in, compel or coerce the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful housing practice under this article, or obstruct or prevent endorsement or compliance with provisions of this article, or attempt, directly or indirectly, to commit any act declared by this article to be an unlawful housing practice. 
(5)  For any person, real estate agent or lending institution to: 
a.  Induce, or attempt to induce, the sale, transfer of interest or listing for sale of any housing by making representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of real property owned, used or occupied by any person of any particular race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income by direct or indirect methods. 
b.  Make any representation to a prospective purchaser or lessee that any housing in a particular block, neighborhood or area may undergo, is undergoing or has undergone a change with respect to race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income of such block, neighborhood or area. 
c.  Induce, or attempt to induce, the sale or listing for sale of any housing by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income in the block, neighborhood or area will or may result in: 
1.  The lowering of property values. 
2.  A change in the racial, color, religious, nationality or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located. 
3.  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area. 
4.  A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area. 
(6)  For any person or real estate agent to: 
a.  Cause or coerce, or attempt to cause or coerce, retaliation against any person because such person has lawfully opposed any act or failure to act that is a violation of this article or has, in good faith, filed a complaint, testified, participated or assisted in any way in any proceeding under this article or prevent any person from complying with this article. 
b.  Deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing or discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation. 
c.  Do any other thing or engage in conduct which would otherwise make unavailable equal housing opportunities. 
(Code 2004,  74-205; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.103) 
Sec. 74-206. - Complaint procedures. 
(a)  Any person subjected to an unlawful housing practice may file, within 180 days of the alleged violation, with the mayor or his designee, a written complaint, sworn to or affirmed, which shall state the name and address of the person aggrieved; the name and address against whom the complaint is filed; a description and the address of the dwelling which involves the alleged discriminatory housing practice; and a concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates, times, individuals involved and other such facts constituting the alleged discriminatory housing practice as may be required by the mayor or his designee. The complaint may be reasonably and fairly amended. 
(b)  Upon the filing of any written complaint, the mayor or his designee shall make a prompt investigation in connection therewith. If he determines after such investigation that no probable cause exists in connection with the alleged unlawful housing practice, he shall so advise the complainant. If he determines after such investigation that probable cause exists in connection with the unlawful housing practice, he shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the alleged practice by conference, conciliation and persuasion. 
(c)  The mayor or his designee shall strive to reduce the terms of conciliation to writing and incorporate them into a consent agreement signed by both parties, which agreement is for conciliation purposes only and does not constitute an admission by any party that the law has been violated. Consent agreements shall be approved as to form by the city attorney and signed by the mayor on behalf of the city. 
(d)  If the mayor or his designee is unable to conciliate a complaint, he shall refer the complaint to the city attorney, who shall thereupon review the file and recommend to the city whether or not the city should take further action with reference thereto. 
(Code 2004,  74-206; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.106) 
Sec. 74-207. - Posting of notices. 
(a)  Every real estate agent shall purchase and post in a conspicuous location in that portion of his place of business normally used by him for negotiating the terms of a sale or lease of housing, and each person who operates a multiunit residential building containing more than two units shall post at all times when prospective tenants are being interviewed, in a conspicuous location in that portion of his housing business normally used by him for negotiating the rental of a housing unit therein, a notice prepared by the city, which contains the following language, printed in black on a light-colored background in not less than 14-point type: 
"It is a violation of the fair housing ordinance of the City of Kentwood, State of Michigan, for any real estate agent, or any person owning or managing a multiunit apartment dwelling unit, to: 
"(1)  Deny housing to any person because of race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income. 
"(2)  Discriminate against any person because of race, creed, color, sex, marital status, religious belief, age, height, weight, national origin, disability or source of income to the terms, conditions or privileges of housing accommodations or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith." 
"IF YOU BELIEVE YOU HAVE BEEN DISCRIMINATED AGAINST, CONTACT THE CITY OF KENTWOOD, THE MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL RIGHTS OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT." 
(b)  Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2004,  74-207; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.105) 
Sec. 74-208. - Violations; penalties; relief. 
(a)  Every person convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Further, to the extent permitted by law, the court in any civil case arising under this section may award damages to the aggrieved party and injunctive relief, if the circumstances so require. 
(Code 2004,  74-208; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.110) 
Sec. 74-209. - Other legal action. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled or from filing any complaint with any other agency or court. 
(Code 2004,  74-209; Comp. Ords. 1987,  18.108) 
Chapter 78 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Soil erosion and sedimentation control, MCL 324.9101 et seq.; local soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, MCL 324.9105 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words, terms and phrases used in this article, unless defined in this section or section 1-2, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Act 451. 
    Act 451 means Part 91 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, being Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) as amended and the Administrative Rules promulgated under the authority of Part 91 are hereby incorporated by reference, as amended. 
    Certification of completion means a signed, written statement by the city engineer that specific construction has been inspected and found to comply with all requirements specified in this article and any permit issued in accordance with this article. 
    City engineer means the city engineer of the City of Kentwood or his duly authorized representative, who has completed the required MDEQ certification. 
    Earth change means a human-made change in the natural cover or topography of land including, but not limited to, cut, fill, grading, and stripping activities as defined in the definitions of the terms "excavation and cut," "grading" and "stripping," as defined in this section. 
    Erosion means the process by which land is worn away by action of wind, water or other force of nature, or a combination thereof. 
    Excavation and cut mean any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions which result from such activity. 
    Floodplain means that area which would be inundated by storm runoff or floodwater equivalent to that which would occur with a storm event of 100-year recurrence frequency after total development of the watershed. 
    Grading means any stripping, excavating, filling or stockpiling, or any combination of such activities, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
    Permit means a permit issued to authorize work to be performed under this article in accordance with the act. 
    Stripping means any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations. 
(Code 2004,  78-31; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.202, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.202, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 6-10,  1, 1-14-2011) 
Sec. 78-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to control soil erosion and sedimentation within the city, by requiring proper provision for water disposal and protection of soil surfaces during and after construction, in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the city, as well as to limit the exposed area of any disturbed land for the shortest possible period of time. 
(Code 2004,  78-32; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.201, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.201, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-33. - Violations; penalties; civil remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be fined in a manner consistent with Act 451. Any person who, after having been determined to be responsible for a violation of this article or the act, commits and is found responsible for a subsequent violation within a two-year period, shall be fined double the amount assessed for the immediate preceding violation. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties in subsection (a) of this section, the city may, following proper notification, enter the property for the purpose of correcting or abating the violation in accordance with the act and state law. 
(c)  A person found to be responsible for a violation shall pay the city's actual costs, direct or indirect, for correcting and abating the violation, and the actual costs, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in correcting or abating the violation to the extent permitted by law. If the fines and costs are not fully paid within 30 days, the fines and costs may be added to, and made part of, the next city tax bill against the subject premises and may be collected in the same manner as provided by state law for the collection of city taxes on real estate. 
(d)  The city may also proceed against any person for a violation of this article by seeking injunctive relief and/or damages. 
(Code 2004,  78-33; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.217, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.217, 25.218, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-34. - Variances and exceptions. 
    Where it is alleged that there is an error or misinterpretation in any order, requirement, determination or interpretation made by the city engineer on non-Part 91 issues, an appeal may be made by the applicant, in writing, to the city commission committee of the whole. The city commission committee of the whole may, by a majority vote of its members serving, affirm, reverse or affirm with conditions the appeal, consistent with the general purposes and the intent of this article. 
(Code 2004,  78-34; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.215, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.215, 9-2-2003; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 78-35. - Enforcement official. 
    The city engineer and his designees are hereby authorized to administer and enforce Part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) as amended and its Administrative Rules promulgated under the authority of Part 91 are hereby incorporated by reference, as amended. 
(Code 2004,  78-35; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.200, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.200, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 6-10,  2, 1-14-2011) 
Sec. 78-36. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city engineer may enter at all reasonable times into or upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions or practices associated with the issuance of a permit. If the city engineer finds that the permittee has not complied with the act or this article and that the work does not conform to the permit issued, a cease and desist order shall be issued and the permit shall be revoked. The permittee shall be notified of the city engineer's determination by certified mail, return receipt requested. The permittee shall, within five calendar days following the issuance of the notice, implement and maintain soil erosion and sediment control measures consistent with the approved plans, the act and this article. The permittee shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred by the city in causing any and all work to be done to comply with the regulations. 
(b)  Upon satisfactory execution of all proposed earth change plans and other requirements, the permittee shall file a written notice of completion so that the city engineer may make a final inspection and issue a certificate of completion and release of the bond. If the project is to be completed in different phases, the city engineer may issue separate permits and certificates of completion and bond release for each phase of the earth change project. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city shall have the right to avail itself to all enforcement mechanisms provided for by the act. 
(Code 2004,  78-36; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.216, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.216, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-37. - Certificate of completion. 
    Except with respect to a development for which no permit is required, a certificate of occupancy for any building shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a certificate of completion from the city engineer. 
(Code 2004,  78-37; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.203, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.203, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-38. - Minimum design standards. 
    All grading plans and specifications, including amendments to previously approved plans, shall include provisions for erosion and sediment control in accordance with, but not limited to, the standards contained in the Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, published by the county drain commissioner. Copies of those standards shall be available for inspection in the office of the city engineer. 
(Code 2004,  78-38; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.214, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.214, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-39. - Maintenance requirements. 
    Persons carrying out soil erosion and sedimentation control measures under this article, and all subsequent owners of the property concerning which such measures have been taken, shall be liable to maintain all permanent antierosion and sediment control devices, retaining walls, structures, plantings and other protective devices. 
(Code 2004,  78-39; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.213, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.213, 9-2-2003) 
Secs. 78-40-78-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN 

Sec. 78-61. - Permit required. 
    A landowner, or designated agent who contracts for, allows or engages in an earth change in the city, shall obtain a permit from the city engineer prior to commencement of an earth change which disturbs one or more acres of land, is adjacent to a public street, or is within 500 feet of waters of the state as defined by the act. A permit is not required for those activities which are exempt from permits as specified in state law. Failure to obtain a permit before initiating the earth change shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 2004,  78-61; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.204(4.1), 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.204(4.1), 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-62. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
    A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared for any earth change identified in section 78-61. The plan shall be designed to effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation, and shall identify factors which may contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation, or both. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A soils survey or a written description of the exposed land area contemplated for the earth change. 
(2)  Details for proposed earth changes, including: 
a.  A description and the location of the physical limits of each proposed earth change. 
b.  A description and the location of all existing and proposed on-site drainage and dewatering facilities. 
c.  The timing and sequence of each proposed earth change. 
d.  A description and the location of all proposed temporary soil erosion and sediment control measures. 
e.  A description and the location of all proposed permanent soil erosion and sediment control measures. 
f.  A program proposal for the continued maintenance of all permanent soil erosion and sediment control facilities which remain after project completion, including the designation of the person responsible for the maintenance. Maintenance responsibilities shall become a part of any sales or exchange agreement for the land on which the permanent soil erosion control measures are located. 
g.  A statement of the quantity of excavation and fill involved. 
(3)  A boundary line survey or legal description of the land on which the work is to be performed. 
(4)  A plan of the site, at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, showing the: 
a.  Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the landowner or designated agent. 
b.  Existing topography at a maximum of five-foot contour intervals. 
c.  Proposed topography at a maximum of five-foot contour intervals. 
d.  Location of any structure or natural feature on the site. 
e.  Location of any structure or natural feature on the land adjacent to the site within 50 feet of the site boundary line. 
f.  Location of any proposed additional structures or development on the site. 
g.  Proximity of any proposed earth change to lakes, drains, wetlands or streams. 
(5)  Such other information as requested by the city engineer. 
(Code 2004,  78-62; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.204(4.2), 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.204(4.2), 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-63. - Application review and permit procedures. 
    All application review and permit procedures shall be in accordance with the act and this article. 
(Code 2004,  78-63; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.205; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.205, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-64. - Fees. 
    At the time of filing an application for a permit, a nonrefundable fee shall be charged for plan review. Upon approval of the plans, a permit will be issued and a fee shall be made for the permit, including inspections. Fees will be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  78-64; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.206; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.206, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-65. - Bond. 
(a)  A permit shall not be issued for an earth change unless the permittee first posts with the city a bond, executed by the owner or the owner's contractor, issued by a surety authorized to do business within the state; provided, however, that a bond shall not be required for single-family residential units less than one acre in size. 
(b)  The bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, payable to the city and in an amount sufficient to ensure the installation and completion of such protective and corrective measures as may be required by the city. The bond shall include penalty provisions for failure to complete the work on schedule as specified in the permit. 
(c)  Every bond shall include language requiring the permittee to comply with all of the provisions of this article and all terms and conditions of the permit, and to complete all work contemplated under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit. If no time limit is specified, the project shall be completed within 365 days after the date of the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 2004,  78-65; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.207, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.207, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-66. - Permit denial. 
    Permits shall not be issued where the: 
(1)  Proposed work would cause uncontrolled soil erosion and sedimentation; 
(2)  Proposed work would cause hazard to the public safety and welfare; 
(3)  Proposed work will damage any public or private property, interfere with an existing drainage course so as to cause damage to adjacent property, result in the deposit of debris or sediment on any public way or waters of the state, or create an unreasonable hazard to persons or property; 
(4)  Land area in which work is to occur is subject to geological hazard such that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any other such hazard to persons or property; 
(5)  Land area in which the work is to occur is within the floodplain of any stream or watercourse, unless a permit from the MDEQ approving the work accompanies the application and a hydrologic report prepared by a professional engineer is submitted certifying that the proposed work will have no detrimental influence on the public welfare or upon the total development of the watershed; or 
(6)  Proposed work unreasonably exposes the land to repeated disturbances. 
(Code 2004,  78-66; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.210, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.210, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-67. - Time extensions. 
    Not less than ten days prior to the expiration date of a permit, a permittee may present in writing to the city engineer a request for an extension where the permittee asserts that it is unable to complete the work within the specified time. For good cause shown, the city engineer may grant additional time for completion, but no extension shall be treated or interpreted as a release of the surety bond. 
(Code 2004,  78-67; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.208, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.208, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-68. - Modification of approved plans. 
    Any modification of an approved plan must be submitted to and approved by the city engineer. All necessary supplemental reports shall be submitted with the proposal to modify the approved plan. No work in connection with any proposed modification shall be permitted without the prior approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 2004,  78-68; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.211, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.211, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-69. - Failure to complete work. 
(a)  In the event of failure to complete work required as part of an approved permit, the city engineer may order such work, as necessary, to provide for effective soil erosion and sedimentation control. The permittee and the surety executing the bond shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred by the city in causing any and all work to be done in compliance with the permit. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the city may avail itself of all the rights provided under the act if a permittee fails to comply with an approved soil erosion and sediment control plan. 
(Code 2004,  78-69; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.209, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.209, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-70. - Responsibility of permittee. 
    During operations associated with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, the permittee shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Prevention of damage to, or sedimentation of, adjacent properties or public areas, or waters of the state. No person shall grade on land so close to a property line as to endanger any public street, sidewalk, alley or any public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage that might result. Similarly, no person shall permit sediment or runoff to occur on public streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public areas. 
(2)  Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and in compliance with all the requirements of the permit, this article and the act. 
(3)  Prompt removal of any sediment that may inadvertently be deposited in any lake, drain, stream or wetland. 
(4)  Complete restoration of the site within five business days following final grading of the site. 
(Code 2004,  78-70; Ord. No. 04-02,  25.212, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-03,  25.212, 9-2-2003) 
Secs. 78-71-78-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Inland lakes and streams, MCL 324.30101 et seq.; soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq.; building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3108; subdivision within or abutting floodplain, plat requirements, MCL 560.138; subdivision within floodplain, conditions for approval, MCL 560.194. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30101). 
    Building opening means any opening of a solid wall, such as a window or door, through which floodwaters could penetrate to cause property damage. 
    Chapter 20 drain means a drain established under chapter 20 of the Michigan Drain Code of 1956 (MCL 280.461 et seq.). 
    Construction means the improvement of a drain by rechannelization, reconstruction, erosion protection or enclosure. 
    Drain means any open or enclosed conduit, ditch, swale or creek, used for purposes of transferring water from land and structures to a downstream location. 
    Drainage means the method of transfer of stormwater from impacting land or structure. 
    Floodplain means the area flooded by a 100-year storm as determined by the current flood insurance study published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Floodway means a cross section of the floodplain, or naturally occurring drain outside the FEMA designated floodplain, necessary to carry the floodwaters. 
    Floodway fringe means a cross section between the floodway and the edge of the floodplain necessary to temporarily store floodwaters. 
    Maintenance means the process of restoration of stormwater flow in a drain by: 
(1)  Returning to a previously established design grade; 
(2)  Cleanout of conduits; 
(3)  Bank stabilization; 
(4)  Drainage structure repair; and 
(5)  Similar measures as determined by the city. 
    Stormwater means water that has its origin in precipitation. 
(Code 2004,  78-101; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.174) 
Sec. 78-102. - Finding of necessity. 
    The city hereby finds that it is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city that provision be made by ordinance for the control, maintenance and regulation of stormwater so as to prevent flooding, loss of life, property damage, erosion and nuisance conditions, and to promote groundwater recharge, lower storm sewer costs and water quality improvement in the city, and this article is hereby adopted to that end. This article is further necessary to define responsibility for handling stormwater related problems among the city, private developers and private citizens. 
(Code 2004,  78-102; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.171) 
Sec. 78-103. - Approval process. 
(a)  Design and approval requirements. 
(1)  Any construction on a drain in the city shall be designed and the construction supervised by a registered professional engineer. 
(2)  Approval for construction work shall be by the city engineer. 
(3)  Any waiver from the provisions of this article must be supported by a study conducted by a registered professional engineer. 
(b)  Standard specifications. 
(1)  Any construction shall conform to following standard specifications and such specifications are hereby adopted by the city in connection and conjunction with this article: 
a.  Site drainage. 
b.  Design and construction of a storm sewer. 
c.  Design and construction of open channels. 
d.  Design and construction of stormwater detention storage. 
(c)  Appeal procedure. 
(1)  Should the application of this article produce drainage facilities which serve to prevent compliance or serve to create offsetting difficulties, the net result of which is detrimental, the city engineer is hereby authorized to hear and consider such difficulties. 
(2)  The city engineer, upon consideration of the facts, shall file a report with the committee of the whole of the city commission. 
(3)  The applicant's input, along with the report as set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section, shall be considered by the city commission committee of the whole and the city commission committee of the whole is hereby designated as the appropriate body to grant a waiver from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004,  78-103; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.181; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 78-104. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction for which the fine shall be an amount not less than $2,500.00 or such lesser amount set by Act 451. 
(b)  Each day a violation exists or continues shall be deemed as a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation, who, having been determined to be responsible for a violation of this article, commits and is found responsible for a subsequent violation, within a two-year period, shall be fined in an amount double the amount of the fine assessed for the immediately preceding violation. 
(d)  In addition to fines assessed pursuant to subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section, a person, firm or corporation found to be responsible for a violation shall pay the city's actual costs, direct or indirect, for correcting and abating the violation, and the actual costs, direct and indirect, to which the city has put in correcting the violation, to the extent permitted by law, in the event the fines and costs are not fully paid within 30 days, the fines and costs may be added to and made part of the next city tax bill against the subject premises and may be collected in the same manner as provided by state law for the collection of city taxes on real estate. 
(Code 2004,  78-104; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.182; Ord. No. 03-01,  2, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 02-02, 1-7-2002) 
Secs. 78-105-78-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 78-121. - Drain construction. 
(a)  City. 
(1)  A drain construction project may be undertaken by the city following receipt of a petition or by initiative of the city commission. 
(2)  Appropriate special assessment hearings must be conducted prior to any further action beyond receipt of a petition or project initiative by the city commission, unless the city commission determines that it is in the best interest of the city to finance the construction project in another manner. 
(3)  The special assessment amount for any chapter 20 drain project shall be divided into 50 percent from the city's drain-at-large fund and 50 percent from the special assessment district. 
(4)  For any enclosure of a drain, except as otherwise provided for in this section, the 50 percent special assessment district amount divides into 25 percent per front foot along the enclosure because of a special benefit and 25 percent from the district because of a legal benefit. 
(b)  Developers. 
(1)  Any drain improvement work required because of land improvement shall be 100 percent funded by the developer. Inherent in this concept is a fundamental principle that an existing drain reduces raw land costs as compared to land without such encumbrance. 
(2)  For any residential development, drains must be enclosed along all front and side yards. 
(3)  All developments must carry a floodway through the development so as to preclude property damage. Dual conduits may be installed in lieu of an overland floodway cross section. Each conduit must be able to carry the flow for a 100-year (one percent chance) storm event. Each of these two conduits must flow to separate systems and thus must not share manholes. 
(4)  Storm sewer laterals must be provided to any building when soil borings or actual excavation indicates a siting in the water table. A hydraulic break must occur between the building and storm sewer so that a storm sewer backup will not affect the building. 
(5)  A grading plan showing surface and subsurface drainage on the parcel and any division of that parcel must be filed and approved by the city for purposes of ensuring that the drainage system and building development are compatible. 
(6)  A site grading and stormwater management bond in the amount of $30,000.00, payable to the city, is required for any nonplat development requiring stormwater detention, floodway construction, or surface or subsurface drainage construction. Such bond is posted to ensure that the approved plan is constructed in the field. Developments of less than one acre or remaining undeveloped parcel size of less than one acre are exempt. Upon certification by a registered professional engineer that such construction has taken place according to the approved plans and specifications, and subsequent approval by the engineering staff, such bond will be released. Certification shall be according to as-built certification requirements of the city, which are adopted in connection and conjunction with this article. Filing of a false certification is subject to the penalties of this article as provided in section 78-104(a). 
(7)  When plans cannot be certified, a review fee as established by resolution of the city commission is required with either a redesign for the corrective stormwater system measures or calculations showing the hydraulic grade lines for both the ten-year and 25-year storm event for the "as-built" site in addition to the submitted mylars. City staff will review the "as-builts" and conduct a site visit, if necessary, to evaluate the potential property impacts and public safety. The hydraulic grade lines will also be reviewed to determine if the water depth for a ten-year or 25-year storm event creates public safety concerns. 
(8)  If a determination is made by the city engineer that a deficiency is not likely to pose a risk to property or public safety, then the owner of the property will be notified of the deficiency and given the following options: 
a.  If the property owner wants to have the stormwater system corrected then the system will be either corrected by the contractor or by the city utilizing the bond. If this option is chosen by the property owner and the costs of correction exceed the bond amount, then the property owner will be held responsible for the difference by paying the excess amount to the city within 30 days of invoicing by the city. 
b.  If the property owner does not want to have the stormwater system corrected, then a professional engineer will certify that "No property damage and/or public safety issues will arise out of the deficiencies of the stormwater system" and the property owner, on behalf of himself, his successors and assigns, shall indemnify the city for all costs, damages, claims or losses attributable to the failure by the property owner or its contractor to construct the stormwater system in accordance with the approved plans. The indemnification will be recorded at the property owner's expense. 
(c)  Private property owners. 
(1)  Drain improvement by a private property owner can be undertaken only after approval by the city and any other appropriate jurisdiction. 
(2)  Costs for improvement are the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Stream protection. 
(1)  Any natural stream, as defined under the act, shall be protected from drain improvement work by means of a 50-foot, no disturbance zone centered on the stream. 
(2)  Exceptions to the no disturbance zone are road culverts and drain enclosures required in front and side yards of residential developments. 
(Code 2004,  78-121; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.175; Ord. No. 03-01,  1, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 11-03,  25.175, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 78-122. - Drain maintenance. 
(a)  City. 
(1)  Any chapter 20 drain improved under a construction project shall be maintained by the city to the following degree: 
a.  Enclosed drains, structures, ditch checks, spillways and constructed erosion protection shall be 100 percent. 
b.  Restoration of hydraulic capacity to prevent property damage shall be 100 percent. 
c.  Stagnant water or erosion remediation will not be performed if correction of the problem would cause greater problems than the existing condition by reason of quantity of earth to be disturbed. 
(2)  Any drain improvement constructed as part of plat improvements and for which a drain easement exists shall be maintained by the city to the same degree as in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Private property owners. 
(1)  For any drain, whether improved or unimproved, the adjacent property owner shall have responsibility of natural growth management of weeds, trees and turf. 
(2)  Any unimproved drain shall be maintained 100 percent by the adjacent property owner. Riparian rights also includes riparian responsibility. The existence of a drain or even a recorded drain easement does not confer on the city the maintenance responsibility. 
(3)  No filling, blocking, fencing or above the surface vegetation planting is to be undertaken within a floodway, except by written approval of the city engineer. 
(4)  For an overland flow drainage easement: 
a.  Site screen fences are not allowed below the top of the bank or the edge of the easement, whichever is higher. 
b.  Chainlink fences will be allowed if it is determined by the engineering department that the chainlink fence will not obstruct or divert the flow of water. 
c.  If the fences are removed by the city for drain access or maintenance, they are to be replaced by the owner of the fence, at the owner's expense. 
d.  No shrubs or trees are to be placed below the top of the bank or the edge of the easement, whichever is higher, unless written approval is received from the city engineer. 
(5)  For a storm sewer easement, shrubs, trees or above the ground vegetation are not permitted to be planted. If the easement is only for storm sewer purposes, a fence can be allowed under the same removal conditions as an overland flow easement. 
(Code 2004,  78-122; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.176) 
Sec. 78-123. - Stormwater detention. 
(a)  Lands subject to requirements; exceptions. Any and all parcels of land are subject to stormwater detention storage requirements in the city, unless the parcel meets one of the following requirements: 
(1)  Is less than one acre in total size or the undeveloped remainder of the parcel is less than one acre. 
(2)  Is within the Crippen or Esbaugh Drains and has an adequate downstream channel. 
(3)  Over 25 percent is a floodplain. 
(4)  Dry wells could be used. 
(5)  Development density is one dwelling unit per acre or less. 
(6)  Already has a master pond to serve the parcel and downstream facilities between the parcel and the master pond are adequate to transport the water. In this case, the master pond must be used. 
(b)  Phase and sequence limitations. 
(1)  To avoid large numbers of detention sites, each original parcel, as of the original adoption date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, is allowed only one detention pond for that parcel. If the original parcel is split off, phased or in any way only partially developed at such time, the detention facility for the whole original parcel must be constructed with the initial construction, regardless of where on the original parcel the pond is best suited. The city expects property owners to work together on property splits to prevent the occurrence of many ponds. 
(2)  Stormwater detention storage is to be the first item of earth moving on any site and must work along with soil erosion prevention requirements to reduce peak downstream flows from the first day of earth change. 
(c)  Maintenance responsibility. 
(1)  For all recorded plats, following final approval by the city, control and maintenance of the stormwater detention storage facility shall be by and under the city. The city shall be responsible for any and all work related to the hydraulic functioning of such facility. The property owner on whose parcel the easement for the facility rests is responsible for turf maintenance. 
(2)  For any development under which the land or parcel remains in one ownership, control and maintenance of the detention storage facility is the responsibility of the property owner. Should the property owner neglect to maintain the storage in such a manner that failure of the detention concept could occur, the city, following proper notification, shall have the right to make the necessary repairs or maintenance and add the cost thereof to the next tax bill covering the subject premises. 
(Code 2004,  78-123; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.177) 
Sec. 78-124. - Stormwater connections. 
(a)  Parking lots. Any parking lot paved after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and which, in its final configuration, constitutes over 2,500 square feet of pavement, shall not be allowed to drain directly to any adjacent surface, but shall drain to an internal storm sewer system. 
(b)  Roof drainage. Residential buildings of two units or less shall dump roof drainage onto the lawn adjacent to the building. A time lapse is needed to reduce peak flows in the storm sewer system. An exception to this requirement shall be permitted for a building with a zero setback, in which case the roof drainage shall be discharged directly to the storm sewer system. 
(c)  Sump pump discharge. 
(1)  Whenever a building needs footing drains because of a high water table which is within two feet of the footing drains or impervious soils, a direct connection between the footing drains through a sump pump check valve system to a storm sewer is required. A gravity system is not allowed. Should a storm sewer lateral or other suitable storm sewer connection point not be available, or if the elevation of the lowest floor level of a building is significantly higher than the adjacent storm sewer, then consideration will be given by the city engineer to a waiver of this requirement. 
(2)  Storm sewer laterals are to be provided at the time of storm sewer construction so that permanent pavement will not have to be removed for the installation. For plats, one storm lateral for every two parcels is required. 
(d)  Swimming pools. Swimming pool discharge water is allowed into the drainage system under the same conditions as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Private storm sewers connected to external sources. Private storm sewers connected to external sources, such as parking lot drains or yard drains, shall not be built under a building. 
(Code 2004,  78-124; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.178) 
Sec. 78-125. - Private property drainage. 
(a)  Building openings. 
(1)  Any building in a flooding influence area of a swale, drainageway, floodway, ditch, culvert, detention pond or any device which controls flooding shall strictly control the lowest building opening elevation so as to preclude building damage. 
(2)  No building opening shall be constructed below the following elevations: 
a.  One foot above the 100-year floodplain established under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
b.  The building opening established at the time of the plat or development approval and on file in the inspection department. 
c.  Three feet above the top of any downstream culvert. 
d.  Four feet above the bottom of any permanent and defined drainageway. 
e.  Five feet above the bottom of any drainageway that could be enclosed in pipe in the probable future. 
(3)  A waiver from meeting elevations outlined in subsection (a)(2) of this section can be granted by the city engineer following receipt of a certified letter from a registered professional engineer which supports the proposed elevation as being nonhazardous. 
(4)  The construction of any minimum building opening specified by this article or an approved grading plan must be certified, upon its completion, by a registered land surveyor. This certification, attesting that the building opening meets the specified standards, must be submitted by the permittee to the city engineer's office before the foundation inspection is performed. If the surveyor should find that the minimum building opening is below the specified elevation, that opening must be raised or protected by using a method which meets the approval of the city building official. The reconstruction must then be certified by the registered land surveyor before additional construction is undertaken. 
(b)  Lot drainage. 
(1)  Any drainage situation not involving any public property water is the responsibility of the property owner. 
(2)  In plat and site plan review, the city will only review private property drainage for the purpose of ensuring that private property can be drained. 
(3)  Lot grading and private property drainage is a civil matter among the property owners affected. 
(4)  The city will provide technical advice to a property owner on drainage matters, but help will be limited to advice only. 
(5)  To aid contractors and builders in grading private property, a lot grading plan will be required on all developments and such information shall be disbursed along with the building permit. The lot grading plan must show the following: 
a.  Any established minimum building opening. 
b.  Floodway elevations. 
c.  All storm sewers and the size, grade, invert elevation and top of casting elevations. 
d.  All storm sewer laterals. 
e.  All utility and drainage easements and their full description. 
f.  Minimum basement elevation for the sanitary sewer. 
g.  Direction of drainage on each lot. 
h.  Elevation of any constructed surface drainage facility. 
i.  Surface grading of the entire parcel. 
(6)  A minimum rear yard of 25 feet prior to any drainage encumbrance is required. This will allow an opportunity for rear yard use for sheds, play equipment, etc., without concern about water damage or inconvenience. 
(7)  Prior to construction of any structure on a parcel or lot upon which a floodway easement exists, the permittee must obtain from the inspections department a copy of the approved plans, showing the location and design elevations of the floodway. Upon completion of the structure and prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the permittee must provide a certification from a registered land surveyor that the floodway grades and dimensions are as designed. If the floodway does not conform to the approved plans, the floodway must be reconstructed and certified prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for that lot or parcel. Concurrent floodway reconstruction and issuance of an occupancy permit are permitted only if that action does not present a danger to the safety and welfare of any affected property. To permit concurrent action, the permittee shall provide the city with a performance bond, letter of credit or cash deposit to cover the cost of such reconstruction at a dollar amount established by the city. 
(Code 2004,  78-125; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.179) 
Sec. 78-126. - Floodplain protection. 
(a)  No alteration of the natural floodway shall be allowed. 
(b)  No alteration of the natural floodway fringe shall be allowed unless natural vegetation, consisting of trees, scrub trees and shrubs, are at a density of one per 100 square feet or less. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section are intended to keep a major drain system in dynamic equilibrium so that the drain can handle major storms without major soil erosion occurring because of impact of natural root systems on soil stabilization. 
(d)  Only in areas of the floodway fringe can permitted development take place and then only in areas of low concentrations of natural soil holding root systems as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  No filling of any floodway or naturally vegetated floodway fringe shall take place. 
(f)  For purposes of retaining the current natural flood storage in the floodway fringe, no filling of any sparsely vegetated portion of the floodway fringe shall take place unless the storage taken away by the filling action is created in another portion of the site outside the floodway fringe. Such process shall be known as "offset detention." 
(g)  In order to protect the Federal Emergency Management Agency designated floodplain fringe from erosion damage, a "Do Not Disturb/Natural Erosion Control Zone" is to be established and called out on a recorded plat, an approved block grading plan, a site plan or an improvement plan. Such zone consists of existing natural tree and vegetation slope protection on the bank immediately adjacent to the established floodplain and shall be maintained as is (e.g., no earth change or vegetation change of any sort is to take place), including planting of additional vegetation, shrubs or trees. Should bank erosion, tree blockage or any excessive erosion of any type threaten the property immediately adjacent to the zone, the city will take any corrective action necessary. If the cause is action taken by the property owner, then such owner will be billed for the corrective action. The limits for the zone extend from the edge of the established floodplain to the established top of the bank. The top of the bank is established in the following sequence: 
(1)  Existing top of bank where the stream channel is within ten feet of the base of the bank or aims at the base of the bank. 
(2)  Existing top of bank where downslope to the floodplain is one on three or steeper. 
(3)  A developed top of bank where: 
a.  The existing downslope is flatter than one on three. 
b.  A six-foot band of natural vegetation is left between the floodplain high water mark and the beginning of yard development. 
c.  The developed slope of the yard is one on four or flatter. 
Should the existing bank have no tree or shrub stabilization, the existing bank can be graded, provided that the existing toe of the bank is not moved, the bank slope does not exceed one on three and the bank grading is blanketed with erosion protection immediately following the grading. Any home construction shall allow for a 35-foot rear yard prior to the top of the bank. This allows for several uses in the rear yard which will not disturb the top of the bank. The 35-foot dimension can be reduced, but only after an approved development plan which does not disturb the top of the bank. 
(Code 2004,  78-126; Comp. Ords. 1987,  25.180) 
State Law reference- Construction in floodplains, MCL 324.3108. 
Sec. 78-127. - Reserved. 
Secs. 78-128-78-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION 
Subdivision 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 78-131. - Statutory authority and title. 
(a)  This division is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, as amended, being MCL 117.1 et seq.; the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq.; the Land Division Act, as amended, being MCL 560.101 et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as amended, being MCL 141.101 et seq.; the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, as amended, being MCL 324.101 et seq.; section 401(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean Water Act), as amended, being 33 USC 1342(p) and 40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123, and 124; and other applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted, or duties imposed, upon the city may be delegated in writing by the mayor to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of the city. 
(Code 2004,  78-131; Ord. No. 11-04,  1.01, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-132. - Findings. 
    The city finds that: 
(1)  Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly degrade the waterbodies and water resources of the city, thus threatening the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry. 
(2)  Illicit discharges enter the stormwater drainage system through either direct connections (e.g., wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm drains) or indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the storm drain system or spills connected by drain inlets). 
(3)  Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges and connections contained in this division and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges. 
(4)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this division is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance. 
(Code 2004,  78-132; Ord. No. 11-04,  1.02, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-133. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system and waterbodies by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit discharges and connections to the stormwater drainage system and waterbodies. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(4)  To provide appropriate remedies for failure to comply with this division. 
(Code 2004,  78-133; Ord. No. 11-04,  1.03, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-134. - Applicability and general provisions. 
    This division shall apply to all discharges entering the stormwater drainage system and waterbodies generated on any developed and undeveloped lands. 
(Code 2004,  78-134; Ord. No. 11-04,  1.04, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-135. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized enforcement agency means the city, and/or any persons or agencies designated to act as the authorized enforcement agency by the city. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means structural devices or nonstructural practices that are designed to prevent pollutants from entering stormwater flows, to direct the flow of stormwater, or to treat polluted stormwater flows. BMPs may include, but shall not be limited to, those described in the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan watersheds. Equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this division (including, but not limited to, minimizing stormwater runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into stormwater) shall be as determined by the city engineer. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Discharge means the introduction (intentionally or unintentionally, and directly or indirectly) of any liquid, substance, pollutant, or other material into a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
    Discharger means any person who directly or indirectly discharges stormwater from any premises. Discharger also includes any employee, officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission that is, or results in, a violation of this division. 
    Drain means any and all conduits, facilities, measures, areas, and structures that serve to convey, catch, hold, filter, store, and/or receive stormwater or groundwater, either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
    Drainage means the collection, conveyance, or discharge of groundwater and/or surface water. 
    Drainageway means a drain, water body, or floodplain. 
    EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
    Floodplain means the area, usually low lands, adjoining the channel of a river, stream, or watercourse or lake, or other body of standing water, that has been or may be covered by floodwater. 
    Hazardous materials means any solid, liquid, semisolid, or gaseous substance or material that because of its quantity, quality, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connection means any method, means, or conduit for conveying an illicit discharge into a water body or a stormwater drainage system. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to a water body or a stormwater drainage system that does not consist entirely of stormwater, that is not authorized by the terms of an NPDES permit, or that is not an authorized discharge as defined by this division. 
    MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued by the EPA or a state under authority delegated pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the stormwater drainage system or a water body that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or any other legal entity. 
    Pollutant includes, but is not limited to, any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes, radioactive materials, hazardous materials, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial, and agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean Water Act. The term "pollutant" also includes properties or characteristics of water, including, but not limited to, pH, heat, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor. 
    Premises means any building, structure, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, or property, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Property owner means any person having legal or equitable title to premises or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any premises. 
    State of Michigan Water Quality Standards means all applicable state rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of section 3106 of part 31 of 1994 PA 451, as amended. 
    Stormwater drainage system means storm sewers, conduits, curbs, gutters, catch basins, drains, ditches, pumping devices, parking lots, roads, or other manmade channels that are designed or used, singly or together in combination with one another, for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document, that describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, a stormwater drainage system, and/or a water body to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Stormwater runoff (or stormwater) means the runoff and drainage of precipitation resulting from rainfall, snowmelt, or other natural event or process. 
    Toxic material means any pollutant or combination of pollutants that is or can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment, including, without limitation, those listed in 40 CFR 401.15 as toxic under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or listed in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the state department of environmental quality, or as otherwise provided by local, state, or federal laws, rules, or regulations. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a premises. The term includes any water that has in any way been used and degraded or physically or chemically altered. 
    Water body means a river, lake, stream, creek, or other watercourse or wetlands. 
(Code 2004,  78-135; Ord. No. 11-04,  1.05, 10-24-2004) 
Subdivision 2. - Prohibitions and Authorizations 

Sec. 78-136. - Prohibited discharges. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, to a stormwater drainage system or water body any substance or material, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater or an authorized discharge. This prohibition includes the commencement, conducting, or continuance of any illicit discharge by any person to a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
(2)  Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively prevent pollutants from being discharged with the stormwater, except in accordance with BMPs. 
(3)  The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution prevention measures, using stormwater pollution prevention plans and BMPs, as determined necessary by the authorized enforcement agency to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
(4)  The discharge prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge authorized under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the EPA, provided the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater drainage system. 
(Code 2004,  78-136; Ord. No. 11-04,  2.01, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-137. - Prohibited illicit connections. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, use, maintain (or to allow the construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of) an illicit connection. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived, and regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Code 2004,  78-137; Ord. No. 11-04,  2.02, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-138. - Authorized discharges. 
    The following nonstormwater discharges are permissible, but only if they do not result in a violation of State of Michigan water quality standards and provided that they are undertaken in compliance with any applicable or required BMPs: 
(1)  Water supply line flushing. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation runoff. 
(3)  Diverted stream flows. 
(4)  Rising groundwater. 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains. 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater. 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources. 
(8)  Foundation (footing) drains. 
(9)  Air conditioning condensate. 
(10)  Irrigation water. 
(11)  Springs. 
(12)  Water from crawl space pumps. 
(13)  Footing drains and basement sump pumps. 
(14)  Lawn watering runoff. 
(15)  Waters from noncommercial car washing. 
(16)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
(17)  Residential swimming pool water and other dechlorinated swimming pool water, provided that any filter backwash water that is present is treated. 
(18)  Residual street wash water. 
(19)  Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities. 
(20)  Discharges specifically authorized in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health, welfare, and safety or the environment. 
(Code 2004,  78-138; Ord. No. 11-04,  2.03, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-139. - Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway. 
    Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store or stockpile, within a drainageway, any hazardous or toxic materials, unless adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent any such materials from entering a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
(Code 2004,  78-139; Ord. No. 11-04,  2.04, 10-24-2004) 
Subdivision 3. - Inspection, Monitoring, Reporting, and Recordkeeping 

Sec. 78-140. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The authorized enforcement agency may inspect and/or obtain samples from any discharger's premises as necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this division. Upon request, the discharger shall allow properly identified representatives of the authorized enforcement agency to enter the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or investigation, including, but not limited to, smoke/dye testing, televising pipes, sampling, and excavation. The authorized enforcement agency shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice of the need for such access, if possible and consistent with protection of public health and safety and the environment. The properly identified representatives may place on the discharger's premises the equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. Unreasonable delays in allowing access to a premises is a violation of this division. 
(Code 2004,  78-140; Ord. No. 11-04,  3.01, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-141. - Stormwater monitoring facilities. 
    If directed in writing to do so by the authorized enforcement agency, a discharger of stormwater runoff from any premises used for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide and operate equipment or devices for the monitoring of stormwater runoff to provide for inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water body or a stormwater drainage system, as specified by the authorized enforcement agency. The authorized enforcement agency may require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects from, or as a result of, such discharges may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained at the discharger's expense in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Code 2004,  78-141; Ord. No. 11-04,  3.02, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-142. - Accidental discharges. 
    Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a stormwater drainage system or a water body any substance other than stormwater or an authorized discharge shall immediately notify the authorized enforcement agency of the discharge. If the notification is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the authorized enforcement agency within five days. The written report shall specify all of the following: 
(1)  The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof. 
(2)  The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge. 
(3)  All measures taken to clean up the discharge, all measures taken or proposed to be taken to mitigate any known or potential adverse impacts of the discharge, and all measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrences. 
(4)  The names and telephone numbers of the individual making the report, and (if different) the individual who may be contacted for additional information regarding the discharge. 
(Code 2004,  78-142; Ord. No. 11-04,  3.03, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-143. - Recordkeeping requirement. 
    Any person that violates any requirement of this division or that is subject to monitoring under this division shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and records, including records on magnetic or electronic media, and any and all summaries of such records relating to monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis of any discharge or stormwater runoff from any premises connected with the violation or subject to monitoring. 
(Code 2004,  78-143; Ord. No. 11-04,  3.04, 10-24-2004) 
Subdivision 4. - Enforcement 

Sec. 78-144. - Sanctions for violation. 
(a)  Violation; municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by subsection (f) of this section, and notwithstanding any other provision of the city's laws, ordinances, and regulations to the contrary, a person who violates any provision of this division (including, without limitation, any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the authorized enforcement agency under this division) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $1,000.00 per day for each infraction and not more than $10,000.00 per day for each infraction, plus costs and other sanctions. 
(b)  Repeat offenses; increased fines. Increased fines may be imposed for repeat offenses. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this division committed by a person within any 12-month period and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fine for any offense that is a first repeat offense shall be not less than $2,500.00, plus costs. 
(2)  The fine for any offense that is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000.00, plus costs. 
(c)  Amount of fines. Subject to the minimum fine amounts specified in subsection (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the following factors shall be considered by a court in determining the amount of a municipal civil infraction fine following the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of this division: the type, nature, severity, frequency, duration, preventability, potential and actual effect, and economic benefit to the violator (such as delayed or avoided costs or competitive advantage) of a violation; the violator's recalcitrance or efforts to comply; the economic impacts of the fine on the violator; and such other matters as justice may require. A violator shall bear the burden of demonstrating the presence and degree of any mitigating factors to be considered in determining the amount of a fine. However, mitigating factors shall not be considered unless it is determined that the violator has made all good faith efforts to correct and terminate all violations. 
(d)  Authorized local official. Notwithstanding any other provision of the city's laws, ordinances, and regulations to the contrary, the following persons are designated as the authorized local officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in district court) and/or notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the city's municipal violations bureau, as applicable) for violations of this division (in addition to any other persons so designated by the authorized enforcement agency): the city engineer and his assigns, and any police officer. 
(e)  Other requirements and procedures. Except as otherwise provided by this section, the requirements and procedures for commencing municipal civil infraction actions; issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations; determination and collection of court-ordered fines, costs and expenses; appearances and payment of fines and costs; failure to answer, appear or, pay fines; disposition of fines, costs and expenses paid; and other matters regarding municipal civil infractions shall be as set forth in Public Act No. 236 of 1961(MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
(f)  Violations. Any person who: 
(1)  At the time of a violation knew or should have known that a pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this division, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the authorized enforcement agency under this division; 
(2)  Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this division, or in any other correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the authorized enforcement agency regarding matters regulated by this division; or 
(3)  Intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this division; or 
(4)  Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days; shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
(g)  Aiding and abetting. Any person who aids or abets another person in a violation of this division shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section. 
(Code 2004,  78-144; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.01, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-145. - Failure to comply; completion. 
    The authorized enforcement agency is authorized, after giving reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, to correct any violation of this division or damage or impairment to the stormwater drainage system caused by a discharge and to bill the person causing the violation or discharge for the costs of the work to be reimbursed. The costs reimbursable under this section shall be in addition to fees, amounts or other costs and expenses required to be paid to the authorized enforcement agency under other sections of this division. 
(Code 2004,  78-145; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.02, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-146. - Emergency measures. 
    If emergency measures are necessary to respond to a nuisance; to protect public safety, health, and welfare; and/or to prevent loss of life, injury, or damage to property, the authorized enforcement agency is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this division, and shall promptly reimburse the city for all of such costs. 
(Code 2004,  78-146; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.03, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-147. - Cost recovery for damage to stormwater drainage system. 
    Any person who discharges to a stormwater drainage system or a water body, including, but not limited to, any person who causes or creates a discharge that violates any provision of this division, produces a deposit or obstruction or otherwise damages or impairs a stormwater drainage system, or causes or contributes to a violation of any federal, state, or local law governing the city, shall be liable to and shall fully reimburse the city for all expenses, costs, losses or damages (direct or indirect) payable or incurred by the city as a result of any such discharge, deposit, obstruction, damage, impairment, violation, exceedence or noncompliance. The costs that must be reimbursed to the city shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  All costs incurred by the city in responding to the violation or discharge, including, expenses for any cleaning, repair or replacement work, and the costs of sampling, monitoring, and treatment, as a result of the discharge, violation, exceedence or noncompliance. 
(2)  All costs to the city of monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement in connection with investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedence, or noncompliance. 
(3)  The full amount of any fines, assessments, penalties, and claims, including natural resource damages, levied against the city, or any city representative, by any governmental agency or third party as a result of a violation of applicable laws or regulations that is caused by or contributed to by any discharge, violation, exceedence, or noncompliance. 
(4)  The full value of any city staff time (including any required overtime), consultant and engineering fees, and actual attorney fees and defense costs (including the city legal counsel and any special legal counsel), associated with responding to, investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedence or noncompliance, or otherwise enforcing the requirements of this division. 
(Code 2004,  78-147; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.04, 10-24-2004) 
State Law reference- Expenses for reimbursement for emergency response, MCL 769.1f; environmental remediation, MCL 324.20101 et seq. 
Sec. 78-148. - Collection of costs; lien. 
(a)  Costs incurred by the city pursuant to sections 78-145, 78-146, 78-147, and 78-149(1) shall constitute a lien on the premises, which shall be enforceable in accordance with Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), or as otherwise authorized by law. Any such charges that are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer, who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises, the costs shall be collected, and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the city shall have all remedies authorized by Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), and by other applicable laws. 
(b)  The failure by any person to pay any amounts required to be reimbursed to the city as provided by this division shall constitute an additional violation of this division. 
(Code 2004,  78-148; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.05, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-149. - Suspension of access to the stormwater drainage system. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend access to the stormwater drainage system to any person or premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the stormwater drainage system or a water body. If the person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the stormwater drainage system or the environment, or to minimize danger to persons, and bill the person for the costs to the city in taking such steps. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the stormwater drainage system in violation of this division may have their access to the system terminated, if the authorized enforcement agency determines that such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its access. It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate access of the stormwater drainage system to a premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior written approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Code 2004,  78-149; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.06, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-150. - Appeals. 
    Any person to whom any provision of this division has been applied may appeal in writing to the city commission committee of the whole, not later than 30 days after the action or decision being appealed. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The city commission committee of the whole shall consider the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects, or modifies the action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the city commission committee of the whole may consider the recommendations of the authorized enforcement agency and the comments of other persons having knowledge or expertise regarding the matter. In considering any such appeal, the city commission committee of the whole may grant a temporary variance from the terms of this division so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The application of the division provisions being appealed will present or cause unnecessary hardship for the person appealing; provided, however, that unnecessary hardship shall not include the need for a property owner to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with the division; and 
(2)  The granting of the relief requested will not prevent accomplishment of the goals and purposes of this division, nor result in less effective management of stormwater runoff. 
(Code 2004,  78-150; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.07, 10-24-2004; Memo of 8-2-2012) 
Sec. 78-151. - Judicial relief. 
    With the approval of the city, the authorized enforcement agency may institute legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek all appropriate relief for violations of this division or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this division. The action may seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief, damages, penalties, costs, and any other relief, at law or equity, that a court may order. The authorized enforcement agency may also seek collection of fines, penalties and any other amounts due to the city that a person has not paid. 
(Code 2004,  78-151; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.08, 10-24-2004) 
Sec. 78-152. - Cumulative remedies. 
    The imposition of a single penalty, fine, order, damage, or surcharge upon any person for a violation of this division, or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued, or entered into under this article, shall not preclude the imposition by the city, the authorized enforcement agency, or a court of competent jurisdiction of a combination of any or all of those sanctions and remedies or additional sanctions and remedies with respect to the same violation, consistent with applicable limitations on penalty amounts under state or federal laws or regulations. A criminal citation and prosecution of a criminal action against a person shall not be dependent upon and need not be held in abeyance during any civil, judicial, or administrative proceeding, conference, or hearing regarding the person. 
(Code 2004,  78-152; Ord. No. 11-04,  4.09, 10-24-2004) 
Subdivision 5. - Performance and Design Standards 

Sec. 78-153. - Responsibility to implement BMPs. 
    The owner or operator of a premises used for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide, at the owner or operator's own expense, reasonable protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the stormwater drainage system or water body through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at the person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system or water body. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2004,  78-153; Ord. No. 11-04,  5.01, 10-24-2004) 
Chapter 82 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Historical records and sites, MCL 399.1 et seq.; Local Historic Districts Act, MCL 399.201 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Adoption of local historic districts act. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference as if set out fully in this chapter the local historic districts act, Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). 
(Code 2004,  82-1-82-4) 
Secs. 82-2-82-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 82-5. - Penalties. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 2004,  82-5; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.264(2)) 
Secs. 82-6-82-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Historic district commissions, MCL 399.204 et seq. 

Sec. 82-41. - Established; membership; terms of office; vacancies; meetings. 
    The historic preservation commission is established. Such commission shall consist of seven members at least six of who shall be Kentwood residents. No more than one nonresident member may be allowed to serve the historic preservation commission at any given time. Such a nonresident member shall be appointed based on prior ties to and demonstrated evidence of knowledge about Paris Township and/or the City of Kentwood. Members shall be appointed by the city commission. 
(Code 2004,  82-41; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.255; Ord. No. 02-06,  1, 1-29-2006) 
State Law reference- Appointment authority, MCL 399.204. 
Secs. 82-42-82-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Secs. 82-81-82-86. - Reserved. 
Sec. 82-87. - Specific historic districts, landmarks and resources. 
    The following are descriptions of specific historic districts, landmarks and resources: 
(1)  Octagon House. 
a.  That part of the northwest one-quarter, section 13, T6N, R11W, City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan, described as beginning at a point on the west line of such northwest one-quarter, which is north 0222' west 25 feet from the west one-quarter corner of section 13; thence north 0222' west 200 feet along such west line; thence south 8959'20" east 233 feet parallel with the south line of such northwest one-quarter; thence south 0222' east 200 feet; thence north 8959'20" west 233 feet to the place of beginning, subject to the highway right-of-way for East Paris Avenue over the westerly 33 feet thereof. This parcel contains 1.069 acres, including the highway right-of-way. 
b.  Common location. 3180 East Paris Avenue. 
(2)  Bowen House and cattle tunnel. 
a.  Bowen House. Part of lot 33, Kentwood Mall Plat, part of the northwest one-quarter, section 28, T6N, R11W, City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan, as recorded in liber 77 of plats, page 38, described as commencing 20.01 feet south 0203'11" east along the east line of such lot 33 from the intersection of such east lot line and north line of lot 20 of such plat; thence south 8936'49" west 88.49 feet; thence northwesterly 177.78 feet along a 220-foot radius curve to the right, long chord bears north 6714'11" west 172.98 feet, to the northeasterly line of Bowen Avenue; thence northwesterly along Bowen Avenue to the most westerly corner of such lot 33; thence northeasterly along the northwesterly lot line to the north line of such lot; thence east to the northeast corner of such lot; thence south to the beginning. 41-18-28-127-009. 
b.  Cattle tunnel. A rectangular area formed by joining the two following rectangular areas: 
1.  Rectangle one. An area at the northeast side of the tunnel formed by measuring 20 feet in a southeasterly direction parallel with the rail trail from the base piece of lumber projecting outward from the tunnel which forms part of the southeastern wall of the tunnel; thence northeasterly at a right angle to the previous line for a distance of 20 feet; thence northwesterly at a right angle to the previous line a distance of 50 feet; thence southwesterly at a right angle to the previous line for a distance of 20 feet; thence southeasterly at a right angle to the previous line for a distance of 30 feet. 
2.  Rectangle two. An area at the southwest side of the tunnel formed by measuring 20 feet in a southeasterly direction parallel with the rail trail from the base piece of lumber projecting outward from the tunnel which forms part of the southeastern wall of the tunnel; thence southwesterly at a right angle to the previous line for a distance of 20 feet; thence northwesterly at a right angle to the previous line a distance of 50 feet; thence northeasterly at a right angle to the previous line for a distance of 20 feet; thence southeasterly at a right angle to the previous line for a distance of 30 feet. Such area as described includes parts of 4499, 4501 and 4505 Bowen Boulevard and 1657 and 1675 View Pond Drive. These properties have a legal description as follows: 
(i)  4499 Bowen Boulevard. Lot 39 Kentwood Mall Plat, section 28, T6N, R11W, City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan. 
(ii)  4501 Bowen Boulevard. That part of lot 20 commencing at the intersection of the west line of such lot and the south line of Bowen Boulevard (60 feet wide); thence north 8936'49" east along the south line of Bowen Boulevard 283.80 feet; thence south 4202'00" east 185.17 feet; thence south 4758'00" west to the northerly line of Penn Central Railroad right-of-way (60 feet wide); thence northwesterly along such railroad right-of-way to the west line of such lot; thence north along the west lot line to the point of beginning, Kentwood Mall Plat, section 28, T6N, R11W, City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan. 
(iii)  4505 Bowen Boulevard. That part of the northwest one-quarter, section 28, T6N, R11W, City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan, described as commencing at the intersection of the southwesterly line of the former K.B.E.C. Railroad right-of-way (60 feet wide) and the north line of Sutherland Park; thence northeasterly perpendicular to the southwesterly line of such railroad right-of-way to the northeasterly line of such railroad right-of-way; thence southeasterly along such northeasterly line to the east line of the west one-half northwest one-quarter; thence south along such east line to the southwesterly line of such railroad right-of-way; thence northwesterly along such southwesterly line to the point of beginning. 
(iv)  1657 View Pond Drive. Lot 4, except commencing at the most northerly corner of such lot; thence south 4203'30" east along the northeasterly line of such lot 60.42 feet; thence south 4756'30" west 131.14 feet to the most northerly corner of lot 5; thence south 1220'00" west 298.61 feet along the westerly line of lot 5 to the northerly line of View Pond Drive (66 feet wide); thence northwesterly along such northerly line 32.42 feet to the easterly line of lot 1; thence north 215'00" west along such easterly line 225.35 feet to the most southerly corner of lot 3; thence north 4019'10" east 247.47 feet along the southeasterly line on lot 3 to the point of beginning, Sutherland Park Plat, section 28, T6N, R11W, City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan. 
(v)  1675 View Pond Drive. Lot 6 of Sutherland Park Plat, section 28, T6N, R11W, City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan. 
c.  Common location. 4550 Bowen Boulevard; 4499, 4501 and 4505 Bowen Boulevard; and 1657 and 1675 View Pond Drive. 
(Code 2004,  82-87; Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.265; Ord. No. 13-02,  1, 5-21-2002) 
State Law reference- Establishment of historic districts, MCL 399.203. 
Chapter 86 - PLANNING AND MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance adopting or amending a comprehensive plan saved from repeal,  1-11(9); administration, ch. 2; natural resources, ch. 30; special assessments, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74; environment, ch. 78; historic preservation, ch. 82; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 90; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Planning commission,  6.14. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions,  2-121 et seq. 

Sec. 86-31. - Established. 
    The City Planning Commission shall continue to serve the City pursuant to Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3881(2)) and shall be entitled to exercise all the powers, duties and functions provided by such act and by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.001; Ord. No. 10-08,  1, 8-29-2008) 
State Law reference- Authority to create planning commission, MCL 125.32. 
Sec. 86-32. - Membership. 
    The Planning Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be representative insofar as possible of different professions or occupations and shall be appointed by the Mayor. The appointments by the Mayor shall always be subject to the approval of a majority vote of the City Commission. All members of the Planning Commission shall receive such compensation as the City Commission shall provide from time to time by resolution and shall hold no other City of Kentwood elected municipal office nor serve as an employee of the City. The term of each member shall be three years or until his successor takes office. Members may, after public hearing, be removed by the Mayor, subject to approval by a majority vote of the City Commission, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. Vacancies that occur, other than through the expiration of terms, shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor, subject to the approval by a majority vote of the City Commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.002; Ord. No. 10-08,  2, 8-29-2008) 
State Law reference- Planning commission membership, MCL 125.33. 
Sec. 86-33. - Officers; meetings; rules; records. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members, and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(b)  The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. 
(c)  The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.003) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.34. 
Sec. 86-34. - Expenditures. 
    The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City Commission, which shall provide for funds, equipment and accommodations reasonably necessary for the Planning Commission's work. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.35. 
Sec. 86-35. - Master plan. 
(a)  It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the City, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the Planning Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of such City and the adjacent areas. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the Planning Commission's recommendations for the development of such territory, including, but not limited to, the: 
(1)  General location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, waterways, bridges, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces; 
(2)  General location of public buildings and other public property; 
(3)  General location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communications, power and other purposes; 
(4)  Removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of such ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; 
(5)  General location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; 
(6)  General character, extent and layout of the replanning and redevelopment of blighted districts and slum areas; and 
(7)  Zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. 
(b)  When requested to do so by the City Commission, it shall also be the duty of the Planning Commission to consider and make informal suggestions to the City Commission regarding any application, petition or proposal for changing the zoning of any parcel of land in the City or such other related problems as the City Commission shall request the Planning Commission to consider. Except when the Planning Commission is acting in its capacity as specified in this article for formal adoptions or recommendations, which necessitate public hearings and specific approval or disapproval by the City Commission, such informal suggestions shall not require public hearings or approval by the City Commission, but shall only assist the City Commission in its determination regarding such application, petition, proposal or other related problem. 
(c)  The Planning Commission may from time to time adopt and publish parts of such proposed master plan, any such parts to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the municipality or one or more of such parts or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The Planning Commission may from time to time amend the plan. In the preparation of such plan, the Planning Commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the municipality and with due regard to its relation to the neighborhood or neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality and its environs which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, but not limited to, adequate provision for traffic, promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.005) 
State Law reference- Master plan generally, MCL 125.36. 
Sec. 86-36. - Proposed municipal plan. 
(a)  Before approving a proposed municipal plan, the Planning Commission shall hold not less than one public hearing on the proposed plan. The hearing shall be held consistent with section 7b(5) of Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.37b(5)). The Planning Commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by such publication as required by law. The Planning Commission shall also submit notice to each entity described in section 7a(2) of Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.37a(2)). 
(b)  The approval of the plan shall be by resolution of the Planning Commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than two-thirds of the membership of the Planning Commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and other descriptive matter intended by the Planning Commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map, plan and descriptive matter, and shall be signed by the chairman or secretary of the Planning Commission. Following approval of the proposed plan by the Planning Commission, the secretary of the Planning Commission shall submit a copy of the proposed plan to the City Commission. 
(c)  Approval of the plan by the Planning Commission under subsection (b) of this section is the final step for adoption of the plan. After approval of the plan by the Planning Commission, the City Commission shall approve or reject the plan, if the City Commission by resolution has asserted the right to approve or reject the plan. 
(d)  If the City Commission rejects the proposed plan, the City Commission shall submit to the Planning Commission a statement of its objections to the proposed plan. The Planning Commission shall consider the City Commission's objections and revise the proposed plan so as to address those objections. The procedures provided in subsections (a)-(c) and this section shall be repeated until a proposed plan is approved by the City Commission. 
(e)  Upon final adoption of the plan, copies of the adopted plan shall be submitted in the same manner as provided for submitting copies of the proposed plan under section 7b(3) of Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.37b(3)). 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.38. 
Sec. 86-37. - Adherence to master plan required; exceptions. 
(a)  Whenever the Planning Commission shall have adopted the master plan of the City, or of one or more major sections of districts thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or structure shall be constructed or authorized in the City or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to, and approved by, the Planning Commission, provided that, in case of disapproval, the Planning Commission shall communicate its reasons to the City Commission, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership; provided, however, that if the public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility be one, the authorizing or financing of which does not, under the law or Charter provisions governing such public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility, fall within the province of the City Commission, then the submission to the Planning Commission shall be by the board, commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the Planning Commission's disapproval may be overruled by such board, commission or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the Planning Commission to take final action within 60 days from and after the date of official submission to it, shall be deemed approval. 
(b)  For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the City and adjacent areas under the master plan, the Planning Commission, after the adoption of the master plan, may prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structure and improvements, which shall be accompanied by a program for the financing thereof. The Planning Commission may annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six years, which program shall show those public structures and improvements in the general order of their priority, which, in the Planning Commission's judgment, will be needed or desirable and can be financed and undertaken within the six-year period. 
(c)  The comprehensive coordinated programs set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements, and, to that end, each agency or department of such municipality concerned with such improvements shall, upon request, furnish the Planning Commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public structures and improvements within the purview of such department. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.007, 14.008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.39. 
Sec. 86-38. - Public improvements. 
    Whenever the City Commission shall have taken final action for the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the City Commission or other legislative body shall have taken final action ordering that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space in conformity with the master plan, such final action shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the Planning Commission for a report and a public hearing shall have been held. The City Commission shall have the power to overrule the recommendation of the Planning Commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.40. 
Sec. 86-39. - Publicity and education; gifts; cooperation of public officials; powers. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall have the power to promote public interest in, and understanding of, the master plan and, to that end, may publish and distribute copies of the plan or any report, and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
(b)  Members of the Planning Commission, when duly authorized by the Planning Commission, may attend City planning conferences or meetings of City planning institutes, or hearings, upon pending City planning legislation, and the commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. 
(c)  The Planning Commission shall from time to time recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements, and the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic educational, professional and other organizations, and citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. 
(d)  The Planning Commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions. 
(e)  All City officials and employees shall, upon request, furnish to the Planning Commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
(f)  The Planning Commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments, and marks thereof. 
(g)  In general, the Planning Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning or carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.41. 
Sec. 86-40. - Plat approval required. 
    Whenever the Planning Commission shall have adopted the type of a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision jurisdiction, or part thereof, and shall have filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds, then no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been approved by such Planning Commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the Planning Commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.011) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.43. 
Sec. 86-41. - Subdivision regulations. 
    Before exercising the powers referred to in section 86-40, the Planning Commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access for firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. Such regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the Planning Commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to such installation, but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the Planning Commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to the municipality the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by, or in accordance with, the regulations of the Planning Commission. The City shall have the power to enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the Planning Commissions to the register of deeds of the county. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.012) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.44. 
Sec. 86-42. - Plat approval procedure. 
    The Planning Commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within 60 days after the submission of such plat to the Planning Commission. Otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the Planning Commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the Planning Commission. Any plat submitted to the Planning Commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent, and no plat shall be acted on by the Planning Commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to such address, by registered mail, not less than five days before the date fixed for such hearing. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office or as their addresses appear upon the records of the City in the directory of the City or on the tax records of the City. Every plat approved by the Planning Commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of, addition to or detail of the municipal plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. The Planning Commission may from time to time recommend to the City Commission an amendment of the zoning ordinance or map, or additions thereto, to conform to the Planning Commission's recommendations for the zoning regulations of the territory comprised within approved subdivisions. The Planning Commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning ordinance. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as part of the zoning ordinance or map. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  14.013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.45. 
Sec. 86-43. - Annual report. 
    The Planning Commission shall make an annual written report to the City Commission concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the City Commission related to planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 10-08,  3, 8-29-2008) 
Secs. 86-44-86-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PRECISE PLAT MAPS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Precise plat maps, MCL 125.51 et seq. 

Sec. 86-71. - Fifty-Second Street and Breton Avenue. 
(a)  Defining of precise plat. The City Commission does hereby find it necessary to adopt the ordinance from which this section is derived, defining the exact location of proposed future outside lines of a certain public street known as Breton Avenue. This section defines as a precise plat roadway the area described in exhibit 1 (legal description) which is available in the office of the City Clerk. Such area is located in section 34 of the City and is shown in exhibit 2 which is available in the office of the City Clerk. The purpose of defining this precise plat is to allow for improved traffic flow and turning movements in the area of 52nd Street and Breton Avenue. 
(b)  Erection of buildings; establishment of streets. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued for, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected on any land located within the proposed future outside lines of the remaining precise plat streets in section 34 except as permitted by subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The adoption of the precise plat ordinance from which this section is derived and any amendments thereto shall not in and of itself constitute, or be deemed to constitute, the opening or establishment of any street, or the taking or acceptance of any land for any of the purposes set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Amendments, modifications, additions and appeals. 
(1)  Amendments or modifications to this section, in conformity with lawfully adopted changes, or additions to the City master plan, may be made and certified by the Planning Commission to the City Commission. The City Commission may then adopt the change or addition by ordinance. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to authorize the granting of a permit for the erection of a building or structure, or part thereof, within the lines of any street or other public way, upon appeal by the owner of any affected land. Such appeal may be granted, based upon the following findings: 
a.  The entire property of the appellant, located in whole or in part within the lines of such street or public way, cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such permit shall be granted. 
b.  Balancing the interest of the municipality in preserving the integrity of the adopted map, and the interest of the owner of the property in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. 
Before taking any such action, the zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least ten days' notice of the time and place of which shall be given to the appellant by mail at the address specified by the appellant in his appeal petition. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height, and other details and conditions of size, character and construction, and also the duration of the building or structure, or part thereof, to be permitted. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  12.839) 
Secs. 86-72-86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - PARKING AND STORAGE OF UTILITY TRAILERS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-09,  1, effective Dec. 25, 2009, amended art. 4. in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. 4,  86-101-86-109, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from  17.181-17.191 of the Comp. Ords. 1987. 

Sec. 86-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking, placement and storage are synonymous terms, and mean the leaving of a recreational vehicle or recreational equipment in a place for a period in excess of 48 hours. 
    Recreational equipment has the meaning assigned to such term in the zoning ordinance (appendix A of this Code). 
    Recreational vehicle has the meaning assigned to such term in the zoning ordinance (appendix A of this Code). 
    Residential area means the same as a residential zone and shall include all areas in the City which are zoned to a residential classification and all areas zoned to a less restrictive classification, but which have been built for residential purposes. 
    Utility trailer is a nonmotorized vehicle which is generally pulled by a motorized vehicle and features an open top or enclosed rear cargo area. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-102. - Finding of public purpose. 
    The City Commission does hereby find it necessary to regulate and control the parking and storage of utility trailers, recreational vehicles and recreational equipment on private property in residential areas for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and welfare, and to preserve property values in all residentially zoned areas. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-103. - Front setback requirements. 
    No utility trailer, recreational vehicle and/or recreational equipment shall be stored, parked or placed within the front yard setback area in residential zones, except temporarily for loading and unloading, in the process of normal upkeep or cleaning, or as provided in section 86-105. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-104. - Side yard setback requirements. 
    If it is not feasible to use the rear yard area for such purposes, utility trailers, recreational vehicles and/or recreational equipment may be stored in side yards, provided that the vehicle shall be placed as far to the rear of the side yard as practicable. In addition such vehicles or equipment should be placed as far from the adjoining lot lines as is practicable. The requirements of this section shall not conflict with any county or state law or regulation and any such regulation shall take precedence over this section. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-105. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A recreational vehicle and/or recreational equipment which is officially designated as handicapped in accordance with state law and which is used as the regular means of transportation by, or for, a disabled person may be parked within the setback area. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may, upon request by the property owner, issue a two-week temporary special exception permit where the applicant wishes to repair his recreational vehicle and/or recreational equipment on his own premises, provided that only one such permit may be granted in any six-month period to any applicant on a parcel or lot. 
(c)  During the fall when the City leaf recycling center is open to residents, the City will refrain from the enforcement of the open top utility trailer parking restrictions to allow for the collection and disposal of leaves. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-106. - Inoperable and unlicensed recreational equipment. 
    Storage of utility trailers, recreational vehicles and/or recreational equipment is prohibited in any residential zone unless such utility trailers, recreational vehicle and/or recreational equipment is currently licensed and in an operable condition, and the owner is the legal tenant or owner of the property upon which such utility trailers, recreational vehicle and/or recreational equipment is stored. Further, such items as detachable camper tops shall not be stored in any residential zone, except in a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-107. - Corner lots. 
    In cases of corner lots, utility trailers, recreational vehicles and/or recreational equipment shall be placed to the rear of both established setback lines. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-108. - Occupation of stored, parked or placed recreational vehicles or recreational equipment. 
    At no time shall any stored, parked or placed recreational vehicle and/or recreational equipment be occupied or used for living purposes, nor shall any such recreational vehicle and/or recreational equipment have fixed connections to electricity, water, gas or a sanitary sewer. A permit for sleeping accommodations only, not to exceed two weeks, may be obtained from the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Sec. 86-109. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to such fines, costs and other relief as provided for in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No 9-09,  1, 12-25-2009) 
Chapter 90 - SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat saved from repeal,  1-11(13); natural resources, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74; environment, ch. 78; planning and miscellaneous restrictions, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1-90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - SUBDIVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by actual or platted streets, waterways or other definite boundaries, or a combination thereof. 
    City means the City of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan, and any other City-owned property outside the City limits. 
    City Engineer means the registered City Engineer of the City of Kentwood, or a duly authorized representative designated by the City Commission. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one terminus open for vehicular or pedestrian access and the other terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Dead-end street means a street having one terminus open for vehicular and pedestrian access and the other end terminated on a temporary basis without a permanent vehicular turnaround. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner for the use of a strip or parcel of land by the public or public utilities, or for any private purpose. 
    Improvements means any or all street pavements, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers and their laterals and services, storm drains and drainage facilities, topsoil between the curb and sidewalks, street trees, grading, street signs and crosswalks, and may also include walkways, streetlights or any other items normally considered as public improvements. 
    Local street means a street which serves primarily to provide access to abutting properties. 
    Lot means a parcel of land, exclusive of any adjoining street or street right-of-way, which parcel is or may be occupied by one building or use and any accessory building. Such term shall mean a plot or parcel. A lot is separated from other parcels by a legal description, subdivision of record, survey map or master deed recorded with the register of deeds. Such term may also include a condominium unit itself, if such condominium unit meets the minimum yard and area requirements required by this article, or a condominium unit and any limited common element under and surrounding such condominium unit, which, together, meet the minimum yard and area requirements required by this article. 
    Major thoroughfare plan means the current adopted element of the City master plan detailing requirements and specifications for streets within the City. 
    Master plan means the master plan of the City as currently adopted by the Planning Commission. 
    Pedestrian way means a walkway to provide pedestrian access to schools, playgrounds or other community facilities. 
    Planning commission means the City Planning Commission created under Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.). The term "community development department" means the community development department of the City. 
    Proprietor means the applicant or owner of the land being subdivided or platted, or the sponsor of any plat, or their agents and representatives appointed or selected to act legally on their behalf. 
    Public street means a public thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property (e.g., avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and other thoroughfare), except an alley. 
    Public street, major local, means a street that provides, or is planned to provide, exclusive access to more than ten, but fewer than 47, lots within a portion of a subdivision. 
    Public street, minor, means a public street which provides, or is planned to provide, exclusive access to no more than ten lots within a portion of a subdivision. 
    Public street, subcollector, means a public street which provides, or is planned to provide, exclusive access to 47 or more lots within a portion of a subdivision. 
    Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships, municipal or other public authorities providing gas, electric, water, steam, sewer, telecommunications, cable television or other services of a similar nature. 
    Residential street means a street providing exclusive access to residential properties. Any street serving other than residential properties shall not be considered as a residential street. 
    Street means a platted or actual right-of-way, dedicated to public use, or a private right-of-way serving more than one ownership. 
    Subdivision, plat and subdivide have the meanings assigned to such terms in the act. 
    Substandard right-of-way means any right-of-way which has a width of less than the standard width established in the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Zoning administrator means the individual appointed by the City Commission to administer the zoning ordinance (appendix A of this Code) or other ordinances and to accomplish other duties as required by the City Commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.004; Ord. No. 12-02,  4, 5-7-2002) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
State Law reference- State definitions, MCL 560.102. 
Sec. 90-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Provide for the proper arrangement and construction of streets; 
(2)  Ensure proper relationship of streets to existing or planned streets; 
(3)  Ensure compliance with the current City master plan; 
(4)  Ensure adequate access for firefighting apparatus; 
(5)  Provide appropriate recreation areas; 
(6)  Reference specifications for the installation of underground utilities, drainage facilities and all other public infrastructure devices; and 
(7)  Generally promote the health, safety and welfare of the people of the City, both present and future. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.001; Ord. No. 12-02,  1, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 90-33. - Compliance. 
    Compliance with the regulations of this article shall be prerequisite to the approval of any subdivision, except insofar as they may conflict with any applicable state statute. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.010; Ord. No. 12-02,  10, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 90-34. - Preliminary plat application and review procedures. 
(a)  The proprietor of a proposed preliminary plat or his designated representative shall submit 15 copies of the proposed plat and an 81/2-inch by 11-inch reduction of the preliminary plat to the community development department, which shall distribute copies to the Planning Commission and City staff, as appropriate, and such copies shall contain the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  Date, north arrow and scale. The scale shall not be more than one inch equals 100 feet, although plat plans at larger scales are encouraged. Smaller scale plans may be accepted with prior permission of the community development department and the City Engineer. 
(2)  Name and firm address of the professional individual responsible for the preparation of the plat plan. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the property owner of record and the proposed plat proprietor. 
(4)  Locational sketch, drawn to scale. 
(5)  Legal and common description of the subject property. 
(6)  Size, in acres, of the property to be subdivided. 
(7)  All lots and/or property lines, with approximate bearings and dimensions. 
(8)  Site topography in contours at not more than five-foot intervals. 
(9)  Location, pavement width and right-of-way width of all proposed and existing streets or easements in or abutting the plat. Land must be reserved and shown on the plat for any streets proposed in the major thoroughfare plan of the City master plan that would go through or abut any part of the plat. 
(10)  Size and location of existing and proposed utilities, including connections to public sewer and water supply systems. 
(11)  Location and estimated size of all subsurface and surface water drainage facilities, existing and proposed, and any floodplain areas, wetlands or bodies of water on the site. 
(12)  When only a portion of a tract is proposed to be subdivided, a general layout of the remainder of the area shall be shown. 
(13)  Name of the proposed plat. 
(14)  Seal of the surveyor. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the preliminary plat plans, the Community Development Department shall place the application on the agenda in accordance with the procedures adopted by the Planning Commission. The Community Development Department shall forward to the Planning Commission the comments of the Fire Department, Engineering Department, Community Development Department and any other department wishing to comment on the proposed plat. Such comments will be considered by the Planning Commission and included, as appropriate, in their recommendation to the City Commission. Any department shall be permitted to forward their comments to the City Commission should they not be included in the Planning Commission's recommendation. 
(c)  Within 90 days from the date of a complete submission of the preliminary plat to the City, the Planning Commission must make a recommendation to the City Commission as to the approval, with or without conditions, or disapproval of the plat. The new plat will be deemed complete when the Planning Commission sets the date for the public hearing. If the recommendation is for disapproval, a list of items necessary to render the plat acceptable shall be submitted in writing to the proprietor and the City Commission. 
(d)  The City Commission shall, within 110 days from the date of a complete submission of the preliminary plat to the City, act upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The City Commission shall either tentatively approve, with or without conditions, or reject the plat. The reasons for rejection shall be set forth in writing, along with the actions needed to obtain approval. 
(e)  The time limits noted in subsections (c) and (d) of this section may be waived if agreed to by the proprietor and Planning and/or City Commission. 
(f)  Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall, for a period of one year, confer upon the proprietor approval of lot sizes, lot orientations, street layouts and application of the then current subdivision regulations. Three individual one-year extensions may be granted by the City Commission if applied for in writing prior to the date of expiration of the plat. Once all extensions have been granted, the plat shall expire if substantial construction has not commenced. Notices of extensions and expirations shall be sent to the proprietor and other approving authorities. 
(g)  After tentative approval by the City Commission, the proprietor shall submit copies of the preliminary plat to each officer or agency entitled to receive those copies under Sections 113 to 118 of Public Act of 1967 as amended. 
(h)  After the preliminary plat is approved or is approved subject to conditions pursuant to Sections 113 to 119 of Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended the proprietor shall: 
(1)  Submit to the City Clerk a list of all authorities required by Sections 113 to 119 of Public Act 288 of 1967 as amended, to review the preliminary plat. 
(2)  Submit all written approvals to the City Clerk. 
(i)  The City Commission shall consider and review the preliminary plat at its next meeting or within 20 days from the date of submission of ten approved copies of the preliminary plat. The City Commission shall grant final approval of the preliminary plat if the proprietor has met all conditions set down by the City for approval of the preliminary plat. 
(j)  Final approval of the preliminary plat shall, for a period of two years, confer upon the proprietor approval of lot sizes, lot orientations and street layouts. Three individual one-year extensions may be granted by the City Commission if applied for in writing prior to the date of expiration of the plat. Once all extensions have been granted, the plat shall expire if substantial construction has not commenced. Notices of extensions and expirations shall be sent to the proprietor and other approving authorities. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.005; Ord. No. 12-02,  5, 5-7-2002; Ord. No. 10-08,  4, 8-29-2008) 
State Law reference- Preliminary plats, MCL 560.105 et seq., 560.111 et seq. 
Sec. 90-35. - Final plat application and review procedures. 
(a)  A final plat must be approved by the City Commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for any structure within the plat, unless there are structures already occupied prior to the approval of the preliminary plat. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any building in the plat, the following items must be fulfilled, unless waived by the appropriate City department: 
(1)  Improvement plan approval. 
(2)  Block grading, floodway and soil erosion plan approval. 
(3)  Basement elevation and building opening restriction approval. 
(4)  Construction of hydrant water, adequate fire access, stormwater detention, floodways and soil erosion controls. 
(5)  Security for noncompleted construction. 
(6)  Approval of the final plat. 
The City Commission may consider the issuance of building permits prior to the approval of the final plat in exceptional or unusual circumstances. If so, financial, engineering and liability assurances, including an indemnification agreement, shall be provided by the proprietor in a form satisfactory to the City. Recommendations to the City Commission on the permit issuance shall be made by the City community development, engineering, and fire and police departments. The City Commission shall adopt a policy and fees and charges to implement this section. 
(b)  To receive approval for a final plat, the proprietor shall submit ten copies of the plat to the City Engineer, who shall place the final plat on the agenda of the City Commission as required in subsection (c) of this section. Such plat is to contain the information required by the act. Copies of the final plat shall be distributed to the appropriate City departments for their review and comment to the City Commission. 
(c)  At its next regular meeting or a meeting called within 20 days of the date of submission, the City Commission shall examine the final plat for general compliance with the preliminary plat and the act. The proprietor may request an extension of the 20-day time limit, which the City Commission may grant at their discretion. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.006; Ord. No. 12-02,  6, 5-7-2002) 
State Law reference- Final plats, MCL 560.106, 560.131 et seq. 
Sec. 90-36. - Design standards. 
(a)  Lots. All platted lots shall comply with the applicable provisions of the City zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code). 
(b)  Streets. 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Subdivision streets shall be classified according to the street use classification of the current major thoroughfare plan of the City master plan, except as modified in this section for residential streets, and shall generally conform to the plan. 
b.  All streets within a subdivision developed according to the regulations set forth in this section shall be dedicated public streets. 
c.  Provisions shall be made for the continuation of principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, unless deemed unnecessary by the City Commission, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider emergency equipment access and utility continuity in its determination of street continuations, as well as efficient and safe movement of traffic and concern for the traffic through the residential area. 
d.  Every subdivision shall have access to a dedicated street right-of-way. 
e.  Streets shall intersect one another at right angles or as nearly at right angles as conditions permit. Intersections with offsets of less than 125 feet should be avoided, where possible. 
f.  Nonresidential local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet. Nonresidential streets, other than local streets, shall conform to the requirements of the current major thoroughfare plan. The proprietor shall only be required to dedicate, at his expense, not more than 120 feet of right-of-way width, unless the connecting street is of a greater width, in which case, he shall dedicate a right-of-way equal to the connecting street. 
g.  Grade Limits are as follows: 
Concrete 
Surfaces Others Local 
Street Other 
Street Minimum 0.4% 0.5% - - Maximum - - 7% 6%  
The City Commission may approve grades in excess of the maximum, where deemed necessary. 
h.  Wherever a dedicated or platted substandard street right-of-way exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, additional width shall be platted to bring the street right-of-way to the standard required by the major thoroughfare plan. The proprietor shall be required to dedicate, at his expense, not more than 50 feet to meet the standard required. 
i.  Streets must be named in a manner to avoid confusion in identification. Streets that are not continuous, or which have 90-degree turns, shall have different names. All street segments shall be designated by the City. 
j.  Subdivisions which abut or contain an existing or proposed minor arterial, major arterial or freeway, as defined on the major thoroughfare plan, shall not permit direct access to such streets for individual lots. 
k.  Dead-end streets shall be permitted when planned to continue or connect to an existing or proposed street, except that such streets shall be subject to a maximum block length of 1,320 feet. The term "proposed street" means a street that has been approved as part of a preliminary plat or precise plat. 
l.  Specifications for public streets, including, but not limited to, road curvature, etc., shall be in accordance with the design specifications of the county road commission or the City as amended from time to time, unless provided otherwise in this section. 
(2)  Culs-de-sac. 
a.  The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be 1,320 feet, if a public hydrant is available within 500 feet of any proposed building site. The maximum length shall be 500 feet in the absence of a public hydrant. 
b.  At or near the entrance to the circular terminal area, an unobstructed (no driveway, mailbox or other obstruction) space of at least 30 feet along the curbline of the street shall be provided for the purposes of snow storage. At least one such space shall be provided on each side of any circular terminal area. 
c.  Circular terminal area for nonresidential permanent cul-de-sac streets shall have a right-of-way diameter of 150 feet, with a pavement diameter of 100 feet. 
d.  Circular terminal areas for residential permanent culs-de-sac (without center islands) shall have a right-of-way diameter of 100 feet, and a pavement diameter of 70 feet minimum. 
e.  Hammerhead design will not be allowed; however, alternate designs, such as landscape center islands for cul-de-sac streets, may be considered by the City Commission, upon recommendation of the Fire Marshal, zoning administrator, traffic safety specialist and City Engineer to ensure that a sufficient turnaround area is provided. 
(3)  Classifications. For residential streets, the following minimum street classifications apply; however, the City reserves the right to require more stringent standards when deemed necessary to accommodate pedestrian connections to parks, schools, transit routes and other pedestrian routes outside the plat: 
Public Street Classification Pavement Width 
(feet) Right-of-Way Width 
(feet) Required 
Sidewalks On-Street 
Parking Minor 24 40 None None Major local 30 60 2 sides 2 sides Subcollector 30 60 2 sides 2 sides  
a.  Pavement width includes two feet of concrete roll curb (valley gutter type) on each side of the street. 
b.  Fire hydrants should be placed on the side of the street opposite the side where parking is permitted. Wherever practical, hydrants should be placed on the north and/or west sides of streets. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.007; Ord. No. 12-02,  7, 5-7-2002; Ord. No. 10-08,  5, 8-29-2008) 
Sec. 90-37. - Improvements. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of any subdivision to provide for the installation and construction of required improvements, except as otherwise noted in this section. Unless otherwise provided in this article, all improvements shall be subject to design standards and specifications as adopted by the City Commission and/or other appropriate reviewing agencies having jurisdiction. 
(1)  Streets. Improvements to streets beyond those required for a 60-foot right-of-way street shall be borne by the City at-large, along residential frontage. 
(2)  Sanitary sewers and public water. Public sanitary sewers and water shall be required in all new plats. If a public sewer and water is not available, the proprietor shall cause such sanitary sewer and water to be extended to serve the proposed plat, at his expense. In such cases, the City will, if practical, establish a deferred benefit charge roll covering the properties abutting the extension of the sewer and water, and enter into a payback agreement with the developer in a form as approved by the City Commission. Any oversizing of these utilities along low density residential uses shall be funded through trunkage funds established for such purpose. Extension of utilities is required through the development to serve adjacent property. 
(3)  Performance surety. The City may require a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the City Commission, covering the estimated cost of construction to ensure the faithful performance of the agreement. The proprietor shall receive, in the form of a rebate, as the work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project. 
(4)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed by the proprietor for all subdivisions, except those in industrial zoning districts. Such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and designs adopted by the City Commission. 
(5)  Streetlights. Adequate streetlighting shall be installed in all new subdivisions in accordance with the standards and specifications required by the public utility responsible for streetlighting installation. Such requirement is not meant to prohibit specially designed streetlights, when approved by the zoning administrator and the public utility. 
(6)  Trees. Street trees will be required in accordance with the zoning ordinance (appendix A of this Code) and any guidelines adopted by the City Commission. 
(7)  Additional pedestrian easements and walkways. Additional pedestrian easements and walkways may be required, where deemed appropriate by the City Commission. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.008; Ord. No. 12-02,  8, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 90-38. - Variances. 
(a)  Planned unit developments. 
(1)  Higher performance. Traditional subdivision regulations with rigid construction controls may be inappropriate for some planned unit developments. Planned unit development zone districts are established to amend the traditional forms of development by seeking to substitute requirements with more innovative and modern design standards, and permit a developer to secure advantages which can be passed on to the public by virtue of more desirable, economical and environmentally sensitive developments. The City Commission may modify the design standards set forth in section 90-36 by allowing a wider variety of subdivision improvements within a controlled planned development concept. Relief from all other provisions of this article shall be processed in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Review considerations. Consideration for modifications will be based on the size of the development, the mixture of uses, open space patterns, site amenities, ability to provide public services and the relationship between individual lots, buildings, streets, parking areas and the land. 
(3)  Statement. Within the written statement submitted as part of a planned unit development proposal, the proprietor shall identify the requested modifications to the design standards set forth in section 90-36. The statement shall fully state the grounds for the substitute requirements. Before such modifications are approved, recommendations to the City Commission shall be made by the City Planning Commission and the community development, engineering, fire and police departments. 
(b)  Other subdivisions. 
(1)  Demonstration of need. If the proprietor can clearly demonstrate that literal enforcement of the terms of this article is impractical or will impose undue hardship in the use of his land because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the zoning board of appeals may at its discretion, permit such variances it finds reasonable and within the general policy and purpose of this article. No variance shall be granted unless the zoning board of appeals finds that: 
a.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the proprietor of the reasonable use of his land. 
b.  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the proprietor. 
c.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or be injurious to property in the area in which the property is situated. 
(2)  Conditions. The zoning board of appeals, in granting approval of variances, may require such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the requirement varied or modified. 
(3)  Application. An application for any such variance shall be submitted to the zoning board of appeals at the time the preliminary plat is filed with the community development department. The application shall fully state the grounds for such a variance. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.009; Ord. No. 12-02,  9, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 90-39. - Partitions, divisions, combinations or boundary line changes after subdivision recording. 
(a)  After a subdivision has been recorded, platted lots or other parcels of land within the subdivision may be partitioned, divided, combined or boundary lines changed into not more than four parts, with the approval of the City Commission, provided that the resulting lots or parcels meet the most restrictive width, size and other dimensional requirements of this article, the zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code) or the act; provided, further, that each resulting lot or parcel shall: 
(1)  Have direct access to a public roadway or private roadway constructed to the standards of this article; 
(2)  Be serviced by public utilities necessary or required by law; and 
(3)  Conform in all particulars to the requirements of the act and all City ordinances. 
(b)  The City Commission may impose reasonable conditions of approval in connection with all such modifications to platted lots. 
(Ord. No. 12-02,  10(a), 5-7-2002) 
State Law reference- Further partitions, MCL 560.263. 
Secs. 90-40-90-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - LOT SPLITS 

Sec. 90-71. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to allow the City to prevent the creation of unbuildable lots, odd or irregularly shaped parcels and parcels with inadequate or inappropriate access to a public road. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.201) 
Sec. 90-72. - Compliance. 
    Compliance with this article shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit for any structure to be built after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.205(B)) 
Sec. 90-73. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all parcels which involve the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels not otherwise regulated by article 2 of this chapter or the zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code). 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.202) 
Sec. 90-74. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the City zoning administrator or his designated representative. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.205(A)) 
Sec. 90-75. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any new construction or building permit involving a project on a lot created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, planning staff approval will be required. The planning staff will review the lot split to ensure it meets the requirements of this article and the zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code). Persons contemplating a lot split should seek approval for such split with the planning staff. 
(b)  The application for a lot split shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a scaled drawing and legal description of the proposed lot split. If the lot split involves the use or creation of a private road or drive, approval of the private road or drive, as outlined by the City's private road regulations (see chapter 58 of this Code), must be obtained prior to approval of the lot split. In addition, the applicant must submit evidence of review and approval of the county road commission and the county health department, when necessary. The county health department must approve lots that will employ septic systems. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by a staff decision on a lot split has the right to appeal the decision to the City Planning Commission. 
(d)  The requirements of this article and approval of a lot split under this article shall not preclude compliance with the requirements of article 2 of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.203) 
Sec. 90-76. - Approval standards. 
(a)  All lots must have adequate access onto a public or private road. The term "adequate access" means that lot frontage on the public or private road must be equal to the required lot width for the zoning district in which the lot is located and compliance with the public or private road regulations. 
(b)  All lots shall meet the minimum requirements as outlined in the zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code) for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Such requirements shall include, but are not limited to, minimum lot width, lot area, allowance for front, rear and side yard setbacks, allowance for corner lot setbacks and allowance for a septic system, if needed. 
(c)  Lots shall only be split so that all parcels resulting from the split are buildable under the zoning ordinance (see appendix A to this Code). 
(Comp. Ords. 1987,  17.204) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix is the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted on April 16, 2002. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citations to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance pertaining to zoning, including, but not limited to, the basic zoning ordinance and ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map saved from repeal,  1-11(17); adult-oriented establishments,  26-331 et seq.; natural resources, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; telecommunications, ch. 62; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74; environment, ch. 78; historic preservation, ch. 82; planning and miscellaneous restrictions, ch. 86; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Zoning, MCL 125.581 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Section 1.01. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "City of Kentwood Zoning Ordinance." 
Section 1.02. - Intent and purpose. 
    The fundamental purpose of this ordinance is to promote and safeguard the public health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of the people of this city. 
    The provisions of this ordinance are intended, among other things, to encourage the use of lands, waters and other natural resources in the city in accordance with their character and in a reasonable manner; to limit the improper use of land and resources; to eliminate nonconforming uses; to reduce hazards to life and property; to provide for orderly development within the city; to avoid overcrowding of land with structures or buildings; to provide for adequate light, air and health conditions in dwellings and buildings hereafter erected or altered; to encourage redevelopment efforts within the city; to manage the impact on the public roads and streets resulting from development; to protect and conserve natural recreational areas, residential, and other areas naturally suited to particular uses; to facilitate the establishment of an adequate and economic system of transportation, sewage disposal, safe water supply, education, recreation and other public requirements; to conserve the expenditure of funds for public improvements and services to conform with the most advantageous uses of land, resources and properties. 
    This ordinance is enacted under the authority of the city and Village Zoning Act (MCL 125.581 et seq.) and Section 6.14(c) of the Charter of the city of Kentwood. 
Section 1.03. - Scope. 
A.  It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any other way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this ordinance, or of any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement; provided, however, that where any provision of this ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations upon the erection or use of land and buildings, or upon the height of buildings and structures, or upon safety and sanitary measures, or requires larger yards or open spaces than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, or any said rules, regulations, permits or easements, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
B.  The requirements of this ordinance are to be construed as minimum requirements, and shall in no way impair or affect any covenant or restriction imposing greater requirements. 
Section 1.04. - Districts. 
A.  In order to effectively protect and promote the general welfare and accomplish the aims and objectives of the city of Kentwood Master Plan, the city is divided into zoning districts of the number, boundaries, shape and area and of common unity of purpose, adaptability or use, that are deemed most suitable to provide for the best development of the community, while protecting the common rights and interests of all through associated regulations and restrictions. 
B.  All street, alley and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise designated to be in a particular zoning district, shall be considered to be in the same district as the lot or parcel it immediately abuts. Unless specifically provided for otherwise, when abutting more than one lot or parcel, or when the centerline of the right-of-way serves as a zoning district boundary, the abutting property's district shall be deemed to be the same up to the center of the right-of-way. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways shall be construed as being parallel and at the distances indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  1(1.04), 4-1-2003) 
State Law reference- Conflicts between zoning ordinances and other ordinances, MCL 125.586. 
Section 1.05. - Zoning map. 
A.  The Official Zoning Map of the city of Kentwood shall be so identified by signature of the Planning Commission chair, as attested to by the city Clerk, under the following wording: "This is to certify that this map is the Official Zoning Map of the city of Kentwood, which is a part of the city of Kentwood Zoning Ordinance." The Official Zoning Map of the city of Kentwood is incorporated by reference in this ordinance. 
B.  A record is to be kept by the zoning administrator of all changes made or required to be made to the official zoning map. The official zoning map is to be kept up to date, accessible to the general public and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning district status of all land and buildings in the city of Kentwood which are subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 1.06. - Chapter and section headings. 
    The chapter, section, and subsection headings used in this zoning ordinance are for convenience only and are not part of the zoning ordinance. 
Section 1.07. - The effect of zoning. 
A.  For the purpose of this ordinance, except as hereafter specifically provided, no lot, land, parcel or premises shall be used, maintained or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be constructed, erected, moved, placed, maintained, reconstructed, used, extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with the regulations specified for the zoning district in which it is located; these limitations being construed as the minimum legislation necessary to promote and protect the general welfare and safety of the community. Zoning affects every structure and use and extends vertically. 
B.  If any building or part thereof is used, erected, altered or occupied contrary to law or to the provisions of this ordinance, that building shall be declared a nuisance per se and may be required to be vacated, torn down or abated by any legal means and shall not be used or occupied until it has been brought into conformance. 
C.  If construction on a building is lawfully begun prior to adoption of this ordinance, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require any change in the planned or designed use of that building, provided that actual construction is being diligently carried on, and further provided that the building shall be entirely completed for its planned or designed use within two years from the effective date of this ordinance. 
D.  The use of any land or premises, or any structure, existing and lawful at the time of enactment of the zoning ordinance, or amendment thereto, may be continued even though the use does not conform to the current provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
E.  Uses which are not expressly listed in a particular zone district to be permitted or allowed subject to special land use review are prohibited. 
F.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the installation or use of a wireless antenna, supporting structure or pole for a wireless antenna, or accessory equipment within a city public right of way shall not be subject to zoning reviews or approvals pursuant to this ordinance so long as such installation and use has been expressly authorized in writing by the city through the issuance of a license or franchise. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  1(1.07), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 2-17,  1, 2-7-2017, eff. 2-17-2017) 
Section 1.08. - Districts established. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, the city of Kentwood is divided into the following zoning districts: 
Zoning District Chapter F-1 Floodplain 4 R1-A, B Very low-density residential 15 R1-C, D Low-density residential 5 R-2 Two-family residential 6 R-3 Medium/high-density residential 6 R-4 High-density residential 6 R-5 Manufactured housing 7 C-2 Community commercial 8 C-3 Regional commercial 8 C-4 Office/business 8 C-5 Neighborhood corridor commercial 9 I-1 Light industrial 10 I-2 General industrial 10 OS Open space, public, semipublic 11 RPUD-1 High-density residential PUD 12 RPUD-2 Low-density residential PUD 12 CPUD Commercial PUD 12 MPUD Mixed use PUD 12 IPUD Industrial PUD 12 OPUD Office PUD 12  
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 2.01. - Interpretation of terms. 
A.  Purpose. 
    For the purposes of interpreting this ordinance, certain words and terms shall have the meaning provided in this chapter. Terms and words not defined in this ordinance shall have the meanings customarily accepted. 
B.  Interpretation of terms. 
1.  All words used in this zoning ordinance indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this ordinance but shall include the time of an event or requirement for which provision is applied. 
2.  The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
3.  References to the masculine gender shall include, extend and apply to females as well as males. 
4.  All references to statutes shall be considered to be references to the statutes as amended from time to time. 
5.  All references to section numbers shall refer to sections of this zoning ordinance. 
6.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the conjunctions noted below shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
C.  Meaning of words. 
1.  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
2.  The word "city" shall mean the city of Kentwood. 
3.  Unless otherwise identified, the word "law" shall mean federal law, the Constitutions of the United States and State of Michigan, state law, common law, this zoning ordinance, and any Charter, ordinances or lawfully adopted acts of the city. 
4.  The word "person" shall include governmental entities, corporations, partnerships, associations and individuals. 
5.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
6.  The word "day" shall mean calendar day. 
Section 2.02. - Definitions. 
A.  Definitions "A." 
    Accessory building. A building or portion of a building supplementary and/or subordinate to a main building on the same lot, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use. Where an accessory building is attached to a main building in a substantial manner, such as a wall or roof, the accessory building shall be considered a part of the main building. 
    Accessory use. A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building. 
    Adult care facilities. A facility for the care of adults, over 18 years of age, as licensed and regulated by the State under Michigan Public Act No. 218 of 1979, as amended (MCL 400.701 et seq.), and rules promulgated by the State Department of Consumer and Industry Services. The organizations shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Adult foster care facility. A governmental or nongovernmental establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically disabled who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, or residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility. 
2.  Adult foster care small group home. A private home with the approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
3.  Adult foster care family home. A private home with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
    Adult caring institution. A state licensed adult residential facility which provides care and supervision on a 24-hour basis for the treatment of mental health, alcohol or substance abuse or other longterm illness or rehabilitation program. The terms "institutions for mentally handicapped," "drug or alcohol patients," "correctional institutions" or "mental health facilities" shall mean the same, with regard to persons 18 years of age or older. 
    Adult day care facility. An unlicensed facility which provides care for elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a 24-hour day. 
    Agriculture. The commercial use of land for tilling of the soil, raising of tree or field crops, or animal husbandry. The words agriculture and farming shall be considered synonymous. 
    Alley. A public way not more than 30 feet in width which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property but not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations. Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of use or occupancy; any change in the supporting structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams, girders or any change which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed". 
    Animal hospital. A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to shortterm care incidental to the hospital use. This term does not include a stable, kennel or a farm. 
    Architectural features. Architectural features of a building shall include cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys and decorative ornaments. 
    Art display venue. Private use of an outdoor space, area or setting, visible from the public right-of-way, intended for the display of art. 
    Art gallery. A room, building or other enclosed space within which art is displayed. 
    Art, public. Publicly-owned art and memorials, artistic enhancement of public infrastructure, temporary art exhibitions or displays on public property. 
    Assembly building. A building or structure designed and intended for use [as] a place of public assembly, with or without fixed seats, for entertainment, business, social, religious, educational, or other purposes. 
    Assisted living family facility. An unlicensed residential facility housing six or fewer people per building, and providing housing, two or more group meals a day, incidental nursing or medical services, and some or all of the following services: transportation, ambulatory assistance, prescription scheduling, laundry, housekeeping or shopping. 
    Assisted living group facility. An unlicensed residential facility that houses more than six people per building, and providing housing, two or more group meals a day, incidental nursing or medical services, and some or all of the following services: transportation, ambulatory assistance, prescription scheduling, laundry, housekeeping or shopping. 
B.  Definitions "B." 
    Basement. A portion of a building partly underground with more than one-half of its height below grade and with the finished surface of the floor above more than six feet above grade plane. 
    Bed and breakfast. A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals are provided for up to three days duration as a commercial operation. 
    Bedroom. A dwelling room used or intended to be used by human beings for sleeping purposes. 
    Block. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, or between one intersecting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, canal, levee, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other physical (natural and artificial) barrier to the continuity of development. An area bounded on all sides by streets or highways. 
    Board of appeals. The city of Kentwood Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). 
    Buildable area. The space of a lot remaining after the setback and the open space requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
Buildable Area and Building Setbacks 
    Building. An independent structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns, or any other support used for the enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels, or carrying on business activities or other uses. When any portion of a building is completely separated from every other part of the building by division of walls from the ground up, and without openings, each portion of the building shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building envelope. The area of a condominium site within which the main building or structure may be constructed as described in the master deed for the site condominium project. 
    Building height. The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof; to the deck of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs. When the terrain is sloping, the established grade shall be the mean level at the building wall perimeter. 
Building Height Gable Roof 
    Building, main. A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Building permits. The written authority as issued by the Building Inspector on behalf of the city permitting the construction, moving or alteration of a building in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and the city's adopted building code. 
    Building setback. The area pertaining to the minimum setback distance required by the zoning district in which it is located, established from the front street right-of-way or property line, thus defining an area of the lot adjacent to the front, side or rear lot line in which no part of a building shall project or be located, except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. 
C.  Definitions "C." 
    Child care organization. An organization having as its principal function the receiving of minor children for care, maintenance, training, and supervision whether or not educational instruction may be given. Child care organizations are licensed and regulated under the State of Michigan Public Act No. 116 of 1973, as amended (MCL 722.111 et seq.), and include the following: 
1.  Child care center (or day care center). A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more preschool or school age child for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day and for not less than two consecutive weeks and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. 
2.  Foster family home. A private home in which one but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the adoption code, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
3.  Foster family group home. A private home in which more than four but fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the adoption code, are provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
4.  Family child day care home. A private home in which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
5.  Group child day care home. A private home in which more than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to the adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
6.  Child caring institution. A child care facility which is organized for the purpose of providing care, maintenance and supervision for children, usually on a 24-hour basis, for more than six children in a building maintained for that purpose, and operates throughout the year. It includes a maternity home for the care of unmarried mothers and institutions for orphaned, mentally, emotionally or developmentally challenged or disturbed children. 
    Clear vision area. An area described by section 3.06. 
    Clinic. A building or group of buildings where human patients are admitted for examination and treatment by a professional, such as a physician, dentist, or the like, except that human patients are not lodged therein overnight. This term is synonymous with the term "medical office." 
    Club. An organization of persons for specific purposes or the promotion of enterprises such as agriculture, sports, arts, science, literature, politics, or the like, but not operating for profit. 
    Commercial. This term relates to the use of property in connection with the purchase, sale, barter, display or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or personal services or the maintenance of service offices or recreation or amusement enterprise. A garage/basement/yard sale operating more than four days during one three-month period is considered a commercial use. 
    Commercial establishment. Examples of a "commercial establishment" in various contexts would include, without limiting, the following: A business operating independent of any other business located in a freestanding building; in a strip mall, a business completely separated from other businesses by walls with a door which may regularly be used by the public for exclusive ingress and egress to that business; and, in an office building, a business holding itself out to the public as a single entity, independent of other businesses or persons. 
    Commercial vehicle . A motor vehicle designed, maintained or used to transport passengers for hire, constructed or used to transport goods, wares, or merchandise, or a motor vehicle designed and used for towing other vehicles for business purposes. A commercial vehicle does not include a vehicle used exclusively for non-business purposes. 
    Commission, city. The Kentwood City Commission. 
    Commission, planning. See Planning Commission. 
    Condominium Act. Public Act No. 59 of 1978, as amended (MCL 559.101 et seq.), of the State of Michigan. 
    Condominium project or site condominium project. A plan or project consisting of not less than two condominium units established in conformance with the Condominium Act (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
    Condominium unit. That portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreation, use as a time share unit or any other type of use. 
Condominium Unit 
    Contractible condominium. A condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn in accordance with the Condominium Act (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
    Convalescent home. A long-term recuperative care facility providing room and board and supervised personal care by facility staff on a 24-hour basis for the aged, the infirm or persons recovering from illness. An unlicensed extended care facility or chronic care facility providing 24-hour nursing care shall mean the same. 
    Convenience store. A retail food establishment of less than 10,000 square feet GFA which may supply groceries, fruits, vegetables, dairy products, baked goods, general interest newspapers, general interest magazines, confections, or similar commodities for consumption off the premises. 
    Conversion condominium. A condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under Section 71 of the Condominium Act (MCL 559.171) 
    Convertible area. A unit or portion of the common elements of the condominium project referred to in the condominium documents within which additional condominium units or general or limited common elements may be created in accordance with the Condominium Act (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
    Cul-de-sac. A street having one terminus open for vehicular or pedestrian access and the other terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
D.  Definitions "D." 
    Day care center. See "child care organizations." 
    Density. The number of dwelling units that may be erected on a described lot or parcel, expressed in dwelling units per acre. 
    Density, gross. The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the gross area of the tract of land (in acres) within a development. Gross density is calculated using all land as well as rights-of-way of streets; the result being the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land. 
    Density, net. The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the area of the actual tract of land (in acres) upon which the dwelling units are proposed to be located and including common open space and associated recreational facilities within the area; the result being the number of dwelling units per net residential acre of land. Net density calculations exclude rights-of-way of publicly dedicated streets and utilities, private road easements, and floodplain (see section 12.03.C.1 for the computation of up to 25 percent of preserved floodplain in PUD zones). 
    District. A portion of the city within which certain specified uses of land and/or buildings are permitted and within which certain specified regulations and requirements apply under the zoning district provisions of this ordinance. 
    Drive-through establishment. An establishment that furnishes the patron with a product or services from a drive-up window or other similar arrangement to be utilized or consumed outside the building. Drive-through establishments retail and/or service character are dependent on providing a driveway approach and/or parking space for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in or momentarily away from their motor vehicles. 
    Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. In no case shall a motor home, trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent or portable building be considered a dwelling. In case of mixed occupancy, where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purpose of this ordinance and shall comply with the provision relative to dwellings. In residential child and adult care facilities, every six beds shall be equivalent to one dwelling unit. 
    Bi-level is a dwelling consisting of two stories, one of which may be a basement having a vertical distance from the grade to the ceiling of four feet or more. 
    Split level or tri-level means a dwelling consisting of more than two levels of living space of which any two shall be at or 75 percent above the grade. 
    Dwelling, multiple. A building or portion of a building, used or designated for use as a residence for more than two families living independently of each other. This definition does not include manufactured homes, single-family attached dwellings or two-family dwellings. 
    Dwelling, single-family attached. A group of three or more independently owned dwelling units which are joined to one another by a common party wall, but not a common floor-ceiling. Each unit shall have its own outside entrance. For the purposes of this ordinance, dwellings such as semi-detached, rowhouses, patio-house and townhouse shall be deemed single-family attached dwellings. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached. A unit exclusively for use by one family which is entirely surrounded by open space or yards on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A building used or designed for two dwelling units. It may also be termed a duplex. 
E.  Definitions "E." 
    Efficiency unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one room, exclusive of bathroom, hallway, closets and the like. 
    Electrical distribution substation. An electrical substation that steps voltage up or down and to or from electrical lines of under 69kV. 
    Electrical substation. A system of electrical equipment that facilitates the stepping up or down of electrical voltage. For the purposes of this ordinance, electrical substations shall include transmission substations and distribution substations. 
    Electrical switching station. A system of electrical equipment that interconnects several electrical transmission lines for the purpose of allowing the transmission lines to be serviced and maintained without disruption of power. 
    Electrical transmission lines. Electric utility wires that are generally strung on large metal or wooden towers including the towers or poles themselves whose function is the transportation of at least 69kV of electricity. 
    Electrical transmission substation. An electrical substation that steps voltage up or down and to or from an electrical transmission line. 
    Erected. The word "erected" includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any other physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential public services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by regulated public utilities or the city of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication supply or disposal systems shall be considered essential public services. This includes, but is not limited to, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, electrical switching stations and substations, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles and other similar equipment and accessories reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by the public utility or city. Wireless communication towers, poles, antenna and related equipment are not essential public services. 
    Excavating. Excavating shall be the removal of sand, stone, gravel or fill dirt below the average grade of the surrounding land and/or street grade, whichever shall be highest, excepting common household gardening. 
F.  Definitions "F." 
    Family means either of the following: 
1.  A domestic family which is one or more persons living together and related by the bonds of blood, marriage or adoption, together with servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated person, with all of the individuals being domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
2.  The functional equivalent of the domestic family which is persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic family must operate as a single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization or group where the common living arrangement and/or the basis for the establishment of the functional equivalency of the domestic family is likely or contemplated to exist for a limited or temporary duration. 
    Farm. The land, plants, animals, buildings, structures, including ponds used for agricultural or aquacultural activities, and the associated use of machinery, equipment, and other appurtenances in the commercial production of farm products; provided, that land to be considered a farm hereunder shall include a contiguous parcel of not less than ten acres in area. 
    Fence. Any permanent fence, partition, structure or gate erected as a dividing structure, barrier or enclosure, and not part of a structure requiring a building permit. 
    Financial institution. A commercial use operated primarily for financial transactions and other similar activities, including but not limited to, personal and business banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions. 
    Finished living area. The sum of the finished horizontal areas of each story of a dwelling unit measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. In order for below grade square footage to constitute finished living area proper egress must be provided according to the currently adopted building code of the city. The finished living area measurement is otherwise exclusive of areas of basements lacking proper egress, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, common halls, and stairways in the two family or multiple-family structures, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floodplain. The area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, or lake subject to a 100-year recurrence-interval flood as delineated by the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and on file with the city or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
    Floor area, gross (GFA). The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of wall separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall include the basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above the established curb level, or finished lot grade, whichever is higher. (See Basement ) 
Floor Area 
  
    Floor area, main. The square foot area of a building within its largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the main floor level, exclusive of breezeways, attached garages, enclosed and unenclosed porches, exterior stairways and interior stairways in the two family or multiple family structures. A split-level building may include as part of the square foot area requirement, a half level adjoining the main floor level. 
    Floor area, usable (UFA). The usable floor area shall be the gross floor area less elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof), attic space having headroom of seven feet or less, or interior balconies or mezzanines. Areas of basements, utility rooms, breezeways, porches or attached garages are not included in usable floor area. 
    Fuel depot. A facility dealing in the sale of petroleum fuels and motor oils through an automated dispense system to motor vehicles. 
    Fuel stations. A building design used for the retail sale of fuel (stored only in underground tanks), lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities for motor vehicles. 
G.  Definitions "G." 
    Garage, carport, private. A building used primarily for the storage of self-propelled vehicles for the use of the occupants of a lot on which the building is located and with a capacity of not more than three vehicles. 
    Garden. An accessory use which is the growing of plants for landscaping purposes which may consist of any plant (flowers, bushes, hedges, arbors, trees, groundcover, manicured lawn); food (vegetables, fruits, herbs); fibers; garden maintenance facilities (potting work area, composting); greenhouse, and other structures subject to applicable setback, height, parcel coverage, and other regulations; and including other landscape features such as but not limited to paths, walls, rocks. A garden is not commercial. A garden is not agriculture. 
    Garden, community. A use in which land managed by a public or nonprofit organization or group of individuals is used to grow plants and harvest food or ornamental crops for donation or for personal use by those cultivating the land. 
    General common elements. The common elements other than the limited common elements defined herein. 
    Grade. A reference plane representing the finished ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls. 
    Greenhouse. A building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or translucent material and which is devoted exclusively to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants. 
H.  Definitions "H." 
    Home occupation. A use conducted entirely within an enclosed residential building employing only the inhabitants of the building, which is clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy and does not change the character of the building. Instruction in a craft, music, or fine art within a dwelling, by a resident member of the family residing in the dwelling, shall be considered a home occupation and shall be subject to the requirements for a home occupation. 
    Hoop house. A type of greenhouse that's built using a hooping or bending system. A hoop house can be as small as a cold frame structure hooped over a few garden rows in a backyard, or as big as a full sized, fully functional, commercial greenhouse. 
    Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, the related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
    Hotel. A building occupied or used as a temporary abiding place by individuals or groups of individuals, with or without meals. 
    Housing for the elderly. An unlicensed multiple-family residential development for elderly persons (primarily for persons 60 years or older) needing little or no personal assistance, which provides independent living dwelling units for the exclusive use of the occupants, whether or not group meals or other convenience services for the elderly are provided. The terms "senior housing" and "elderly housing" shall mean the same. 
I.  Definitions "I." 
    Industry. The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, treating or assembly of products and materials in a manner which complies with all requirements of chapter 10. 
J.  Definitions "J." 
    Junk. Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise with parts missing, scrap metals or materials that are damaged or deteriorated, vehicles or machines in a condition which precludes their use for the purpose for which they were manufactured, or inoperable motor vehicles. 
    Junkyard. The term "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and salvage areas and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for the storage, sale, processing, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals, other scrap materials or reclaimed materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts of automobiles or other vehicles for profit. 
K.  Definitions "K." 
    Kennel. Any lot or premises on which more than three dogs or cats, six months of age or older are kept. (Refer to City Code chapter 10.) 
L.  Definitions "L." 
    Limited common elements. A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 
    Loading space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking for a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. Off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking. 
    Lot. An individual portion of platted or unplatted land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, buildings, structures, lot coverage, yards and other open spaces as may be present or required under the provisions of this ordinance. The lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or an approved private street, and may consist of: a single lot of record, a portion of a lot of record, a combination of contiguous lots of record, or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds or a condominium unit and any limited common element under and surrounding the condominium unit, which together meet the minimum yard and area requirements required by this ordinance. 
    Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    Lot corner. A lot located at the intersection of two streets or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street, any two chords of which form an angle of 135 degrees or less. 
    Lot coverage. The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or structures. 
    Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line, or in the case of an acreage lot, from the front right-of-way line to the rear property line. 
    Lot, double frontage, through. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, one street will be designated as the front street for all lots. If there are existing structures in the same block fronting on one or both of the streets, the required front yard setback shall be observed on those streets where the structures presently front. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot with only one lot line fronting on a street. 
    Lot, irregular. A lot with nonparallel lot lines and/or nonuniform lot width. 
    Lot lines. The property lines bounding the lot. 
1.  Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, abutting upon one public or private street, the front lot line shall mean the line separating the lot from the right-of-way. In the case of a corner or through lot, the front lot line shall be that line separating the lot from that street which is designated as the front street. (See Lot, double frontage ) 

Lot Lines 
2.  Rear lot line. Ordinarily, that lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line at least ten feet in length entirely within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line of the lot shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear yard. In case where none of these definitions are applicable, the zoning administrator shall designate the rear lot line. (See Lot, double frontage ) 
3.  Side lot line. Any lot line not a front line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
4.  Street or alley lot line. A lot line separating the lot from the right-of-way of a street or an alley. 
    Lot, nonconforming. See Nonconforming lot . 
    Lots of record. A lot which actually exists in a subdivision plat as shown on the records of the county register of deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded as required by law. 
    Lot width. The distance between lot lines, at the building setback line measured parallel to the street or street tangent line. 
Lot Widths 
M.  Definitions "M." 
    Main building. The building(s) in which the principal use of a lot is located. 
    Manufactured home (i.e., mobile home). A structure transportable in one or more sections, connected to required utilities which includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure, built on a chassis and designed to be used as a single dwelling unit with or without permanent foundation. 
    Manufactured housing development. A parcel or tract of land which is under the control of one person, group or firm upon which three or more manufactured homes have been located on a continual nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a change is made therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a mobile home. 
    Master deed. The condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project. 
    Master plan. The master plan of the city which is intended to guide the physical development of all portions of the city, The plan including maps, plats, charts, policy statements and/or descriptive material, shall be that adopted in accordance with the Municipal Planning Act, Michigan Public Act No. 285 of 1931, as amended (MCL 125.31 et seq.) 
    Mechanical work. This term shall be synonymous with the terms vehicle repair, major and minor, and shall include any work done to repair or maintain a vehicle's mechanical and electrical components, including, but not limited to, the replenishment or addition of fluids, lubrication of parts and components, collision repair, or painting. 
    Medical marihuana dispensary. Any business, facility, association, cooperative, location, or operation, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marihuana (also commonly known as marijuana or cannabis) is made available to, sold, used, grown, processed, delivered, or distributed by or to one or more of the following: 
1.  A primary caregiver (i.e., a person who is at least 21 years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs, as provided for in Initiated Law No. 1 of the Public Acts of 2008, as amended). 
2.  A qualifying patient (i.e., a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition, as provided for in Initiated Law No. 1 of the Public Acts of 2008, as amended). 
3.  Members of the public. 
    A medical marihuana dispensary shall also include any place, location, facility, or operation, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marihuana is smoked or consumed by three or more persons at one time. 
    A medical marihuana dispensary shall not include the dispensation of medical marihuana by a primary caregiver personally dispensing to not more than five qualified patients in strict accordance with Michigan Initiated Law 1 of 2008, as amended, so long as the lawful amount of medical marihuana is delivered to the qualifying patient where the qualifying patient resides and it is done in full compliance with this Ordinance as well as all other applicable city ordinances and applicable Michigan and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
    Medical office. (See Clinic). 
    Motel. A series of attached, semi-attached or detached rental units with separate private entrances providing overnight lodging for transients, open to the traveling public for compensation. 
    Motor freight terminal. A building or area in which freight brought by truck is assembled and/or stored for routing or reshipment, or in which semitrailers, including tractor and/or trailer units and other trucks, are parked or stored. 
    Motor home. A motorized vehicular unit primarily designed as a temporary dwelling in connection with travel and/or recreational usage. This term does not include manufactured homes. 
N.  Definitions "N." 
    Nonconforming lot. A lot with area or dimension lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto with less than the minimum required for the zoning district in which it is located. This includes, but is not limited to minimum area, dimension or access requirements. 
    Nonconforming structure. A structure or portion of a structure lawfully existing at the effective date of the zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the current provisions of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonresidential district. The C-2, C-3, C-4, CPUD, OPUD, IPUD, I-1, I-2, and OS zoning districts. 
    Nonresidential private street. Private street that provides ingress or egress from a public street or another private street to a nonresidential use. 
    Nursing home. A state licensed longterm facility providing room and board and supervised personal care by facility staff on a 24-hour basis for seven or more aged or infirm persons or persons recovering from illness which is regulated under Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq.). A state licensed sub-acute care facility, state licensed home for the aged, a state licensed nursing home, or state licensed hospice facility providing 24-hour nursing care shall mean the same. 
O.  Definitions "O." 
    Office. A room, studio, suite or building occupied for office uses only. 
    Off-street parking lot. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces, along with adequate drives, aisles, and maneuvering space to allow unrestricted ingress and egress for four or more vehicles. 
    Open air business. Uses operated substantially in the open air including, but not limited to: 
1.  Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicle, boat, or home equipment sale, repair or rental services. 
2.  Outdoor display and sale of garages, motor homes, manufactured homes, snowmobiles, farm implements, swimming pools and similar activities (either as a principal or accessory use conducted on a lot). 
3.  Retail sales of trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seeds, top-soil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment. 
    Open air business, short-term. Uses operated for a period of less than 61 days in a calendar year substantially in the open air or under a tent as an accessory use to an existing principal use conducted on the lot, which accessory uses shall be limited to: 
1.  Outdoor display and sale of trees, flowers and homemade foods; or 
2.  Items produced or sold by the existing principal use. 
P.  Definitions "P." 
    Parking space. An off-street space exclusive of necessary driveways, aisles or maneuvering areas suitable to accommodate one motor vehicle and having direct unobstructed access to a street or alley. 
    Pawnbrokers and pawnshops. The term "pawnbroker" as used herein is defined as any person, who loans money on deposit, or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. The term "pawnshop" is defined as any location where a pawnbroker conducts business. 
    Personal service establishment. A commercial business conducting services involving the care of a person or a person's apparel that are performed primarily on the premises such as barber or beauty shops and photographic studios. 
    Planned unit development. A zoning district which permits integrated and coordinated residential dwellings and/or certain nonresidential uses, all to be developed according to approved area and site plans as provided in chapter 12 of this ordinance. 
    Planning commission. The city of Kentwood Planning Commission created under the Municipal Planning Act, being Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended. (Refer to City Code chapter 86.) 
    Porch, enclosed. A covered entrance to a building or structure that is totally enclosed, and projects out from the wall of the building or structure and has a separate roof or integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached. 
    Porch, open. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed except for columns supporting the porch roof that projects out from the wall of the building or structure. 
    Public service activities. Any authorized activity conducted by a person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish to the public under federal, state or municipal regulations, gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation, or water in furtherance of their duties and responsibilities. 
    Public utility. Any person, firm, corporation, or city department duly authorized to furnish, under federal, state or municipal regulations, within the city, electricity, gas, steam, sewer, transportation or water services. 
Q.  Reserved for future use. 
R.  Definitions "R." 
    Recreational equipment and vehicles. Portable structures, machines or devices, self propelled or towable by another vehicle, capable of moving upon the highways without special movement permits; primarily designed, constructed or modified to provide temporary living quarters or for recreational camping, or travel use and the trailers and other devices as shall be primarily intended for the transporting of all the structures, machines, or devices. Motorcycles, bicycles, minibikes and the vehicles such as jeeps, four-wheel drives and pickup trucks with attached cabs that do not exceed the roofline of the vehicle are specifically excluded from the provisions of this definition. This does not include a temporary building, structure or use, permitted to exist during periods of construction of the principal building, structure or use. Various types of recreational equipment and vehicles include: 
1.  Travel trailer. A portable vehicle on a towing chassis, which is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and which may be identified as a "travel trailer" or a "fifth wheel" by the manufacturer. Travel trailers generally include self-contained sanitary, water, and electrical facilities. On an industry-wide basis, this type of recreational vehicle is classified as a nonmotorized recreational vehicle. 
2.  Pickup camper. A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses. On an industry-wide basis, this type of recreational vehicle is classified as a nonmotorized recreational vehicle. 
3.  Motor home. A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. Motor homes generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities. On an industry-wide basis, this type of recreational vehicle is classified as either a class A or class C recreational vehicle. A class A or bus type recreational vehicle has the luggage compartment below the living quarter. The class C recreational vehicle is a van with the bed over the cab and is much larger than a passenger van due to the bed over the cab. 
4.  Van/camper. A motorized recreational vehicle intended for temporary human habitation, sleeping and/or eating. This class of recreational vehicles includes conversion vans and camper vans that may contain refrigerator as well as water and electrical facilities. This class closely resembles passenger vans, but some models may be taller to allow for extra headroom. On an industry-wide basis, this type of recreational vehicle is classified as a class B recreational vehicle. 
5.  Folding tent trailer. A folding structure, mounted on wheels for towing and designed for travel and vacation use. 
6.  Boats and boat trailers. Boats, floats, rafts, canoes, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway. 
7.  Other recreational equipment includes snowmobiles, jet skis, all terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus the normal equipment used to transport them on the highway. 
    Recreational facility. Any public or private facility designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities, including indoor and outdoor facilities. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to recreational fields, courts, and other similar facilities. Spectator events may be conducted at the recreational facilities provided accommodations are made for well-designed seating, parking and traffic circulation. 
    Recycling facility. A facility dedicated to the processing of recyclables for conversion into raw materials or new products. This definition does not include recycling stations, landfills, junkyards, or incinerators. 
    Recycling station. A location solely dedicated to the collection of recyclable materials for hauling to another site for processing. 
    Redevelopment. The substantial reinvestment in the restoration and reuse of a vacant building or area that has deteriorated and/or has been substantially unoccupied for at least five years. 
    Repair establishment. Any building or grounds used, or intended to be used, for the repair of vehicles, equipment, or other similar materials, including, but not necessarily limited to engine repair, maintenance, reconstruction, renovation, or other repair or refurbishing activity. 
    Residential district. The R-1A-D, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RPUD-1 and RPUD-2 zoning districts. 
    Restaurant. A business establishment or use providing food service to patrons for consumption on the premises. 
    Restaurant, drive-through. A business establishment or use so developed that it provides a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle either exclusively or in addition to service within a building or structure, or to provide self-service for patrons and food carry-out. 
    Restaurant, freestanding. A business establishment providing food service to patrons for consumption on the premises operated exclusively and entirely within a separate building. 
    Restaurant, within a shopping center. A business establishment or use providing food service to patrons for consumption on the premises operated within a retail center, with or without a separate entrance. 
    Retail. Any establishment or use operated primarily for the purpose of providing goods, materials, or products for sale to the public. See also "commercial" and "commercial establishment." 
S.  Definitions "S." 
    Setback. The minimum horizontal required distance measured from the front, side or rear lot line, as the case may be, which describes a distance termed the required setback area on a lot or parcel. Setbacks for lots containing or adjoining private streets shall be measured from the pavement edge or lot line, whichever is less. 
    Shopping center. A group (more than one) of primary retail and/or service commercial establishments constructed as one development. 
    Shopping center, regional. A commercial shopping center offering merchandise for sale and providing services, that (1) consists of multiple commercial establishments located within an enclosed building (whether or not the building is constructed as a series of adjacent buildings); (2) is designated by a single name; (3) has frontage on at least two major streets; and (4) is located on a parcel or parcels of land of at least 50 acres in total area. A regional shopping center may be located on multiple parcels of land that are titled in the names of different owners, and which may be numbered differently for property tax assessment purposes, but all of such parcels shall nevertheless be deemed to constitute a single regional shopping center, so long as the aggregate area of the parcels is at least 50 acres. 
    Sign. Any object, device, display or structure, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. Specific definitions for different sign types regulated by this ordinance are contained in chapter 16. 
    Site condominium development. A development of condominium units on an unplatted tract of land, in which each individual lot conforms to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is established. 
    Small group fitness and rehabilitation training facility. A training facility restricted to prearranged individual or small group fitness and rehabilitation training with instructor to trainee ratios of no more than 1:4. The small group fitness and rehabilitation training facility shall not exceed 25 percent of a building or 10,000 square feet in area (whichever is smaller) and shall be located entirely within an enclosed building. 
    Story. That portion of a building, other than a basement or mezzanine, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
1.  A mezzanine floor shall be deemed a full story only when it covers more than 50 percent of the area of the story underneath the mezzanine, or, if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more. 
2.  A basement or cellar shall be counted as a story only if over 50 percent of its height is above the level from which the height of the building is measured and the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than six feet above grade plane, or, if it is used for business purposes. 
    Story, half. The part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story having a floor area which does not exceed one-half the floor area of the full story, provided the area contains at least 200 square feet with a clear height of at least 71/2 feet. 
    Street, dead-end. Street that has one terminus open for vehicular or pedestrian access and the other terminated on a temporary basis without a permanent vehicular turnaround. 
    Street, private. A roadway contained within a private street easement which is privately owned and maintained and which provides the principal means of access to one or more abutting lots. 
    Private driveway. A private street that provides or is planned to provide access to more than one or fewer than five lots. 
    Private street easement. An easement that is granted exclusively for private access to one or more parcels of land that contains a private street. 
    Private street, major. A private street providing exclusive access for more than 15 but fewer than 47 lots. 
    Private street, minor. A private street that provides exclusive access for between five and 15 lots within a portion of a development. 
    Private street, subcollector. A private street that provides exclusive access for 47 or more lots. 
    Street, public. A public, dedicated thoroughfare that affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property, e.g., avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and other thoroughfare, except an alley. 
    Public street, arterial. A public street designed to increase mobility by limiting access and increasing speed. 
    Public street, collector. A public street which collects traffic from local streets and connects with arterial streets. 
    Public street, local. A public street designed to improve access by limiting speed and maximizing the number of access points. 
    Street frontage. The borders or boundaries of a lot or parcel of land which abut an improved public street or an improved private street. 
T.  Definitions "T." 
    Temporary building and use. A structure used during periods of construction of the main building. 
    Training facility. A specialized indoor facility devoted to physical fitness training. The training may include cardiovascular and strength training utilizing machines and equipment as well as group and individual fitness training. Training facilities are primarily for the prearranged use of specific groups and programs, rather than for general public walk-in use. This use includes specialized facilities such as pools, weight rooms, gymnasiums, classrooms and workout space. Activities may include sports training sessions and workouts with no spectator events. 
U.  Definitions "U." 
    Use, principal. The principal purpose for which land or premises, or a building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, for which it is occupied or maintained, let, or leased. 
V.  Definitions "V." 
    Vehicle rental establishment. A business that deals in the rental of motor vehicles, excluding trucks and recreational vehicles. 
    Vehicle repair, major. Any activity involving the general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, engines or trailers; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting and vehicle rust-proofing; or steam cleaning. 
    Vehicle repair, minor. Any activity involving minor repair and maintenance of passenger vehicles and light trucks and vans, including, but not limited to vehicle detailing, oil change establishments, audio or cellular installation, and auto glass installation and repair. 
    Vehicle fuel station. A building and surfaced area where automotive vehicles may be refueled. 
    Vehicle wash establishment. A building, or portion of a building, the primary purpose of which is washing motor vehicles. 
W.  Definitions "W." 
    Waste disposal facility. A facility for end-of-the-line storage or incineration of solid and/or liquid waste including but not limited to household garbage, yard waste, and nonhazardous industrial byproducts. 
    Wireless communication towers. A structure of lattice or monopole framework to which an antenna may be attached for the transmission and/or reception of radio, television, satellite or microwave signals that facilitates wireless communications including cellular, enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), personal communication, or similar services. 
    Wireless communication antenna. The device for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, satellite, cellular, enhanced specialized mobile radio, personal communication, microwave, or similar transmissions. 
X.  Reserved for future use. 
Y.  Definitions "Y." 
    Yard. A yard is an open space of prescribed width or depth on the same land with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 

1.  Front yard. A front yard is an open space extending the full width of the lot, the uniform depth of which is the minimum prescribed horizontal setback distance measured at right angles to the front lot line and is unoccupied space between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building, excepting steps and unenclosed porches. 
2.  Rear yard. A rear yard is an open area extending across the full width of the lot, the uniform depth of which is the minimum prescribed horizontal setback distance measured at right angles to the rear lot line, describing an unoccupied space between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
3.  Side yard. A side yard is an open unoccupied area between a main building and the side lot lines, extending from the front yard area to the rear yard area. The width of the required side yard shall be measured from the center of the nearest wall of the building or structure to the nearest point of the side lot line. 
    Yard, required. A required yard is an open space on a lot prescribed by the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 

Z.  Definitions "Z." 
    Zero lot line, single-family detached dwelling. A unit exclusively for use by one family which is constructed so that one wall is sited directly, or nearly directly, on a side lot line. 

    Zoning Act. The city and Village Zoning Act of Michigan, Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended (MCL 125.581 et seq.). 
    Zoning Administrator. The person or persons designated by the city to interpret and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  2(2.02), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5-04,  1, 5-2-2004; Ord. No. 6-06,  1, 4-30-2006; Ord. No. 11-08,  1, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 12-08,  1, 9-26-2008; Ord. No. 4-10,  1, 10-22-2010; Ord. No. 3-13,  1, 2, 3-13-2013; Ord. No. 4-14,  1-3, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 6-14,  4, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 9-16,  13, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016; Ord. No. 2-17,  2, 2-7-2017, eff. 2-17-2017; Ord. No. 10-17,  1, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 2-18,  1, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 7-18,  1-5, 5-1-2018) 
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 3.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The general regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all zoning districts except as otherwise noted. The regulations apply to multiple zoning districts and are not repeated within the individual chapters. 
Section 3.02. - Essential public services. 
A.  The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential public services shall be permitted as authorized or regulated by law and other ordinances in any use district, except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. 
B.  New electrical substations, and electrical switching stations in any zoning district except the I-1 and I-2 districts must receive special land use approval from the Planning Commission. 
C.  Commercial wireless telecommunication services are not an essential public service. 
(Ord. No. 2-17,  3, 2-7-2017, eff. 2-17-2017) 
Section 3.03. - Building and structure height exceptions. 
A.  Height requirements may be exceeded by no more than 15 feet for the following: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, grain elevators, silos, stacks, stage towers and scenery lofts, water tanks, public monuments, church spires, radio and television antennas and towers, and penthouses or roof structures housing necessary mechanical appurtenances. Parapet walls may not exceed four feet in height. Height of amateur radio antennas and supporting structures shall be governed by section 3.28 of this ordinance. The provisions of section 3.28 do not apply to citizen band radio operators. 
B.  Height exceptions are not permitted for towers or structures used in the support of commercial wireless telecommunication services. These towers and structures may be permitted by the Planning Commission as a special land use governed by the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  3(3.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5-04,  2, 5-2-2004) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 74. 
Section 3.04. - Required area or space. 
A.  No lot or lots in common ownership and no yard, court, parking area or other space shall be so divided, altered or reduced as to make the area or dimension less than the minimum required under this ordinance. If already less than the minimum required under this ordinance, the area or dimension shall not be further divided or reduced. 
B.  Accessory buildings, including enclosed porches and garages, attached to a dwelling or to other main buildings shall be deemed a part of the main buildings for the purpose of determining yard space, areas and setbacks. 
Section 3.05. - Basis for determining yard requirements. 
A.  The required front yard shall be measured from the right-of-way line to the nearest foundation or building wall of the building or structure; provided that where an existing setback line has been established by existing buildings occupying 50 percent or more of the frontage within the same block or where unplatted, within 200 feet of the proposed building, such established setback shall apply. 
B.  A corner lot shall have a front lot line and a street side lot line. 
C.  Projections into yards. 
1.  Architectural features, as defined, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than four inches for each one foot of width of the side yard and may extend or project into a required front yard not more than four feet. 
2.  Unenclosed porches, steps, patios or similar construction may not project into a required front or rear yard setback for a distance to exceed ten feet. No projection is allowed into a required side yard. 
D.  Irregular lots. 
1.  The minimum distance between side lot lines at the street right-of-way shall be 40 feet measured in a straight line. 
2.  The minimum required lot width shall be measured at a straight line drawn between the two side lot lines. This line will be drawn from the points along the side lot lines at which the required front setback distance for the district is met. If the minimum lot width is not met at the required setback distance, the minimum required setback line shall be moved further into the lot to the point at which the minimum lot width is met. 

(Ord. No. 9-16,  6, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016) 
Section 3.06. - Clear vision area. 
A.  No plantings or structures shall be established or maintained on any corner lot or along any driveway that will likely result in obstructing the view of a vehicle driver approaching the intersection or entering or exiting the driveway. 
B.  On corner lots, the clear vision area shall mean a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines or in the case of a rounded property corner from the intersection of the street property lines extended. 
C.  This shall not prohibit the maintaining of shrubbery less than 30 inches in height in this area. 
D.  Tree branches shall be a minimum of ten feet above the adjoining street level within the clearance corner. 

Clear Vision Areas 
(Ord. No. 11-05,  1, 7-17-2005) 
Section 3.07. - Street access. 
    Any lot of record created after the effective date of this ordinance shall have the minimum lot width as required by this ordinance upon a public street or lawful private street right-of-way or easement. 
Section 3.08. - Principal use. 
    No lot may contain more than one main building or principal use, with the following exceptions: groups of apartment buildings, retail business buildings, within those areas of the community regulated under chapter 23, Form Based Code, or other groups of buildings contained within a single integrated complex. An integrated complex may share parking, signs, access, and other similar features which together form a unified function and appearance that the Zoning Administrator deems to be a principal use collectively. 
(Ord. No. 10-17,  2, 9-19-2017) 
Section 3.09. - Mechanical appurtenances. 
    Mechanical appurtenances such as blowers, ventilating fans, and air conditioning units shall be placed not closer than five feet to adjoining properties or buildings and shall not be located in the front yard of any lot. 
Section 3.10. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    Any development in a residential, commercial, or planned unit development must provide sidewalks conforming to city standards along all portions of its property which border arterial or collector streets. Properties bordering arterial streets in the industrial zones must also provide sidewalks conforming to city standards. The city commission, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may adopt by resolution a list of any arterial or collector streets exempted from this sidewalk requirement. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54. 
Section 3.11. - Swimming pools and other similar structures. 
A.  A fence approved by the zoning administrator shall be erected on any lot on which there is located a commercially manufactured swimming pool, hot tub, or other similar structure (below ground or above ground) which contains 24 inches or more of water in depth at any point. The approved fence shall be erected and maintained either surrounding the property or pool area in a manner sufficient to make the swimming pool inaccessible to small children. The fence will not be required if a motorized pool cover is installed in accordance with the current State of Michigan Residential Building Code. 
B.  The fence, including the gates, must not be less than four feet above ground level. All gates must be self-latching with latches placed four feet above ground level or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. 
1.  For above ground pools or other similar structures, if the walls enclosing or making up the structures are four feet or greater in height, the wall shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this section. 
2.  If steps are included for access to above ground pools or other similar structures, the steps must be gated, as required by this section, or otherwise removed or secured from the pool wall when the pool is not in use so as to be inaccessible to small children. 
C.  Any part of the pool or other similar structures shall be set back a minimum of six feet from any side or rear property line. Pools or other similar structures are not permitted in the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 9-16,  8, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016) 
Section 3.12. - Animal keeping. 
A.  The keeping of up to three of any combination of the following domestic animals is allowed by right in all zone districts: dogs and cats. 
B.  Except as provided for in Appendix A, section 3.12.A., the keeping of other domestic animals, fowl or insects including ducks, rabbits, pigeons, chickens, goats and bees in residential districts is allowed only with a permit from the zoning administrator after notification of the adjacent property owners. 
1.  Poultry and other fowl. Single and two family lots of less than one acre allowed up to six and single and two family lots of one acre or more six per acre not to exceed a maximum of 20. 
a.  No roosters, no outdoor slaughter, personal consumption only, no commercial sales. 
b.  Kept in fully enclosed shelter and fully fenced (sides and top) run located in the rear yard at all times. 
c.  Shelter and/or run shall be setback at least 20 feet from any adjacent residence or business structure and no closer than ten feet to any lot line (for six or fewer). Shelter and/or run shall be setback at least 35 feet from any adjacent residence or business structure and 20 feet to any lot line (for more than six). 
d.  Shelter area shall be no less than one square foot per poultry or fowl nor greater than four square feet per poultry or fowl up to a maximum of 240 square feet in area with a maximum height of six feet. 
e.  Maximum area of the run shall not exceed 64 square feet for six or fewer poultry or fowl. For more than six the run shall not exceed ten square feet per poultry or fowl. 
f.  Coops and runs must be tended daily. Accumulation of waste materials (feed, manure and litter) is prohibited. All waste materials shall be disposed of so as not to create a nuisance. 
2.  Honeybees. Maximum of two hives on lots of one acre or less. Up to two hives per acre (maximum of 20 active hives) for lots greater than one acre. No commercial sales. 
a.  Hives must be located in the rear yard and setback a minimum of ten feet from any property line. 
b.  A hive must be enclosed on four sides by a barrier at least six feet in height. Maximum height for a hive is five feet. Maximum area for a hive is 20 cubic feet. 
c.  An adequate supply of water for the bees shall be located close to each hive. In any instance in which a hive exhibits aggressive or swarming behavior, the beekeeper must ensure that the colony is re-queened. Aggressive behavior is any instance in which unusual aggressive characteristics such as stinging or attacking without provocation occurs. 
3.  Rabbits and goats. Maximum of three rabbits on lots of one acre or less and up to six rabbits per acre for lots greater than one acre (maximum of 20 rabbits). Maximum of one goat allowed only on a lot of over one acre. No commercial sales. 
a.  Rabbits and goats must be kept in fully fenced run at all times. Shelter and fenced area for rabbits and goats run shall be setback at least 20 feet from any adjacent residence or business structure and at least ten feet from any lot line. 
b.  Shelter and fenced run must be tended daily. Accumulation of waste materials (feed, manure and litter) is prohibited. All waste materials shall be disposed of so as not to create a nuisance. 
C.  Subject to zoning administrator approval, in the R1-A estate residential or R1-B single-family residential zones, up to two horses on a noncommercial basis are permitted when adequately housed and fenced on a parcel of land not less than two acres in area. The zoning administrator may allow for one additional horse to be kept per each additional acre over two acres up to a maximum of four horses. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  3(3.12), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 7-18,  6, 5-1-2018) 
Section 3.13. - Repair and/or sale of motor vehicles. 
A.  Mechanical work on trucks or race cars, stock or otherwise, owned by the occupant of a dwelling or on any vehicles not owned by an occupant of the premises is prohibited in residential zones. Mechanical work on owner-operated vehicles may be performed by the occupant-owner but must be performed entirely within an enclosed building. Parts or vehicles not in a legally operative condition shall be stored inside. 
B.  Section 3.13.B. The display of vehicles for sale on private property is addressed by Section 66-63 of the Code of Ordinances City of Kentwood, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 9-16,  9, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016) 
Section 3.14. - Storage outdoors in residential district. 
A.  The outdoor storage or parking of recreational vehicles including, but not limited to, special purpose automobiles, boats, floats, rafts, camping or travel trailers, motorized homes or detachable travel equipment adaptable to light duty trucks is prohibited anywhere on any street right-of-way or public utility easement or rights-of-way. These provisions also apply to utility trailers or trailers used for storage, transport, display or demonstration purposes. 
B.  Parking of utility trailers and recreational equipment in a residential district, including but not limited to boats, boat trailers, camping trailers, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, houseboats and house vans is permitted, subject to the limitations set forth by City Code chapter 86. 
(Ord. No. 10-09,  3, 12-25-2009) 
Section 3.15. - Accessory buildings. 
    Except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, accessory buildings shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Accessory buildings are permitted only in connection with, incidental to and on the same lot with a principal use or main building permitted in the particular zoning district. 
2.  No accessory building shall be occupied or utilized unless the main building to which it is an accessory is occupied or utilized. 
3.  All accessory buildings shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the zoning district in which it is located. 
4.  No detached accessory building shall be used in any part for residential purposes. 
5.  If an accessory building is attached to a main building by any wall or roof construction, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this ordinance applicable to main buildings. 
6.  All accessory buildings and use combined shall cover no more than 30 percent of the rear yard. Swimming pools shall not count towards this restriction. 
B.  Height restrictions. No detached accessory building in a residential district shall exceed one story or 14 feet in height. Accessory buildings in nonresidential districts shall not exceed the height requirements of the district in which they are located. 
C.  Location regulations. 
1.  Yard locations. 
a.  In the R-1 residential districts, an accessory building shall be located in the rear yard of the lot except when attached to the main building. 
b.  In the case of multiple family developments, parking garage or covered bays may be permitted in any yard, but not within any required yard. 
2.  Setbacks. 
a.  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to any main building or closer to any street right-of-way line than permitted for a main building. 
b.  The drip edge of any detached accessory building 576 square feet or less in area shall be located no closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. Detached accessory buildings between 576 square feet and 960 square feet in area shall be located no closer than five feet to a side lot line and 30 feet to a rear lot line. Detached accessory buildings in excess of 960 square feet in area shall meet the rear yard and side yard setback requirements for main use buildings of the zoning district in which they are located. 
c.  When an accessory building is located on a corner lot it shall meet the front yard setback of both streets. 

Front Lot Line 
D.  Number and size limitations. 
1.  With the exception of multiple family developments, in no case shall the number of attached or detached accessory buildings, in combination, exceed two. 
2.  Accessory buildings in single family and two-family residential developments are subject to the following area restrictions. 
a.    
Lot Size Primary Accessory Building Style Primary Accessory Building 
Maximum Area 2 nd Accessory 
Building 
Maximum Area <1 Acre Attached 768 square feet* 250 square feet <1 Acre Detached 768 square feet 120 square feet =1 acre <5 acres Attached 768 square feet* 960 square feet =1 acre <5 acres Detached 768 square feet 500 square feet =5 acres Attached 768 square feet* 1,100 square feet =5 acres Detached 768 square feet 750 square feet  
* If the home has at least 3,000 square feet of finished living area then an attached accessory building of up to 1,200 square feet in area is permitted. 
b.  A garage accessory to a multiple family dwelling unit shall be designed for not more than two vehicles per dwelling unit. 
c.  Multiple family developments may have one detached accessory building for use as a maintenance/storage facility subject to the following restrictions: 
Lot Size Accessory Building Maximum Area <1 Acre 250 square feet =1 acre <5 acres 960 square feet =5 acres 1,100 square feet  
3.  Detached accessory buildings in commercial and industrial districts are subject to the following area restrictions: 
Lot Size Accessory Building 
Maximum Area <1 Acre 250 square feet =1 acre <5 acres 960 square feet =5 acres 1,100 square feet  
4.  Carports are to be considered as an accessory building subject to these provisions. 
5.  A stable for horses, which shall not be subject to the size limitations of this section may be permitted on a lot of two acres or more where a horse is kept in accordance with the provisions of the R1-A, B Districts in accordance with the requirements of section 5.02 or section 3.12. 
6.  The following accessory buildings or structures are permitted, and shall not be subject to a number limitation unless as expressly noted below: 
a.  A child's playhouse or treehouse, not to exceed 100 square feet in gross floor area. 
b.  Doghouses, pens and other similar structures for the housing of household pets, but not including kennels as defined in chapter 2. 
c.  Fallout shelters. 
d.  Swimming pool and/or bathhouse, private. 
e.  Decks, porches, gazebos and similar structures. 
f.  Recreation, storage and service structures in a manufactured home park, as regulated by chapter 7. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  3(3.15), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 3-12,  1, 4, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 16-18,  1-5, 11-20-2018) 
Section 3.16. - Accessory uses. 
    Except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, accessory uses shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses and structures shall include, but are not limited to, the following uses and structures provided that the use or structure shall be in accordance with the definition of accessory use contained in chapter 2. 
1.  In Nonresidential Districts a dwelling unit is permitted for a proprietor or storekeeper and their families, located in the same building as their place of occupation, and for a watchman or caretaker. The size for the proprietor or storekeeper dwelling unit shall be at least 375 square feet in area. 
2.  Signs as permitted by this Ordinance unless otherwise designated as a principal use. 
3.  Statuary, arbors, trellises, barbeque stoves, flagpoles, walls and hedges. 
4.  Compost piles of less than 100 cubic feet, located on rear yard, set back at least five feet from any lot line. 
5.  Parking and loading spaces, off-street, as regulated in chapter 17. 
6.  Private tennis, basketball or volleyball courts, and similar outdoor private recreation uses. 
7.  Private swimming pools and/or bathhouses. 
8.  Private streets. 
9.  Short term open air business. 
10.  Other accessory uses as may be provided for by this ordinance. 
11.  In a residential area, the open off street parking of one commercial vehicle which is operated by the occupant of the lot. 
12.  Art venue display subject to Art Commission approval. 
13.  Vegetable/fruit gardens. 
B.  Accessory uses not permitted. The following shall not be considered accessory uses but shall be regulated as otherwise required by this ordinance or other applicable city ordinances. 
1.  Junkyards, scrap heaps or refuse piles, not including compost piles of less than 100 cubic feet. 
2.  The selling of motor vehicles other than the property owner's in residential districts or on properties of residential uses. 
3.  The outside repair of motor vehicles. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall not be considered as accessory to a permitted use. 
C.  Requirements for accessory uses. 
1.  All accessory uses and structures combined shall cover no more than 30 percent of the required rear yard, except that swimming pools shall not count toward this restriction. 
2.  Except for approved parking in commercial and industrial zones, accessory uses are permitted only in connection with, incidental to and on the same lot with a principal use or main building which is permitted in the particular zoning district. 
3.  An accessory use shall not be occupied or utilized unless the main building to which it is an accessory is occupied or utilized. 
4.  An accessory use must be in the same zoning district as the principal use on a lot or parcel. 
5.  Private streets, as regulated in this ordinance, may cross zoning districts and lots or parcels to access a principal use. Private streets serving nonresidential uses shall not cross residential districts unless authorized by the Planning Commission. 
6.  When an accessory use is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, the accessory use shall not project beyond the front yard set-back line required on the lot in the rear of the corner lot. 
7.  Unless otherwise permitted by this ordinance, an accessory use in a residential district shall be located in the rear yard of the lot except when attached to the main building. 
8.  Short term open air businesses may be allowed by the Zoning Administrator by way of a zoning permit for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days after submitting a simple site plan sketch determined by the Zoning Administrator to be in conformance with the zoning ordinance. Written permission is required from the owner of the lot, parcel or tract intended for the site of operations and not more than two approvals may be allowed to a business or property within a twelve-month period. A performance guarantee shall be filed with the city Clerk to ensure that clean-up of site is accomplished following the expiration of the sales permit. If the clean-up is not completed in that time, the performance guarantee is forfeited. 
9.  The Art Commission may allow front, side or rear yard area art venue display placement. 
(Ord. No. 11-08,  2, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 3-12,  2, 3, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 9-16,  5, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016; Ord. No. 10-17,  3, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 2-18,  2, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 7-18,  7, 5-1-2018) 
Section 3.17. - Satellite dish antennas. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  These regulations are formulated to ensure that adequate protection measures are provided in the ordinance for ensuring that sight distance is not impaired, that the dish antennas are located and constructed in a manner that will not afford the potential for injury, and to ensure that the intent and purposes of this ordinance are met. 
2.  Satellite dish antennas and other similar structures may be permitted as accessory structures. 
3.  Any person who proposes to construct a satellite dish antenna subject to these requirements must first obtain a permit from the community development department. The person seeking the permit, if not the owner of the lot or parcel of land, must provide evidence to the community development department that the owner of the lot or parcel of land consents to its construction and assumes all liability for its construction, operation and use. 
4.  In residential districts, satellite dish antennas or other similar devices one meter or less in diameter, or in nonresidential districts satellite dish antennas or other similar devices two meters or less in diameter may be attached to a roof structure and shall not be subject to the regulations of this section. 
5.  The zoning administrator may vary any provision of this section if its enforcement inhibits or prevents the proper operation of the satellite dish antenna. In these instances, the zoning administrator may require additional screening or impose other reasonable conditions intended to reduce the visual effects from adjacent properties. 
B.  Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas or other similar roof-mounted devices over two meters in diameter are permitted in commercial and industrial districts only, provided that the antenna complies with the height standards for the district in which they are located. 
C.  Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas or other similar devices (exceeding one meter in diameter in residential districts, or in nonresidential districts between two and three meters in diameter) are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Maximum height shall be 15 feet. 
2.  Satellite dish antennas or other similar devices shall comply with setback requirements for the district in which they are located and shall not be permitted in front or side yards. 
3.  All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground. 
4.  The site of the antenna shall be screened from view through the planting of evergreens of sufficient concentration to reasonably conceal the antenna. Alternative screening is acceptable if approved by the zoning administrator. 
5.  Any ground-mounted antenna shall be so located and designed to withstand a wind force of 90 miles per hour. The satellite dish antenna or other similar device shall be securely mounted and anchored to a pole and secured in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer and the building code. 
6.  The surface of the dish shall be painted or treated as not to reflect glare from sunlight and shall not be used as a sign or message board. All installations shall employ (to the extent possible) materials and colors that blend with the surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 5-04,  2, 5-2-2004) 
Section 3.18. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations are permitted as residential accessory uses in any residential district, subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Home occupations shall be approved by the zoning administrator, who may issue an approval upon receipt of a letter from the applicant stating an intent to comply with the requirements of this section and the specific measures by which compliance will be maintained. 
B.  No person other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises shall be engaged in the home occupation. 
C.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 20 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
D.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation other than one sign not exceeding two square feet in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the main building. 
E.  The home occupation shall be operated in its entirety within the main building. 
F.  There shall be no sale of products or services except as are produced on the premises by the home occupation. 
G.  No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the residential district in which it is located, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met off the street on the property's driveway. 
H.  No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family dwelling, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises. 
State Law reference- Home occupations, MCL 125.583c. 
Section 3.19. - Fences and walls. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to construct any fence in any public right-of-way, floodway easement, or drainage easement. (Refer also to City Ordinance No. 9-84, as amended, the Stormwater Management Ordinance.) 
2.  No fence shall be erected on any corner lot or parcel or adjacent to any driveways, which will, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, obstruct the view of a vehicle driver approaching the intersection or driveway. Fencing is not permitted within the clear vision area, as provided in section 3.06. 
3.  It shall be unlawful to install, construct or maintain electric fences in any zoning district. 
4.  All fences and walls exceeding 30 inches in height shall require a zoning permit and shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator prior to construction. 
B.  Fences in all zoning districts. 
1.  Solid-type fences in the required front yard shall not exceed a height of three feet. An open fence may be permitted within the front setback area provided it does not exceed a height of four feet. Open fences shall include chain link, wrought iron or other decorative metal fence as well as an open type fence with spacing between boards equivalent to the board width of the fence. However, no chain link or wire fencing shall be located within any residential front yard. 
2.  Fences in the street side yard of a corner lot may be erected to the side lot line but may not exceed a height of three feet if solid, or four feet if a decorative open-type fence. Fences above this height must be set back at least 17 feet from the side lot line. No chain link or wire fence shall be located in the required street side yard. 
3.  Fencing in any other portion of a lot shall not exceed six feet if in or immediately adjacent to a residential zone district or use. 
4.  The finished side of the fence must be oriented to the closest property line. Fences constructed with alternating boards on opposite sides of the fence are determined to be finished on both sides. 
C.  Fences in nonresidential districts. 
1.  Barbed-wire strands may be used to enclose public services and installations, storage areas or other similar areas in nonresidential zoning districts. The strands shall be restricted to the uppermost portion of the fence, which shall be setback at least ten feet from the public right-of-way or perimeter property line abutting a residential district and shall not extend lower than a height of six feet from the nearest ground level. 
2.  No fence in a nonresidential zoning district shall exceed an eight-foot height. 
(Ord. No. 4-10,  4, 10-22-2010; Ord. No. 6-14,  5, 8-19-2014) 
Section 3.20. - Residential child and adult care facilities. 
[A.]  As defined in chapter 2, definitions, the following uses are allowed only as provided for in the following table of facilities and zoning districts. Refer to chapter 15, approval standards for special land uses for applicable conditions. 
P: Land and/or buildings may be used for the purposes listed by right. SLU: Land and/or buildings may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 and elsewhere are met. SLU as accessory: Land and/or buildings may only be allowed as an accessory to an approved use, such as a church, school, recreation facility, office or other similar use upon review and approval of a special land use approval, in accordance with general and specific standards.  
Type of Facility per District R1-A, B, 
C, D R-2, 3, 
4, 5 C-2, 3, 4 OS Form Based 
Code (FBC) I-1, I-2 Adult foster care family home P P - - P - Adult foster care small group home SLU SLU - - SLU - Adult day care facility - SLU SLU - SLU - Foster family home P P - - P - Foster family group home SLU P - - SLU - Family child day care home P P - - P - Group child day care home P P - - SLU - Child care center SLU SLU P - SLU SLU as accessory 
and free-standing Child caring institution - SLU - - SLU - Adult caring institution - SLU - - - -  
[B.]  Requirements pertaining to group child day care homes. 
1.  There shall be sufficient on-site outdoor play area to meet state regulations. All required outdoor play areas shall be fenced with a minimum of a four-foot tall fence, provided that no such fence shall be located in the front yard. 
2.  Ingress and egress shall be provided as far as possible from two intersecting streets and shall be at least 100 feet from two through streets. 
3.  A group child day care shall not be located within a 1,200-foot radius of any other group child day care. 
4.  For the purpose of this section, the measurement of a radius shall be measured in a straight line from the actual location of the use to the nearest property line of the other group day care home. 
5.  An on-site drive shall be provided for drop offs/loading. This drive shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without creating a hazard to traffic flow on the public street. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  3(3.20), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 10-17,  4, 9-19-2017) 
Section 3.21. - Wireless communication antennas. 
    Antennas for wireless communication are allowed in all zoning districts consistent with the Kentwood Master Plan. Antennas for wireless communication transmissions do not have to be directly related to the main use of the site provided the antenna is attached to an existing tower or structure and the zoning administrator determines it does not adversely impact the structure to which it is attached or the surrounding area. The zoning administrator shall rely upon the site plan review standards in section 14.05 of the zoning ordinance in making this determination. The antenna itself shall not exceed 15 feet in height and shall otherwise be restricted by the permitted height provisions of the zoning district. Any antenna placement in a residential district shall not be erected at a height that requires lighting. Any antenna placement adjacent to a residential district or use that requires lighting shall be a continuous red beacon at night. 
Section 3.22. - Regulations applicable to all single-family dwellings outside manufactured housing communities. 
A.  The relationship of the width and depth of any dwelling unit shall not exceed a ratio of 4:1. 
B.  The longest side of the structure must face generally parallel to the front street unless 75 percent of the existing dwelling units within 300 feet of the lot boundaries on which the dwelling unit is to be placed face the shorter side toward the street. Homes within this distance whose length is equal to their width shall be counted toward the above percentage. 
C.  The roof of the dwelling unit shall have a minimum pitch of three inches height to one foot of run. 
D.  The dwelling unit shall be permanently anchored to a wood, masonry, concrete, or other approved foundation. Access to the basement or crawl space shall be from inside the dwelling unit. 
E.  Chimneys for fireplaces, furnaces, wood-burning stoves and similar devices may be on the outside of the unit, providing the vent pipe is enclosed with materials compatible with exterior finish. 
F.  The dwelling unit shall meet all the requirements and specifications of the currently adopted building code, housing code, electric code, plumbing code, energy code, and the one- and two-family code. 
G.  If the dwelling unit was transported to the building site, all wheels, axles, and towing devices shall be removed from the dwelling unit once placed on the lot. 
Section 3.23. - Lot width to depth ratio. 
A.  Except as may be permitted in B, below, no lot created after the adoption date of this ordinance shall have a depth exceeding four times its width, as measured at the front lot line. 

Lot Width to Depth Ratio 
B.  Where steep topography, unusual soil conditions, or drainage problems exist, the Planning Commission, upon application for a land division in accordance with the city land division ordinance, may permit a greater width to depth ratio. The permit may be issued when a division meeting the requirements of section 3.23.A would result in an unnecessary waste of land or otherwise create an unusual or odd-shaped lot. 
Section 3.24. - Nonconforming uses, buildings, and lots. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  It is recognized that there exists within zoning districts certain buildings and structures, uses, and lots which were lawful before this ordinance was adopted, and which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit nonconforming lots, buildings and structures, and uses to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. 
2.  Nonconforming lots, buildings, structures, and uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which they are located. It is the intent of this ordinance that these nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other buildings, structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the district. 
B.  General requirements. 
1.  No structure or part thereof shall be constructed, erected, moved, placed, maintained, reconstructed, used, extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  No use shall be established on any lot, land or premises except in conformity with the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
3.  No building shall be established on any lot, land or premises except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
4.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently conducted. 
5.  The city may acquire, through purchase or condemnation, private nonconforming lots, buildings and structures. The city commission may take these actions in the manner provided for by law. 
C.  Nonconforming uses. 
1.  The lawful use of any land or premises exactly as it existed at the time of enactment of the zoning ordinance, or amendment thereto, may be continued although the use does not conform to the current provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  If a nonconforming use is abandoned for any reason for a period of not less than six months, any subsequent use shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
3.  A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned if one or more of the following conditions exists, and shall be deemed to constitute intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the nonconforming use: 
a.  Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property, have been disconnected; 
b.  The property, buildings, and grounds, have fallen into disrepair; 
c.  Signs or other indications of the existence of the nonconforming use have been removed; 
d.  Removal of equipment or fixtures that are necessary for the operation of the nonconforming use; or 
e.  Other actions, which in the opinion of the zoning administrator constitute an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon the nonconforming use. 
4.  Uses nonconforming solely because of height, area, parking or loading provisions only may be expanded provided that the zoning administrator determines that all three of the following occur. For the purposes of this subsection expansion shall include extension or enlargement of the use. 
a.  All zoning district requirements are satisfied with respect to the expansion; 
b.  The expansion shall not substantially extend the life of any nonconforming use by reason of parking and loading provisions; and 
c.  The nonconforming use is made conforming or less nonconforming by the addition of parking and/or loading space. Thereafter any subsequent expansion of the nonconforming use or change in use will not be allowed if it requires even greater parking and/or loading space. 
D.  Nonconforming structures. 
1.  Any structure existing and lawful at the time of enactment of the zoning ordinance, or amendments thereto, may be continued although the structure does not conform with the current provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Repairs and maintenance work may be made as are required to keep a nonconforming building or structure in a sound condition. 
3.  In the event fire, wind or an act of God or the public enemy shall damage any nonconforming building(s) or structure(s), it may be rebuilt or restored provided the cost thereof shall not exceed the state equalized value of the building or structure after the rebuilding or restoration. The Building Inspector shall determine the cost of reconstruction. 
4.  In the event any nonconforming building(s) or structure(s) shall be damaged by fire, wind or an act of God or the public enemy and the cost of rebuilding or restoration exceeds the state equalized value of the building(s) or structure(s) after rebuilding or restoration, the buildings or structures shall be built in conformance with the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, unless the zoning board of appeals permits the rebuilding or restoration of the building or structure. The approval of the zoning board of appeals shall be granted only upon finding that at least one of the following is true: 
a.  That the rebuilding or restoration will not substantially extend the probable duration of the nonconforming building or structure; or 
b.  There are circumstances that the land previously occupied by the nonconforming use does not permit the reasonable construction of the nonconforming building or structure. 
5.  Structures nonconforming solely because of height, area, parking or loading provisions only may be expanded provided that the zoning administrator determines that all three of the following occur. Expansion shall include extension, enlargement, alteration or modernization. 
a.  All development requirements are satisfied with respect to the expansion; 
b.  The expansion shall not substantially extend the life of any nonconforming structure by reason of parking and loading provisions; and 
c.  The nonconforming structure is made conforming or less nonconforming by the addition of parking and/or loading space. Thereafter any subsequent expansion of the nonconforming structure or change in use will not be allowed if it requires even greater parking and/or loading space. 
E.  Nonconforming lots. 
1.  If a lot in use already has less than the minimum required area or dimension required for the zoning district in which it is located, the area or dimension may be maintained but shall not be further divided or reduced. 
2.  Existing platted lots. 
a.  Where a nonconforming platted lot has an area of not less than 90 percent of its zoning district requirements and where the lot can provide the side and front yard requirements of its zone, the permitted uses of the district shall be allowed. 
b.  A nonconforming platted lot, in single ownership, of less than 90 percent of its zoning district requirements may be utilized for permitted uses, and the required side yards may be reduced by the same percentage the area of the lot bears to its zone district requirements, provided that no side yard provision may be reduced to less than five feet and that off-street parking requirements are also met. 
3.  Adjacent lots in common ownership. 
a.  No lot or lots in common ownership shall be so divided, altered or reduced as to make the area or dimension less than the minimum specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
b.  Where three or more adjacent lots are in single ownership and where these lots individually contain less than 90 percent of the zoning district requirements, the lots shall be utilized only in complete conformance with the zoning district's minimum requirements. 
c.  In the event two adjacent lots are in single ownership, the zoning board of appeals may permit their use as separate lots having less than the required lot area if it shall determine that all of the following are met: 
(1)  There is no practical possibility of obtaining additional land. 
(2)  The lots can be so used without adversely affecting the character of the neighborhood. 
(3)  No side yard provision is reduced to less than five feet. 
(4)  Off-street parking requirements are met. 
d.  A nonconforming lot may only be expanded if it is brought into closer conformity with the regulations specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
State Law reference- Nonconformities, MCL 125.583a. 
Section 3.25. - Site condominiums. 
A.  A site condominium unit shall be a unit created by the division of land on the basis of condominium ownership that is not subject to the platting provisions of the Land Division Act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967, as amended (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
B.  A site condominium unit shall be treated as a separate lot or parcel and may have buildings constructed on it and uses conducted within it as allowed in its zoning district provided the unit meets the development requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
C.  Site plan approval: 
    Preliminary site plan: 
1.  A preliminary site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning commission and city commission in accordance with chapters 13 and 14. 
2.  Approval of a preliminary site plan shall for a period of two years confer upon the proprietor approval of lot sizes, lot orientations, and street layouts. 
3.  Three separate one-year extensions may be granted by the city commission if applied for in writing prior to the date of expiration of approval of the preliminary site plan. 
4.  After a period of two years from approval, unless extensions as provided for in this chapter have been granted, the preliminary site plan approval shall become null and void if substantial construction has not commenced and proceeded in a meaningful manner. 
    Final site plan: 
5.  A final site plan for the site condominium project must be approved by the city commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for any structures on the proposed site, unless they already exist. 
6.  At its regular meeting or at a meeting called within 20 days of the date of submission, the city commission shall examine the final plan for general compliance with this ordinance. The proprietor or his designated representative may request an extension of the 20-day time limit, which the city commission may grant at its discretion. 
7.  To receive final approval for the site condominium project, the owner shall submit ten copies of the plan to the city Engineer who shall place the final plan on the agenda of the city commission, said plan to contain the information required by this ordinance. Copies of the final plan shall be distributed to the appropriate city departments for their review and comment to the city commission. 
    Building permit: 
8.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any building in the proposed site condominium project, the following items must be fulfilled, unless waived by the appropriate city department. The city commission may consider the issuance of building permits prior to the approval of the final site plan in exceptional or unusual circumstances beyond the ability of the applicant to control. 
a.  Proposed master deed. 
b.  Articles of incorporation for the condominium association. 
c.  Improvement plan approval. 
d.  Block grading, floodway, soil erosion approval. 
e.  Basement elevation and building restriction approval. 
f.  Construction of hydrant water, adequate fire access, stormwater detention, floodways, and soil erosion controls. 
D.  Monuments shall be set at all boundary corners and deflection points and at all street right-of-way intersection corner and deflection points. Lot irons shall be set at all condominium site corners and deflection points of condominium site lines. 
E.  The city Engineer may grant a delay in the setting of required monuments or irons for a reasonable time, but not to exceed one year from the date of approval by the city commission, on condition that the developer deposit with the city Clerk cash, a certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city, whichever the developer selects, in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
1.  The deposit shall be returned to the developer upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor registered in the State of Michigan that the monuments and irons have been set as required, within the time specified. 
2.  If the developer defaults, the city commission shall promptly engage a registered surveyor to set the monuments and irons in the ground as shown on the condominium site plan, at the developer's expense. 
F.  All rights-of-way and utility easements shall be described separately from individual condominium sites and shall be accurately delineated by bearings and distances on the condominium subdivision plan and the final site plan. 
1.  The rights-of-way and utility easements shall be separately designed for their individual purpose, such as access, roadway, location, installation, maintenance and replacing of public utilities. 
2.  The developer shall dedicate to the city all easements for utilities. Water, sewer and electrical easements may be placed within streets, subject to the approval of the city Engineer and the standards of the city. 
3.  All streets proposed for any site condominium shall be developed within the minimum design, construction, inspection, approval, and maintenance requirements of this ordinance, and the subdivision control ordinance (ordinance no. 21-84, as amended). 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  3(3.25), 4-1-2003) 
Section 3.26. - Regulated uses. 
A.  Uses subject to controls. Uses subject to the controls of this section are as follows: 
1.  Adult-oriented businesses. 
2.  Massage establishments. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings: 
1.  Adult-oriented business means a business or commercial establishment engaging in one or more of the following enterprises (these enterprises are defined in the adult-oriented businesses regulatory ordinance): (1) adult cabaret; (2) adult merchandise store; (3) adult motel; (4) adult theater; (5) escort agency; (6) nude model studio; and (7) sexual encounter center. 
2.  Massage establishment means any building, room, place or establishment where body massage is regularly practiced on the human body, to club members or to the general public for a charge. The term "massage establishment" shall not include: 
a.  Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics; 
b.  The office of a state-licensed physician, surgeon, osteopath or chiropractor; 
c.  The establishment of a barber, manicurist, beautician or cosmetologist who is duly licensed under the laws of this state, or another state within the United States, or the federal government, and who practices within the established limits of his or her license, and who administers a massage in the normal course of his or her duties in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck, hands, feet, or shoulders; or 
d.  The establishment of a myomassaologist who is a current member of the American Massage Therapy Association or other national massage therapy organization with comparable prerequisites for certification. 
3.  Massage means any method of applying pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the body, for remedial or hygienic or other purposes, with the hands, with or without the aid of any mechanical, magnetic or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations. 
4.  Specified anatomical area and specified sexual activities shall have the same meaning for the purposes of this chapter as those terms have in the adult-oriented businesses regulatory ordinance. 
C.  Requirements. Permitted regulated uses shall meet each of the following requirements: 
1.  A regulated use may be located only within a zone district where the use is normally permitted. 
2.  Except as provided in section 3.26C.3 below, a regulated use shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius of any residential district or use, or upon which is located a school, public park, library, child care facility, or place of religious worship. 
3.  In accordance with the procedures in this subsection, the Planning Commission may permit a regulated use within a 1,000-foot radius, but not within a 500-foot radius, of a residential district or use, or upon which is located a school, public park, library, child care facility, or place of religious worship. An applicant seeking approval pursuant to this subsection shall file a completed application on an application form prepared and made available by the city. The Planning Commission shall make a final determination on the application within 60 days after the applicant submits the final application. The Planning Commission shall approve the application if the Planning Commission determines that each of the following criteria is met: 
a.  That the establishment of a regulated use in the proposed location will not adversely affect the public interest; 
b.  That the establishment of a regulated use in the proposed location will not be injurious to nearby uses, particularly lots zoned or occupied for residential purposes or the school, public park, library, child care facility, or place of religious worship; 
c.  That the establishment of a regulated use in the area will not be inconsistent with the spirit and intent of this ordinance; and 
d.  That the establishment of a regulated use in the proposed location would comply with all applicable regulations of this ordinance and other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
4.  Within ten days after the Planning Commission makes its decision, any person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission under this section may appeal the decision to the city commission which shall decide the appeal within thirty days after the Planning Commission makes its decision. The decision of the city commission (or of the Planning Commission, if a timely appeal to the city commission is not taken) shall be a final, nonappealable decision. 
5.  A regulated use shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius of any other regulated use. 
6.  For the purpose of this section, the measurement of a radius shall be measured in a straight line from the actual location of the use to the nearest property line of the residential district or use, public park, school, child care facility, or place of religious worship, or other regulated use. 
7.  A regulated use shall not be located in the same structure or on the same parcel as another regulated use. 
8.  All on site parking areas shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance and additionally shall be illuminated on any days the business is open from sunset until at least 60 minutes after closing. 
Section 3.27. - Restoration of unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or structure, or part thereof, declared unsafe by the Building Inspector, or required to comply with his lawful order. 
Section 3.28. - Amateur radio services. 
A.  Intent and purpose. This section is intended 1) to provide reasonable accommodation for amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures in the city of Kentwood and 2) to constitute minimum practicable regulation to accomplish the city's legitimate purposes consistent with state and federal laws including Federal Communication Commission regulations pertaining to amateur radio services, as noted in PRB-1 (1985), as amended and reconsidered. Legitimate purposes include but are not limited to preserving residential areas as livable neighborhoods and preserving public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings: 
    Amateur radio antenna: Any combination of materials or equipment used exclusively for the purpose of sending and/or receiving electromagnetic waves for amateur radio services. 
    Amateur radio antenna support structure (or antenna support structure): Any structure, such as a mast, pole, tower or any combination thereof, whether ground or roof mounted, freestanding or guyed, used exclusively for supporting amateur radio antenna(e). 
    Amateur radio service: A federally licensed radio-communication service for the purpose of self-training, intercommunication and technical investigations carried out by amateurs, that is, duly authorized persons interested in radio technique solely with a personal aim and without pecuniary interest particularly with respect to providing emergency communications. (As per Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, Part 97.) 
    Ground-mounted amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures: Amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures that are not fixed to any building or accessory structure. 
    Overall height: The total height of the amateur radio antenna and/or antenna support structure as measured from mean grade to the highest point of the antenna, the antenna support Structure or the combination thereof. For roof-mounted antenna and/or antenna support structures, the mean grade is measured from the established grade adjoining the exterior walls of the structure upon which the antenna or support structure is affixed. For ground-mounted amateur radio antennas and/or antenna support structures, the mean grade is measured at the established grade adjoining such antenna and/or support structure. 
    Roof-mounted amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures: Amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures that are fixed to any building or accessory structure. 
C.  General requirements. 
1.  Amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structure may be permitted in all zoning districts as long as they are in compliance with the provisions of this section. In addition unobtrusive wire antenna(e) not supported by a structure(s) that is (are) otherwise not in compliance with the provisions of this section are permitted in all zoning districts and are exempt from these provisions to the extent that they do not interfere with public utilities or can be otherwise deemed unsafe in any respects. 
2.  In residential districts, amateur radio antennae and/or amateur radio antenna support structures shall not be used for collection of commercial antennae. In nonresidential districts, co-location of commercial antenna must comply with zoning ordinance requirements applicable to wireless communication towers. an otherwise lawful amateur radio antenna may be installed on commercial antenna structures by agreement with the owner of such commercial antenna structures. 
3.  All amateur radio antennae and amateur radio antenna support structures shall be in compliance at all times with the FCC regulations pertaining to amateur radio services. 
4.  All amateur radio antennae and amateur radio antenna support structures shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Gerald R. Ford International Airport and Federal Aviation Administration. 
5.  In residential zoning districts, amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures do not require any permit from the city's Community Development Department as long as the overall height, defined herein, does not exceed the maximum building height permitted in the respective zoning district by more than 15 feet. In nonresidential districts, amateur radio antenna and antenna support structures do not require any permit from the city's Community Development Department as long as the overall height does not exceed the maximum building height permitted in the respective zoning district. 
6.  In residential zoning districts, amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures with an overall height exceeding the allowable maximum building height permitted in the zoning district where the property is located by more than 15 feet, shall require an amateur radio antenna/antenna support structure permit from the city's Community Development Department. In residential districts, no amateur radio antenna and/or antenna support structures shall be erected to a height that requires the installation of lighting per Federation Aviation Administration rules and/or regulations. 
7.  In nonresidential districts, amateur radio antennae and amateur radio antenna support structures an overall height exceeding the allowable maximum building height permitted in the respective zoning district, shall require an amateur radio antenna/antenna support structure permit from the city's Community Development Department. 
8.  No more than two amateur radio antennae and/or amateur radio antenna support structure requiring a permit under this section shall be permitted on a single lot. 
9.  All amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures with an overall height exceeding 70 feet (but not exceeding 100 feet in height) shall require the approval of the zoning administrator. 
10.  No amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures shall have an overall height exceeding 195 feet. All amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures with an overall height exceeding 100 feet shall require a variance. The applicant for such a variance shall submit to the city's Community Development Department a certification by a licensed professional engineer confirming the structural stability and soundness of the antenna and/or antenna support structure prior to final approval. 
11.  No roof-mounted amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures shall be fixed to the side of a structure that faces a street. Roof-mounted amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures may be allowed on the roof as long as such antennas are not entirely on the front half of the roof facing a street. 
12.  Ground-mounted amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures shall not be allowed in the front yard or a side yard facing a street. 
13.  No part of amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures shall encroach within one foot of any property line. Guy wires may be permitted in the side yards provided no part of the anchors and/or the foundations shall encroach within one foot of any lot line. 
14.  Ground-mounted amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support shall be set back at least ten feet of any property line at its base (measured up to four feet from the mean grade). Guy wire may be permitted in the side yards provided no part of the anchors and/or the foundations shall encroach within one foot of any lot line. 
15.  Climbable ground-mounted amateur radio antenna and antenna support structures shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least five feet and no more than seven feet in height or shall have appropriate anti-climb devices attached up to a height of five feet or more. 
16.  Antenna and/or antenna support structures requiring a permit under this section shall require filing with the city's Community Development Department, a copy of the manufacturer's specifications for construction, assembly and erection and a certification from the owner and/or licensee that such specifications have been followed in erecting the subject structure. In the event of unavailability of manufacturer's specifications, certification by a licensed professional engineer must be filed with the city confirming the structural stability and soundness of the antenna and/or support structure. If neither the manufacturer's specifications nor the certification can be made available, the antenna and/or support structure shall be set back a distance of at least 50 percent of its total height from the property line. 
17.  All ground-mounted amateur radio antenna and antenna support structures shall be structurally sound enough and so designed and installed as to withstand a wind speed of at least 90 miles per hour. 
18.  No amateur radio antenna and/or antenna support structures shall be erected on cemetery sites. 
D.  Permits, construction, maintenance and removal. 
1.  Amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures shall be erected within one year of issuance of the permit. In the event of failure on the part of the applicant to complete the installation within one year, a renewal of the permit shall be required. 
2.  Permits shall be required to be renewed if alterations affecting the overall height and structural capacity of the permitted amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures are to be made. 
3.  The owner and/or licensee shall maintain a log that documents any and all alterations, maintenance measures, structural condition and routine inspection reports of the amateur radio antennae or amateur radio antenna support structures. The maintenance log shall also include the manufacturer's specifications where available and details of construction and erection. 
4.  All amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures are subject to inspection by the city staff. The owner and/or licensee shall provide the city staff upon request with a copy of the permit where applicable and the maintenance log. 
5.  In case the amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures no longer meet FCC required safety standards or the requirements of this section 3.28, the owner and/or licensee shall immediately notify the same to the city's Community Development Department along with the measures being taken to restore the same. The owner and/or licensee shall be responsible for the removal/replacement of the amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures as reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
6.  The owner and/or licensee shall notify the city staff at least 30 days in advance of cessation of ownership or leasehold rights on the subject property and remove the amateur radio antenna and amateur radio antenna support structures within 60 days of termination of such rights. If the amateur radio antennae and amateur radio antenna support structures are transferred to the ownership of a different individual, such individual shall need to renew the permit with the city's Community Development Department. 
E.  Zoning administrator's approval standards for amateur radio antennas and support structures. As per subection 3.28.C.9, the zoning administrator shall approve all amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures where the overall height exceeds 70 feet but does not exceed 100 feet. The zoning administrator shall base his/her decision on the following standards: 
1.  Structural stability and soundness: The applicant shall demonstrate structural stability and soundness of the proposed amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures at his own expense. This can be achieved through either of the following: 
a.  Providing a copy of the manufacturer's specification on assembly, construction and erection, and a certification that such specification has been followed. 
b.  A certification by a licensed professional engineer confirming the structural stability and soundness of the proposed amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures. 
2.  Location: The proposed amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures shall be so located and installed as to be safe and to create minimum impact to the surrounding properties. In addition, the amateur radio antenna and/or amateur radio antenna support structures shall be set back from all lot lines a distance greater than or equal to 50 percent of its overall height. 
3.  The zoning administrator may attach reasonable conditions of approval pursuant to the intent and purpose set forth in subsection 3.28.A, including measures that would help reduce the impact of such amateur radio antennae and/or amateur radio antenna support structures on the surrounding properties including but not limited to appropriate landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 5-04,  2, 5-2-2004) 
Section 3.29. - Conditional zoning. 
A.  Intent and purpose. 
1.  The city finds that there are certain instances where it may be in the best interests of the city and property owners seeking rezonings to allow property owners to voluntarily impose use and development restrictions as part of a rezoning application. It is the intent of this section to provide a process by which an applicant seeking a rezoning may submit a conditional rezoning agreement, with proposed use and development restrictions, as part of the application for a requested rezoning. This section shall be read in a manner consistent with the provisions of the city and Village Zoning Act, as amended. 
2.  Whenever this section refers to the owner of land or a landowner, it shall mean all of the owners of the land involved capable of restricting the use and development of the property. 
B.  Application and offer of conditions. 
1.  An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing, and the city may approve at the city's discretion, use and development restrictions regarding the land as a condition of rezoning (including a planned unit development involving a rezoning). Such stipulation or agreement shall be referred to in this ordinance as a "conditional rezoning agreement." 
2.  The required application and process for considering a rezoning request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning requests without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this section. 
3.  The city shall not require a landowner to execute a conditional rezoning agreement as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer by a landowner to enter into a conditional rezoning agreement shall not otherwise affect a landowner's rights. 
4.  The restrictions and conditions contained in a conditional rezoning agreement shall be in addition to any other requirements associated with a zoning approval granted by the city. 
5.  The owner's offer of conditions may not claim to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. 
6.  Any use proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a special land use permit under the terms of this ordinance may only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use is granted in accordance with the provision of this ordinance. 
7.  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a variance under the terms of this ordinance may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is granted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
8.  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms of this ordinance may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
9.  The offer of conditions may be amended during the rezoning review process provided that any amended conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the city commission provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
10.  Nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit the ability of the city to enter into a planned unit development, development agreement, or other agreement with a property owner. Such agreements are different than a conditional rezoning agreement. The terms and provisions of a conditional rezoning agreement may be combined in the same document with a development agreement or similar agreement between the parties. 
11.  All costs associated with the negotiation and drafting of a conditional rezoning agreement shall be reimbursed to the city by the landowner (including, but not limited to, the reasonable attorney fees of the city and similar fees and costs). 
C.  Approval. 
1.  If the city commission finds the rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written conditional rezoning agreement acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this [ordinance]. 
2.  The conditional rezoning agreement shall: 
a.  Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains. 
b.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the conditional rezoning agreement runs with the land and is binding upon successors. 
c.  Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to illustrate the implementation of the conditional rezoning agreement. If any such documents are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where the documents may be examined. 
d.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the conditional rezoning agreement may be recorded by the city with the Register of Deeds. 
e.  Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the conditional rezoning agreement. 
3.  The city shall not add to or alter the conditions contained in an executed conditional rezoning agreement during the time period covered by such conditional rezoning agreement, unless any such change is expressly agreed to in writing by the landowner. Such prohibition shall not apply to any restrictions or conditions contained in the zoning regulations which are otherwise applicable to the rezoning or proposed use or activity. 
4.  Without limitation, a conditional rezoning agreement may establish a time period during which the conditions and restrictions contained in the conditional rezoning agreement shall be met. Unless an extension is granted by the city or the city elects to take other legal action as specified in subsection 5, if the conditions are not met, the land shall automatically revert to its former zoning classification without the need for further action by the city. The time period imposed in the conditional rezoning agreement may be extended upon the application of the landowner and with the written approval of both the landowner and the city. 
5.  If a condition is not satisfied within the time period specified in the conditional rezoning agreement, rather than have the land automatically revert to its former zoning classification, the city, at its sole option and discretion, can take appropriate legal action to enforce the condition (whether by a lawsuit or other enforcement action) in lieu of a zoning revision. With regards to a restriction (rather than a condition), there shall be no reverting to the former zoning classification if such restriction is breached or violated, and the city may pursue appropriate legal action for violation of the restriction (including a civil lawsuit or other enforcement). A violation of a conditional rezoning agreement (whether by the landowner or successors) shall also be deemed a violation of the city Zoning Ordinance. All the foregoing remedies and enforcement mechanisms available to the city (including any additional ones authorized by law) shall be deemed cumulative and, by pursuing one remedy for a breach or violation of a conditional rezoning agreement, the city shall not be deemed to have waived the other remedies or enforcement mechanisms. 
6.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be without authority to grant variances or otherwise change or vary any aspect of a conditional rezoning agreement. A conditional rezoning agreement can only be changed with the written consent of the landowner and the city as specified in subsection 3. 
7.  The city Zoning Administrator is authorized to render final interpretations with respect to provisions in conditional rezoning agreements. If either the landowner or the city disagrees with the interpretation of a provision by the city Zoning Administrator, either party may appeal that determination in writing to the zoning board of appeals within 30 days of the date when the city Zoning Administrator renders his/her determination. 
8.  The city commission may adopt policies to implement the provisions of this section, including developing a checklist for city officials to follow when reviewing and executing a conditional rezoning agreement. 
9.  A conditional rezoning agreement can impose restrictions and requirements which are more restrictive than the provisions of the city's Zoning Ordinance, but a conditional rezoning agreement cannot lessen or waive applicable restrictions or requirements contained in the Zoning Ordinance or other city ordinance. A conditional rezoning agreement shall not permit any use, activity, or other action that would not otherwise be permissible under the new zoning district classification. 
10.  Provisions which may be contained in a conditional rezoning agreement include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Language regarding whether or not all or part of the land reverts to the prior zoning classification should a condition be violated or not satisfied within the time period specified in the conditional rezoning agreement. 
b.  A process to utilize should an apparent violation of a restriction occur or a condition is not satisfied within the time period specified. 
c.  Specifying how and when an existing building or use are deemed lawful nonconforming uses should a condition be violated or not satisfied within the time period specified in the conditional rezoning agreement and the land involved reverts back to its former zoning classification. 
d.  Provisions identifying the result of a breach or violation of a restriction. 
e.  Defining a material nonsatisfaction of a condition. 
f.  The extent and nature of offsite improvements that may be included or implemented pursuant to a conditional rezoning agreement. 
g.  An indemnification provision in favor of the city. 
h.  Language governing the dedication, granting or transfer of any property or easements to the city or other governmental units. 
i.  Language providing for posting adequate security pursuant to a bond, letter of credit or cash deposit. 
j.  Specifying what occurs if an applicable provision of the city's Zoning Ordinance changes before a condition in a conditional rezoning agreement has been met or satisfied. 
k.  Language identifying what portions of the conditional rezoning agreement shall survive (including restrictions, security agreements, indemnification clauses) should a condition not be satisfied within the time period specified. 
11.  If a conditional rezoning agreement has been executed by both the landowner and the city, as a condition to the same, the landowner shall be deemed to have waived all objections regarding compliance of the conditional rezoning agreement with Michigan law and enforceability of the agreement. 
12.  A conditional rezoning agreement shall be null and void if the rezoning to which the conditional rezoning agreement applies is not approved by the city or does not become effective. 
(Ord. No. 6-06,  2, 4-30-2006) 
Section 3.30. - Wind energy. 
A.  Intent and purpose. 
1.  It is the intent and purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings: 
Anemometer: A device to measure wind speed. 
Small wind energy system: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power. 
Tower height: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself. 
Wind energy system height: The total height of the entire wind energy system including the top of the blade in its vertical position. 
C.  General requirements. 
1.  Small wind energy systems are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts. 
2.  Height. 
a.  In residential and open space districts, towers of up to 30 feet would be permitted uses. Towers greater than 30 feet in height up to a maximum of 60 feet would be a special land use (see Section 13.04). 
b.  In commercial and office districts, towers of up to 45 feet in height would be permitted uses. Towers greater than 45 feet in height up to a maximum of 60 feet would be a special land use (see Section 13.04). 
c.  In industrial districts, towers up to 60 feet in height would be permitted uses. Towers greater than 60 feet in height up to a maximum of 120 feet would be a special land use (see Section 13.04). 
d.  In all zoning districts, rooftop mounted systems extending not more than 15 feet above the existing roofline are permitted uses. Any rooftop system extending more than 15 feet above and existing roofline would be a special land use (see Section 13.04). 
3.  Setback. The tower setback shall be the height of the system, including the top of the blade in its vertical position; no other part of the system, guy wires for example, can extend closer than ten feet to a lot line. 
4.  Location. In residential districts small wind energy systems mounted on towers are restricted to the rear yard. In commercial and industrial districts small wind energy systems mounted on towers are be permitted in rear or side yards. 
Towers located in the front yard of commercial or industrial district may be permitted as a special land use. 
5.  Anemometer towers. The same restrictions for height, location and setback that apply to wind energy systems also apply to anemometer towers (MET) which are used to conduct a wind site assessment for possible installation of a small wind energy system. 
6.  Noise. Small wind energy systems shall not exceed 60dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. This level may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms. 
7.  Construction codes. Utility systems including towers shall comply with all applicable state construction and electrical codes and local building permit requirements, Federal Aviation Administration requirements, the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23 of 1950, MCL 259.432 et seq.), the Michigan Tall Structures Act (Public Act 259 of 1959, MCL 259.481 et seq.), the Gerald R. Ford International Airport Zoning Ordinance height and lighting requirements, applicable utility, Michigan Public Service Commission, and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission interconnection standards. The minimum FAA lighting standards shall not be exceeded. All tower lighting required by the FAA shall be shielded to the extent possible to reduce glare and visibility from the ground. 
8.  Safety. All small wind energy systems shall have an automatic braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or over speeding. All wind towers shall have lightning protection. If a tower is supported by guy wires, the wires shall be clearly visible to a height of at least six feet above the guy wire ground anchors. The minimum vertical blade tip clearance from grade shall be 20 feet for a wind energy system employing a horizontal axis rotor. 
9.  Number. Properties in residential district are limited one small wind energy system. Properties in commercial, office and industrial districts are limited to two small wind energy systems per building. 
(Ord. No. 11-08,  3, 8-29-2008) 
Sec. 3.31. - Prohibition on marihuana establishments and facilities. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 6 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, as amended, marihuana establishments are prohibited within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Marihuana facilities are prohibited within the boundaries of the city. 
    As used in this section, "marihuana establishment(s)" means that term as defined in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, as amended, and "marihuana facility(ies)" means that term as defined in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4-10,  2, 10-22-2010; Ord. No. 17-18,  1, 12-4-2018) 
CHAPTER 4. - F-1 FLOODPLAIN 

Section 4.01. - Floodplain. 
    This district relies upon the analysis of flood prone lands in the city as defined in the city of Kentwood Flood Insurance Study dated May 18, 1981, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration with accompanying flood insurance rate maps. The study and accompanying maps, as amended from time to time, are adopted by reference, and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The limitations of the flood prone areas shall be considered to be the 100-year floodplain as shown on the most current federal insurance administration maps. 
Section 4.02. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this district to protect the general public and all lands in the city subject to periodic inundation of floodwaters by the following: 
A.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood flow heights or velocities. 
B.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
C.  Developing means to notify property owners of lands that are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
D.  Promoting the goals of the master plan by encouraging the coordination and planning of open space while enhancing and protecting the natural environment. 
E.  Aiding to increase the visibility and access to a key natural feature in the city, while maintaining the natural conditions present in the floodplain. 
Section 4.03. - Scope. 
A.  This district shall apply to all lands within the city located within the boundaries of the Plaster Creek, Little Plaster Creek, and Whiskey Creek Floodplains as shown on the federal insurance administration maps. The provisions and restrictions of this district shall be considered to apply in addition to the provisions of underlying zoning districts shown on the official zoning map, sufficient to fulfill the purpose of this chapter. 
B.  Uses and regulations otherwise applicable in existing zoning districts shall not be allowed unless also permitted, and developed in accordance with the regulations of this chapter. This district shall take precedence over any conflicting laws, ordinances or codes. 
C.  The city may request public access easements for developments incorporating floodplain areas. 
Section 4.04. - Table of uses. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses: 
P: These uses have a low flood damage potential because of their open space nature and shall be permitted by right to the extent that they are allowed uses in the underlying zoning district. SLU: The following uses shall be allowed only by special land use approval, to the extent that they are allowed uses in the underlying zoning districts, provided all requirements of chapter 15 are met and priority is given to the retention of the site in its natural state. NP: Use is not permitted in the district.  
F-1 FloodPlain District-Table of Uses Parks, swimming areas, picnic grounds, wildlife and nature preserves, fishing and hiking areas P Residential support uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas P Utility facilities such as: transmission lines, pipelines, and water monitoring devices P Bridges, culverts, and river crossings of transmission lines, subject to approval by the Water Resources Commission of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality P Accessory uses to any of the permitted uses as regulated in sections 3.15 and 3.16 SLU Billboards and signs SLU Industrial-commercial accessory uses such as: loading areas, parking areas, and storage yards for equipment or machinery easily moved or not subject to flood damage SLU Golf courses, driving ranges SLU Storage yards for heavy equipment, materials or machinery SLU Transient amusement enterprises such as: circuses, carnivals and fairs SLU A permanent structure of any type NP Agricultural uses such as: general farming, grazing pasture, truck farming, and fruit orchards NP Extraction uses such as sand, gravel, plaster, and other mining operations; or oil drilling NP Landfill, dump or junkyard NP Enlargement of an existing building NP On-site sewage disposal systems NP Storage or processing of materials which in time of flooding become buoyant, flammable, explosive or otherwise injurious to public health NP  
Section 4.05. - Review considerations. 
A.  The following review considerations are applicable to those uses outlined in section 4.04 in order to ensure proper construction and, for special land uses, to assist the Planning Commission in evaluating the appropriateness of each use. 
B.  All uses: 
1.  Any project proposed having property located within the floodplain shall comply with the applicable provisions of City Code chapter 86. 
2.  Material and equipment may be stored if it is not subject to major flood damage and must be firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if it is easily removable within the time following the flood warning and preceding the actual flood. 
C.  Special land uses. The Planning Commission, in addition to the general standards of section 15.02 shall consider the following points in reviewing an application for a special land use in the floodplain district. 
1.  Any possible danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments on the floodplain. 
2.  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of the public. 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the development to the community. 
5.  The requirement of the proposed development for a waterfront location. 
6.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
7.  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding. 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the master plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
9.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
11.  Such other factors which are, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, relevant to the purposes of this district. 
D.  Where in the opinion of the Planning Commission topographic data, engineering studies, or other studies are needed to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed use and/or the effects of the use on the floodway, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to submit such data and/or studies prepared by competent engineers or other technical people. 
E.  Upon reviewing all data and materials, and before granting approval, the Planning Commission may attach conditions to the granting of approval of a special land use. Such conditions may be, but are not limited to those enumerated, as in the following: 
1.  Limitations on periods of use and operation, as needed to address seasonal flooding conditions. 
2.  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, deed restrictions, and covenants. 
3.  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures. 
Section 4.06. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan review requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan review. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02. 
District Site Plan Review Requirements Other Requirements F-1 district All special land uses See chapter 14 for site plan requirements. See chapter 15 for special land use requirements.  
B.  Lot and yard requirements. The lot and yard requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply. 
C.  Development requirements for parking. The parking requirements for uses in the underlying zoning district shall apply. See also chapter 17 for general requirements. 
D.  Development requirements for signs. The sign requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply. See also chapter 16 for general requirements. 
CHAPTER 5. - R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 5.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The regulations of this district are intended to encourage a suitable environment for very low and low-density residential development, and compatible supportive recreational, institutional, and educational uses. 
Section 5.02. - Table of uses. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses: 
P: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. SLU: The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 and elsewhere are met. NP: Use is not permitted in the district.  
Use R1-A R1-B R1-C R1-D Residential Detached single-family dwellings P P P P Manufactured and modular single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 3.22 P P P P Residential child and adult care facilities Refer to section 3.20 Zero lot line, single-family detached dwellings NP SLU SLU SLU Assisted living family facility P P P P Nonresidential Accessory buildings and uses as defined in chapter 2 and subject to sections 3.15 and 3.16 P P P P Agricultural operations including general farming, truck farming, fruit orchards, nursery, greenhouses, and usual farm buildings NP NP NP NP Cemeteries P P P P Clinics SLU SLU SLU SLU Colleges and universities SLU SLU SLU SLU Convalescent homes SLU SLU SLU SLU Elementary and secondary schools SLU SLU SLU SLU Golf courses or country clubs SLU SLU SLU SLU Home occupations subject to section 3.18 P P P P Horse riding stables, horse breeding stables SLU SLU NP NP Hospitals SLU SLU SLU SLU Municipal and public service activities SLU SLU SLU SLU Nursing home SLU SLU SLU SLU Parks, playgrounds and community centers P P P P Places of religious worship SLU SLU SLU SLU Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor SLU SLU SLU SLU Utility substations, transmission lines and switching stations SLU SLU SLU SLU Wireless communication towers when proposed tower is within the height limitations for the zoning district SLU SLU SLU SLU Wireless communications antenna when attached to a lawful existing telecommunications tower, water tower, or other structure P P P P  
(Ord. No. 7-03,  4(5.02), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 12-08,  1, 9-26-2008) 
Section 5.03. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan review requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan review. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02: 
District Site Plan Review Requirements Other Requirements R1-A-D All special land uses, plats and site condominium developments Any new building with a permitted use shall be subject to approval by the staff review team in accordance with the requirements of section 13.05. See section 3.25 for site condominium requirements and procedures. See chapter 14 for site plan requirements. See chapter 15 for special land use requirements.  
B.  Lot, yard, and building requirements. 
Zone standards
Use R1-A R1-B R1-C R1-D 
Minimum lot area 5 acres (217,800 sq. ft.) 14,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 5,500 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. if not served by public water and sanitary sewer 16,800 sq. ft. if served by public water but not sanitary sewer 
Minimum lot width See section 3.23 100 ft. 80 ft. 50 ft. Lot width is measured at the front building setback line. See section 3.05. 160 ft. if not served by public water and sanitary sewer See section 5.03.C.1 140 ft. if served by public water but not sanitary sewer 
Front Yard 40 ft. 40 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. See section 5.03.C.1. For nonresidential main buildings a minimum 35-foot front yard shall be provided 
Side yard 12 ft. 7 ft. 7 ft. 5 ft. In cases of nonparallel lot lines, the nearest wall shall be no closer than four feet to the nearest point of the side lot line. See definition of Yard, side in section 2.02.Y. On the side street of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of 25 feet shall be provided > See section 5.03.C.1. For nonresidential principle use buildings a minimum 20-foot side yard shall be provided 
Rear yard > 35 ft. > 35 ft. > 35 ft. > 30 ft. Except for the R1-A district, in the case of corner lots there shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. See section 5.03.C.1. For nonresidential main buildings a minimum 50-foot rear yard shall be provided. 
Maximum lot coverage 20% 25% 25% 30% Includes area of lot covered by main and accessory buildings and structures. 
Minimum dwelling unit size 1,040 sq. ft. minimum 650 sq. ft. on main floor 850 sq. ft. minimum 600 sq. ft. on main floor See chapter 2, floor area, main definition for split level buildings. 
Maximum building height > 21/2 stories 
or 35 ft. Two stories or 25 ft. Two stories or 25 ft. Two stories or 25 ft. For sites over five acres, the building height for nonresidential main buildings may be increased by one foot for each ten ft. of additional setback provided above 50 ft. from building wall to nearest property line, to a maximum height of 35 ft. See chapter 2, definition for building height and section 3.03.  
C.  Average lot requirements. The R1-D requirements for lot area, lot width, side yard, front yard, and rear yard are minimum requirements. The following average lot requirements apply to plats and site condominium projects. Each phase must meet the following average requirements. All other requirements of section 5.03 remain the same. 
Averaged Requirement R1-D Other Requirements Lot area 6,600 sq. ft. Lot width 60 ft. Lots with more than one public street frontage shall count the shorter street frontage as the lot width used to determine average width. Side yard 5 ft. one side/12 ft. total Front yard 25 ft. Rear yard 30 ft.  
D.  Development requirements for parking. 
1.  The amount of required off-street parking spaces for individual uses shall be determined in accordance with the following table and shall meet the dimensional requirements of chapter 17. 
Use Parking Requirement 
Spaces per Unit of Measurement Residential Detached single-family dwellings Three per dwelling unit Family child day care homes Parking operations plan or one per each three children computed on the basis of the greatest number of children on site at a given time Foster care group home, adult foster care family home, adult foster care small group home, foster family home, foster family group home One per each three beds or two rooms, whichever is less, plus one per each on duty shift staff Nonresidential Assisted living facilities, convalescent homes, nursing homes One per each three beds or two rooms, plus ten spaces signed for visitors Auditoriums or places of assembly, as included in uses permitted in the R-1 districts One per each three seats Cemeteries Sufficient parking shall be provided within the site through the submission by the owner of an operations plan submitted with a site plan Clinics Three per each exam or outpatient procedure room or station plus one per each lab or recovery room Day care centers Parking operations plan or one per each three clients computed on the basis of the greatest number of clients on site at a given time Elementary and middle schools Four per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Golf courses or country clubs Two per each hole for a par three course; six per hole for other courses plus those required for accessory uses High schools, colleges and universities Eight per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Horse riding stables, horse breeding stables One per each two stalls; parking spaces shall be sized to accommodate vehicles plus trailers Hospitals Two per each in patient bed plus one per 150 sq. ft. for offices and administrative uses, plus required out patient parking. Total parking needs shall be based on a parking needs study submitted with the site plan Municipal and public service activities One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA, not including parking areas for municipal vehicles (police cars, public works vehicles, etc.), plus spaces required for assembly areas Parks, playgrounds and community centers Ten per each athletic field plus one per each ten sq. ft. of indoor or outdoor play area Places of religious worship Two per each five seats based on the maximum seating capacity of the main place of assembly up to 2,500 persons Recreation facilities, indoor Parking operations plan but not less than four per court or other recreational facility use plus parking required for any accessory uses, including restaurants, offices, or other similar activities Recreation facilities, outdoor Parking operations plan but not less than four per court or other recreational facility use plus parking required for any accessory uses, including restaurants, offices, or other similar activities. If athletic fields are included, there shall be provided ten spaces per field  
2.  Location of parking. 
a.  Single-family dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for single- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the building they are intended to serve. Parking is limited to the garage and driveway only. One additional parking lane may be allowed with zoning administrator approval. 
b.  Nonresidential uses. The off-street parking facilities required for nonresidential uses shall not be located in the required front yard area and the respective side and rear yard setback common to an adjacent residential use or district shall be a minimum of 45 feet of which 20 feet nearest the respective property line is developed as a buffer zone. No accessory buildings or storage allowed within the 45-foot setback. Such buffer zone shall extend the entire depth of the side of the lot in the case of the side yard parking adjoining residential use, or the width of the rear of the lot in the case of rear yard parking adjoining the residential use. The required buffer zone shall incorporate a minimum six-foot high vertical screen. 

E.  Development requirements for signs. See also chapter 16, signs for general requirements. 
Signs Permitted R-1A through D Districts Other 

Requirements Size Number Height Location Home occupation sign Two sq. ft. One/dwelling unit N/A Attached to dwelling unit or mailbox May not be illuminated Noncommercial Six sq. ft One/issue or candidate per lot Four ft. Behind the ROW Sign must be maintained so as not to become unsightly or dangerous and may not be illuminated Real estate Six sq. ft. One/premises or building Four ft. Behind the ROW Permitted only when property is for sale, rent, or lease 32 sq. ft. - R1-A only Plat entry 75 sq. ft. (unless located within a boulevard) One/subdivision entrance Eight ft. (unless located within a boulevard) At least 17 ft. from the public street ROW line (unless located within a boulevard) See section 16.05.A.7 for restrictions on boulevard signs Portable 32 sq. ft. if advertising a special event or community activity One/lot Four ft. Behind the ROW and in a location where driver visibility is not impaired Limited to 30 days of display in any calendar year Institutional bulletin board 50 sq. ft. One/public or semipublic institution Six ft. Setback 25 ft. from front property line Institutional wall sign 50 sq. ft. One/street frontage N/A N/A On-site identification 50 sq. ft. One/use Four ft. Minimum of one-half required front yard setback; not permitted in side yard setback Only for nonresidential principal uses Directional sign Six sq. ft. only To the extent necessary as determined by the zoning administrator for traffic safety, subject to approved plat for design, number and location Subdivision real estate sign 64 sq. ft. One/major street frontage Ten ft. Setback at least 15 ft. from front and side lot lines Subject to approval for periods up to 12 months by the Zoning Administrator  
(Ord. No. 7-03,  4(5.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  2, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 11-08,  4, 8-29-2008) 
CHAPTER 6. - TWO-FAMILY AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 6.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    These districts are intended to provide a sound and stable environment for various types of residential buildings and group housing developments. It is further intended to accommodate a mixture of housing types, including two-family and single-family homes, and to serve the limited needs for townhouses, row houses or other attached single-family housing facilities similar in character and density, but generally somewhat more dense than detached single-family developments. These districts may also act as buffers between other detached single-family developments and certain nonresidential or multiple-family developments. 
Section 6.02. - Table of uses. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses: 
P: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. SLU: The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 and elsewhere are met. NP: Use is not permitted in the district.  
Use R-2 R-3 R-4 Residential Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses or row houses) NP SLU P Detached single-family dwellings P P NP Elderly housing NP SLU SLU Manufactured and modular, single-family detached dwellings, subject to section 3.22 P P NP Multiple-family dwellings NP SLU P Residential child and adult care facilities Refer to section 3.20 Two-family dwellings P P P Zero lot line, single-family detached dwellings SLU SLU NP Nonresidential Accessory buildings and uses as defined in chapter 2 and subject to sections 3.15 and 3.16 P P P Assisted living group facility SLU SLU SLU Assisted living family facility P P P Cemeteries P P P Clinics SLU SLU SLU Colleges and universities SLU SLU SLU Convalescent homes SLU SLU SLU Elementary and secondary schools SLU SLU SLU Golf courses or country clubs SLU SLU SLU Home occupations subject to section 3.18 P P P Hospitals SLU SLU SLU Municipal and public service activities P P P Nursing home SLU SLU SLU Parks, playgrounds and community centers P P SLU Places of religious worship SLU SLU SLU Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor SLU SLU SLU Utility substations, transmission lines and switching stations SLU SLU SLU Wireless communication towers-when tower is within height limitations for the zoning district SLU SLU SLU Wireless communication antenna when attached to existing telecommunications tower, water tower, or other structure P P P  
(Ord. No. 7-03,  5(6.02), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 12-08,  1, 9-26-2008) 
Section 6.03. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan review requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan review. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02: 
District Site Plan Review Requirements Other Requirements R-2 Special land uses, plats and site condominium developments Any new building with a permitted use shall be subject to approval by the staff review team in accordance with the requirements of section 13.05. See section 3.25 for site condominium requirements and procedures. R-3, R-4 Permitted uses and special land uses, plats and site condominium developments Single- or two-family dwellings as a principal use on a single lot shall be subject to approval by the staff review team in accordance with the requirements of section 13.05. 
See chapter 14 for site plan requirements. 
See chapter 15 for special land use requirements.  
B.  Lot, yard and building requirements. 
Requirement R-2 R-3 R-4 Other 
Requirements Minimum Lot Area Single family 6,500 sq. ft. 8,400 sq. ft. Not permitted Maximum densities permitted: 
R-3 seven units per acre 
R-4 12 units per acre Two family 13,000 sq. ft. > Multiple family Not applicable 4,000 sq. ft. for first dwelling unit and 2,200 sq. ft. for each additional unit All 20,000 sq. ft. without public water and sanitary sewer Minimum 20 acre site for cemeteries 16,800 sq. ft. with public water but not sanitary sewer Minimum lot width Single family 70 ft. 65 ft. Not permitted Lot width is measured at front building setback line. See section 3.05. Two family 100 ft. Front yard 35 ft. Side yard Seven ft. one side/15 ft. total 15 ft. one side/30 ft. total In cases of non-parallel lot lines, nearest wall shall be no closer than four feet to nearest point of side lot line. See definition of Yard, side in section 2.02.Y. Rear yard Side street-corner lot-25 ft. Nonresidential principal use buildings-20 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 30 ft. Nonresidential principal use buildings-50 ft. Maximum lot coverage 30 percent 40 percent Including buildings and structures Minimum (finished living area) Two family 850 sq. ft. minimum 600 sq. ft. on main floor Attached single family See chapter 2, floor area, main definition for split level buildings. Multiple family Not applicable Efficiency 375 sq. ft. 1 BR 600 sq. ft. 2 BR 780 sq. ft. 3 + BR 940 sq. ft. + 80 sq. ft. for any bedroom over three Maximum building height Two stories or 25 ft. Three stories or 35 ft. Sites over five acres-Building height for nonresidential main buildings may be increased by one foot for each ten ft. of additional setback provided beyond 50 ft. from building wall to nearest property line, to a maximum height of 35 ft. See chapter 2, definition for building height. See section 3.03.  
C.  Site development requirements. All lots in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts must be served by public sanitary sewer and public water. 
D.  Development requirements for parking. 
1.  The amount of required off-street parking spaces for individual uses shall be determined in accordance with the following table and shall meet the dimensional requirements of chapter 17. 
Use Parking Requirement 
Spaces per Unit of Measurement Residential Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses or row houses) Two per dwelling unit Detached single-family dwellings Three per dwelling unit Elderly housing One per dwelling unit, of which 25 percent shall be designated for visitor parking Family child day care home, group child day care home Parking operations plan or one per each three children computed on the basis of the greatest number of children on site at a given time Foster family home, adult foster care small group home, adult foster care family home, foster family group home One per each three beds or two rooms, whichever is less, plus one per each on duty shift staff Multiple-family dwellings Two per dwelling unit Two-family dwellings Three per dwelling unit Zero lot line, single-family detached dwellings Three per dwelling unit Nonresidential Assisted living facilities, convalescent homes, nursing homes One per each three beds or two rooms, whichever is less, plus ten spaces signed for visitors Cemeteries Sufficient parking shall be provided within the site through the submission by the owner of a operations plan submitted with a site plan Child care institutions and adult care institutions One per each four beds, plus one per each on duty shift staff plus one per each four off-site visiting staff Clinic Three per each exam or outpatient procedure room or station plus one per each lab or recovery room Colleges, universities and high schools Eight per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Day care centers, adult day care facility Parking operations plan or one per each three clients computed on the basis of the greatest number of clients Elementary and middle schools Four per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Golf courses or country clubs Two per each hole for a par three course; six per hole for other courses plus those required for accessory uses Hospitals Two per each in patient bed plus one per 150 sq. ft. GFA for offices and administrative uses, plus required out patient parking (see clinic). Total parking needs shall be based on a parking needs study submitted with the site plan Municipal and public service activities One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA, not including parking areas for municipal vehicles (police cars, public works vehicles, etc.), plus spaces required for assembly areas Parks, playgrounds and community centers Ten per each athletic field plus one per each ten sq. ft. of indoor or outdoor play area Places of religious worship Two per each five seats based on the maximum seating capacity of the main place of assembly up to 2,500 persons One per each two seats, based on the maximum seating capacity of the main place of assembly exceeding 2,500 persons Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor Four per court or other recreational facility use plus parking required for any accessory uses, including restaurants, offices, or other similar activities. If athletic fields are included, there shall be provided ten spaces per field  
2.  Location of parking. 
a.  Single-family dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for single- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the building they are intended to serve. Parking is limited to the garage and driveway only. One additional parking lane may be allowed with zoning administrator approval. 
b.  Nonresidential uses. The off-street parking facilities required for nonresidential uses shall not be located in the required front yard area and the respective side and rear yard setback common to an adjacent residential use or district shall be a minimum of 45 feet of which 20 feet nearest the respective property line is developed as a buffer zone. No accessory buildings or storage allowed within the 45-foot setback. Such buffer zone shall extend the entire depth of the side of the lot in the case of the side yard parking adjoining residential use, or the width of the rear of the lot in the case of rear yard parking adjoining the residential use. The required buffer zone shall incorporate a minimum six-foot high vertical screen. 

Residential District or Use 
c.  The off-street parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwellings they are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking lot as defined elsewhere in this chapter. In no event shall any uncovered parking space for a multiple-family dwelling be located nearer than ten feet to any main building. The required front yard setback area shall be maintained as a green area. In cases of difficult topography, the zoning administrator may allow the parking lots to extend into the front setback area, provided that the average of front setback areas totals at least 30 feet from any public street right-of-way. In no case shall the parking lot be any closer than ten feet to a public street right-of-way. 
E.  Development requirements for signs. See also chapter 16, signs for general requirements. Directional sign provision of up to six square feet only to the extent necessary as determined by the zoning administrator for traffic safety, subject to approved plan for design, number and location. 
Signs Permitted R-2 through R-4 Districts Other Requirements Size Number Height Location Home occupation sign Two sq. ft. One/dwelling unit N/A Attached to dwelling unit or mailbox May not be illuminated Noncommercial Six sq. ft. One/issue or candidate or issue per lot Four ft. Behind the ROW Signs may remain until deemed unsightly through disrepair or action of the elements May not be illuminated Real estate Six sq. ft. One/premises/building/or use Four ft. Behind the ROW Permitted only when property/units are for sale, rent, or lease Plat entry 75 sq. ft. (unless located within a boulevard) One/subdivision entrance Eight ft. (unless located within a boulevard) At least 17 ft. from public street ROW line (unless located within a boulevard) See section 16.05.A.7 for restrictions on boulevard signs Portable (1) Four sq. ft. (32 sq. ft. if advertising a special event of community activity One/lot Four ft. Behind the ROW and in a location where driver visibility is not impaired Maximum 30 days of display/calendar year Institutional bulletin board 50 sq. ft. One/public or semipublic institution Six ft. 25 ft. from front property line Institutional wall sign 50 sq. ft. One/street frontage N/A N/A On-site identification 50 sq. ft. One/use Four ft. Setback 1/2 of required front yard; not permitted in side yard setback Only for nonresidential principal uses Freestanding (R-3 and R-4 only) 50 sq. ft. One/major entrance; total of two Four ft. above mean grade 
If less than ten feet from ROW line 
Six ft. above mean grade 
If ten ft. or more from ROW line Wall 50 sq. ft. Permitted if no freestanding sign is used Directional sign Six sq. ft. only To the extent necessary as determined by the zoning administrator for traffic safety, subject to approved plan for design, number and location  
(1)  For multiple-family developments a one-time six-month display period is permitted during initial opening. No other portable sign is permitted for six months after the initial display period has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  5(6.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  3, 7-17-2005) 
CHAPTER 7. - R-5 MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT 

Section 7.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to provide for suitable areas for development of manufactured housing communities and other compatible uses. The regulations contained in this chapter are intended to ensure that manufactured housing communities will provide a comfortable, pleasing and safe environment for persons who seek manufactured housing residence by providing for safe and adequate vehicular and pedestrian movement on the site. These regulations are also intended to ensure that manufactured housing communities will be served adequately by essential public facilities such as access streets, public water, sanitary sewer, storm water drainage facilities and police and fire protection. All manufactured housing communities shall comply with the applicable requirements and promulgated rules of Public Act No. 96 of 1987, as amended (MCL 125.2301 et seq.). All development within this district must also comply with the regulations set forth in this ordinance that shall be considered the minimum standards to be applied to all new manufactured housing communities in the city of Kentwood. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  6(7.01), 4-1-2003) 
Section 7.02. - Table of uses. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses: 
P: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the following uses by right. SLU: The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 and elsewhere are met. NP: Use is not permitted in the district.  
R-5 Manufactured Housing District-Table of Uses Residential uses Detached, single-family dwellings P Manufactured housing communities as regulated by Act 96 of 1987, as amended (MCL 125.2301 et seq.) P Manufactured housing condominium projects as regulated by the Condominium Act, being Act 59 of 1978, as amended (MCL 559.101 et seq.) P Nonresidential uses Accessory buildings and uses as defined in chapter 2 and subject to sections 3.15 and 3.16 and as regulated within this chapter P Adult and child caring institutions See section 3.20 Community buildings for the residents of a manufactured housing community P Elementary and secondary schools, not to include colleges and universities SLU Golf courses or country clubs SLU Home occupations subject to section 3.18 P Municipal and public service activities P Office building to be used exclusively for conducting business operations of the manufactured housing development P Parks, playgrounds and community centers P Places of religious worship SLU Utility substations, transmission lines and switching stations SLU Wireless communications antenna when attached to an existing telecommunications tower, water tower, or other structure P  
Section 7.03. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan review requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan review. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission public hearing review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02. Directional sign provision of up to six square feet only to the extent necessary as determined by the zoning administrator for traffic safety, subject to approved plan for design, number and location. 
District Site Plan Review Requirements Other Requirements MH district All permitted and special land uses See chapter 14 for site plan requirements. See chapter 15 for special land use requirements.  
B.  Lot, yard and building requirements. 
Requirement Residential Uses Nonresidential Uses Other Requirements Minimum project size 15 contiguous acres Not applicable Minimum project size does not apply to expansions to existing communities or individual phases Minimum lot size 5,500 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 5,500 sq. ft. may be reduced by 20 percent provided that the individual manufactured home site shall be equal to at least 4,400 sq. ft provided each square foot of land gained through the reduction of the lot be dedicated as open space Overall site density shall not exceed that designated in the master plan Maximum building height Two stories 
25 feet 2.5 stories 
35 feet See section 3.03 Minimum floor area 720 sq. ft. minimum 600 square feet on main floor Not applicable Minimum floor area is exclusive of garage, basement or porch Front yard setback 40 ft. Side yard  One Side See spacing standards 
below Seven ft. See definition of Yard, side in Section 2.02.Y.  Total 15 ft. Rear yard 30 ft.  
C.  Spacing requirements within manufactured housing communities. 
Situation Spacing 
Requirement Housing unit from internal roadway 20 ft. Housing unit from any lot line, with the exception of road easements and right-of-way 10 ft. Accessory structure from any lot line internal to the development, with the exception of road easements and right-of-way 10 ft. Housing unit, accessory structure, utility building or development office building from an external public right-of-way or private road easement 50 ft. Housing unit or accessory structure from perimeter lot line 10 ft. Housing unit from another housing unit 20 ft. Housing unit from an accessory structure 10 ft. Housing unit or accessory structure from the edge of any manmade lake or waterway 25 ft. Accessory structure from internal roadway 10 ft. Accessory structure from another accessory structure 10 ft.  
D.  Development requirements for parking. See also chapter 17, off-street parking and loading for general requirements. The off-street parking required may be located on each site or in parking lots conveniently located and readily accessible to each site. Each parking space must meet the minimum area requirements. 
Use Parking Requirements-Spaces per Unit of Measurement Residential Detached, single-family Three per parking spaces per each dwelling unit Manufactured home located in a licensed manufactured housing community Two each dwelling unit plus; plus one parking space for every three units for visitor parking Nonresidential Community buildings for the residents of a manufactured housing community One per space per 100 sq. ft. of GFA Day care centers Parking operations plan or one per each three clients computed on the basis of the greatest number of clients on site at a given time Day care homes for six or fewer nonresidents, foster family homes One per each three children Elementary and middle schools Four per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Golf courses or country clubs Two per each hole for a par 3 course; Six per hole for other courses plus those required for accessory uses Municipal and public service activities One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA, not including parking areas for municipal vehicles (police cars, public works vehicles, etc.), plus spaces required for assembly areas Office building to be used exclusively for conducting business operations of the manufactured housing development One per space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA Parks, playgrounds and community centers Ten per each athletic field plus one per each ten sq. ft. of indoor or outdoor play area Places of religious worship Two per each five seats based on the maximum seating capacity of the main place of assembly up to 2,500 persons One Per each two seats, based on the maximum seating capacity of the main place of assembly exceeding 2,500 persons  
E.  Development requirements for signs. See also chapter 16, signs, for general requirements. 
Signs Permitted Size Number Height Location Other 
Requirements Manufactured housing community entrance sign 32 sq. ft. One per each major entrances Four ft. At least 17 ft. from public street ROW line Institutional wall sign 50 sq. ft. One per street frontage N/A N/A Real estate sign Six sq. ft. One per unit Four ft. Behind the ROW Permitted only when property is for sale, rent or lease Noncommercial Six sq. ft. One per candidate or issue per lot Four ft. Behind the ROW Sign must be maintained so as not to become unsightly or dangerous and may not be illuminated Directional sign Six sq. ft. To the extent necessary as determined by the zoning administrator for traffic safety, subject to approved plan for design, number and location Portable 32 sq. ft. if advertising a special event or community activity One per entrance Four ft. Behind ROW and in a location where driver visibility is not impaired Limited to 30 days of display in any calendar year  
(Ord. No. 7-03,  6(7.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 15-06,  1, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-08,  4, 8-29-2008) 
Section 7.04. - Manufactured housing community design requirements. 
    All manufactured housing communities shall comply with the applicable requirements of Act 96 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1987, as amended (MCL 125.2301), provided that said developments meet the standards and conditions and all other provisions as herein established. 
A.  Access and circulation. 
1.  Access. Each manufactured housing community shall have at least two points of access. All ingress and egress from arterial or collector street or streets shall be a minimum of 125 feet from any other curbcut or local street or a distance from another arterial/collector street as determined by the Planning Commission. 
2.  [Street frontage.] Each manufactured housing community shall have frontage on a collector street or arterial street as designated on the city's master thoroughfare plan. 
3.  Street requirements. All internal streets located within the boundaries of a manufactured housing community shall have two-way circulation and meet the following standards: 
Intended Use Requirement Two-way circulation with no on-street parking 21 ft. wide Two-way circulation with on-street parking on one side of the road 31 ft. wide Two-way circulation with on-street parking on both sides of the road 41 ft. wide  
4.  Pavement and curbing. All internal streets shall be paved with curbing. Only streets within the manufactured housing community shall provide access to individual manufactured home sites. 
B.  Utilities/drainage. 
1.  Public water and sanitary sewer shall be connected to all manufactured housing units located within the manufactured housing community. The homes in the development do not have to be metered separately, although the development itself must be metered. All other utilities for manufactured homes located in the development shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with the manufactured home commission regulations. 
2.  All other utilities for mobile or manufactured homes located in the manufactured housing community shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with manufactured home commission regulations. 
3.  The ground surface in all parts of a manufactured housing community shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe and efficient manner. Stormwater detention areas must be provided which are sufficient to prevent increased run-off prior to the development of the site. The manufactured housing community shall also comply with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality standards for drainage. 
C.  Screening/landscaping. 
1.  Manufactured housing communities which abut any R-1 district shall be adequately screened from such zone by natural or landscaped areas that meets the minimum landscaping requirements of chapter 19, table 19.01. 
2.  A minimum of one shade tree at least two inches in caliper when planted shall be provided at 40-foot intervals along the street side of all manufactured housing sites located on any public street. 
3.  Landscaping shall meet the minimum planting sizes, installation requirements and all other general landscaping requirements set forth in chapter 19. 
D.  Open space and recreation. 
1.  At least one designated open space area shall contain two percent but not less than 25,000 square feet of the manufactured housing community for developments of 50 or more home sites. 
2.  The open space shall be in an appropriate location in relation to the site and surrounding lands. The required open space shall not include narrow corridors and shall be centrally located and suitable for recreation. Connections with adjacent open space, public land or existing or planned pedestrian/bike paths may be required by the city. 
3.  Open space areas shall not include existing and proposed street rights-of-way, parking areas, parking, drives, sidewalk, stormwater detention areas, manufactured home sites, or nonrecreational buildings. If a recreational area is to be provided in a manufactured housing community, such area shall be designated on the preliminary plan, and if so designated, must be developed and maintained. Such area shall be protected from streets, drives and parking areas. The development and maintenance of each recreational area shall be the responsibility of the manufactured housing community. 
4.  Unused open space of up to 1,100 square feet for each individual site may be counted toward the total open space requirements of the city as long as it is in compliance with the qualifications as stated in section 7.04.D.2. 
E.  Storage of recreational vehicles. The storage of recreational vehicles shall be permitted only in the storage area designated by the owner of the manufactured housing community and limited to the use of the residents. The storage yard shall be completely screened around its entire perimeter by a solid screen at least six feet in height. 
F.  Lighting. Lighting shall be provided along all vehicular and sidewalk systems within a manufactured housing community including access points, road intersections, designated pedestrian crosswalks and parking bays and shall comply with the intensity levels set forth by the Michigan Manufactured Home Commission Regulations. 
G.  Sidewalks. If provided, sidewalks on any street other than a public street shall be at least four feet wide and shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Michigan Manufactured Home Commission Rules. Such sidewalks are required to be provided on both sides of all streets functioning as a main collector route for the development. Sidewalks located along streets dedicated to the public shall be at least five feet in width and shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Michigan Manufactured Home Commission Regulations. 
H.  Signs. Signs in the manufactured housing community shall conform to the requirements of section 7.03.D., chapter 16 of this ordinance, and the Michigan Manufactured Home Commission Regulations. 
I.  Personal storage. Except as otherwise noted in this ordinance, no personal property, including tires, shall be stored outside or under any mobile home, or within carports which are open on any side. Bicycles and motorcycles may be parked in carports. Seasonal outdoor storage of outdoor cooking grills is permitted so long as they are kept on either a finished wooden deck, a concrete or bituminous asphalt patio of equivalent type of surface associated with the home. Towing mechanisms shall be removed from all homes at the time of installation and stored so as not to be visible from the exterior of the community. Towing mechanisms, including axles, may, however, be stored under manufactured homes within a community. 
J.  Accessory buildings and structure. An accessory building or structure constructed within the manufactured housing community shall be designed and serviced consistent with the following requirements: 
1.  Accessory buildings and structures including development management offices and public works facilities storage buildings, laundry facilities, recreation and community centers, and other accessory facilities shall be designed and operated for use by only residents, guests and employees of the manufactured housing community. 
2.  Each manufactured home shall be permitted up to one storage shed and one garage. The installation of any such shed or garage shall comply with codes and ordinances of the city and, if otherwise required by the adopted building code of the city, shall require a building permit. 
3.  Accessory buildings and structures shall not be permitted in the front yard of any site. 
4.  A storage shed shall not exceed a floor area greater than 144 sq. ft. A carport shall not exceed 576 sq. ft. 
5.  Attached accessory buildings and structures shall consist of materials similar to the principal building. 
6.  All detached accessory buildings shall be at least ten feet from an adjacent residential unit. 
7.  Carports open at a minimum on two long sides and the entrance side shall be set back such that the support pillars are installed at least four feet from the edge of internal roads or at least two feet from the edge of sidewalks. Furthermore the roof overhang shall be set back at least two feet from the edge of the internal road. Carports and garages must otherwise set back at least 20 feet from the edge of an internal roadway. 
K.  Skirting. All manufactured homes located in a manufactured housing community within the city shall be skirted in accordance with the [Michigan] Manufactured Home Commission Regulations. 
L.  Unit certification. Any manufactured home built since 1976 must be certified by HUD (Department of Housing and Urban Development). Manufactured homes constructed prior to 1976 shall meet all the requirements and specifications of the state construction code, the A.N.S.I. Code, or any other applicable code. 
M.  Anchoring and installation. Each manufactured housing site shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturer's set up instructions and pursuant to Michigan Manufactured Home Commission Regulations. Each manufactured home shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device compatible with Michigan Manufactured Home Commission Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  6(7.04), 4-1-2003) 
Section 7.05. - Application procedures. 
    Application for the construction, alteration, or extension of a manufactured housing community shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed community and all permanent buildings indicating the proposed methods of compliance with these requirements. Said site plan shall be in conformance with the review process for site plans of chapter 13 and provisions and requirements of chapter 14. 
CHAPTER 8. - COMMERCIAL/OFFICE DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 26. 

Section 8.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to provide in an organized format the regulations associated with three commercial/office zoning districts in the city: C-2 community commercial district which provides for commercial uses and activities providing services for the community and surrounding neighborhoods; C-3 regional commercial district providing commercial goods and services of a regional nature, serving areas both within and outside the city; and C-4 office/business district, which is intended primarily to permit office and business uses of a less intensive nature than those in the other commercial districts. These regulations shall provide for the orderly development of these uses to meet the retail, service and employment needs of the city's residents and surrounding areas. 
Section 8.02. - Table of uses. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses: 
P: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes by right. SLU: The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. NP: Use is not permitted in the district  
Use C-2 C-3 C-4 Retail Building supply and equipment establishments SLU NP NP Commercial enterprises producing merchandise on the premises SLU SLU NP Convenience stores P NP NP Drive-through service establishments SLU NP NP Open air businesses SLU SLU NP Pawnshops SLU NP NP Restaurants, drive-through SLU SLU NP Restaurants, freestanding but excluding drive-through establishments P P SLU Restaurants within shopping centers, excluding drive-through establishments P P NP Retail businesses P P NP Retail with on-site warehousing/distribution SLU NP NP Vehicle rental establishments SLU NP NP Service Animal hospitals and kennels SLU NP NP Billboard NP NP NP Commercial schools SLU SLU SLU Financial institutions, freestanding SLU SLU SLU Funeral homes and crematoria SLU NP P Hotels and motels SLU SLU SLU Personal service establishments P P P Radio and television stations P P P Repair and service establishments P NP NP Vehicle fuel stations SLU NP NP Vehicle repair, major SLU SLU NP Vehicle repair, minor P SLU NP Vehicle washes SLU NP NP Institutional, recreational and utilities Assisted living group facilities NP NP NP Assisted living family facility NP NP NP Colleges and universities SLU SLU SLU Convalescent homes NP NP NP Elementary and secondary schools SLU NP NP Emergency medical centers SLU SLU SLU Training facility P P SLU Hospitals SLU SLU SLU Municipal and public service activities P P P Nursing homes NP NP NP Private clubs or lodges P NP NP Recreation facilities, indoor P P SLU Recreational facilities, outdoor P P SLU Recycling station SLU NP NP Theaters SLU SLU NP Utility substations, transmission lines and pressure controls SLU SLU SLU Offices Clinics P NP P Offices P P P Other Accessory buildings and uses subject to sections 3.15 and 3.16 P P P Assembly buildings P P P Conference meeting and banquet facility P P P Elderly housing NP NP NP Places of religious worship P P P Residential child and adult care institutions Refer to section 3.20 Single-family residential within a historic district as designated by the city of Kentwood Historic Preservation Commission P NP P Wireless communications tower SLU NP SLU Wireless communications antenna when attached to an existing telecommunications tower, water tower, or other structure P P P Freestanding off-street parking P P P  
(Ord. No. 5-04,  3, 5-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-05,  4, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 11-08,  2, 5, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 12-08,  1, 9-26-2008; Ord. No. 3-09,  1, 6-26-2009; Ord. No. 1-11,  1, 2-11-2011; Ord. No. 5-12,  1, 7-1-2012; Ord. No. 4-14,  4, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 10-17,  5, 9-19-2017) 
Section 8.03. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan approval requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan approval. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02: 
District Site Plan Approval Requirements Other Requirements C-2 Special land uses Site plans shall be submitted for all shopping centers, plats, site condominium projects, and municipal buildings; all other new buildings with a permitted use in C-2 and C-4 shall be subject to approval by the staff review team in accordance with the requirements of section 13.05; see section 3.25 for site condominium requirements and procedures. See chapter 14 for site plan requirements; see chapter 15 for special land use requirements. C-3 Permitted and special land uses C-4 Special land uses  
B.  Lot, yard and building requirements. 
1.  Size and dimensional table: 
Requirement C-2 C-3 C-4 Other Requirements Minimum lot area 11,050 sq. ft. 11,050 sq. ft. 15,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 85 ft. 85 ft. 100 ft. Lot width is measured at the front building setback line. See section 3.05. Front yard 35 ft. 40 ft. 30 ft. The required front yard shall be landscaped, except for necessary drives or walks. No storage, parking, off-street loading areas or accessory structures shall be permitted. Side yard None required when adjacent to a C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 district 12 ft. one side/25 ft. 
total In the C-2 and C-3 districts, side yards shall not be required, except on that side of the lot abutting an OS Open Space or C-4 Office district in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than 10 feet or upon a residential district in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than 20 feet. Where the building is not placed on the lot line on lots abutting commercial or industrial districts, a minimum side yard of ten feet shall be required. In all commercial districts in the case of a corner lot the building setback on the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 30 feet with a minimum ten-foot landscaped area. Rear yard 30 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. When the rear yard of a lot in any commercial district abuts any residential district, the building setback shall be 50 feet. Maximum lot coverage 75 percent 35 percent 35 percent Includes area of lot covered by main and accessory buildings and structures. For the C-2 district, maximum lot coverage includes all areas not landscaped. Principal activity conducted within an enclosed building except for specified special land uses. 
Maximum 85% lot coverage for redeveloping C-2 sites where existing buildings will be retained. Maximum building height Three stories or 45 feet, whichever is lower Building height is limited to two stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower, in any commercial property abutting any residential district. 
See chapter 2, definition for building height. See section 3.03. Maximum warehouse with retail use 75 percent NP No outside storage of materials. The site shall not abut any residential district nor lie within 100 feet of a residential use.  
2.  The type and amount of building materials utilized shall comply with the following table: 
Material Maximum Percent of Wall to be Covered by Certain 
Building Materials 100 75 50 25 Brick ? Glass ? Decorative masonry ? Stone ? Metal composite material panel ? Wood, vinyl and metal siding ? Finishes* ? * Includes dryvit, plaster, stucco or similar materials. Such materials shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur such as parking areas and traffic ways.  
C.  Development requirements for parking. 
1.  The amount of required off-street parking spaces for individual uses shall be determined in accordance with the following table and shall meet the dimensional requirements of chapter 17, off-street parking and loading. Site development within the C-2 zone district must provide for sufficient parking for general retail use of the building. 
Use Parking Requirement-Spaces Per Unit of 
Measurement Retail Auto salesrooms, wholesale stores and machinery sales One per each 400 sq. ft. GFA Building supply and equipment establishments One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA Commercial enterprises producing merchandise on the premises One space per each 250 square feet GFA of area used for retail sales plus one per each 2,000 square feet GFA of manufacturing area. Convenience store One per each 250 sq. ft. GFA Drive through service establishments Four standing spaces per each outside teller or other outside service window, plus normal requirements for the use Open air businesses One per each 800 sq. ft. of lot area used for the open air business plus parking for any main use building and associated accessory uses Open air businesses-Vehicle sales One per each 300 square feet of GFA for the showroom building Retail businesses One per each 250 sq. ft. GFA for the first 25,000 sq. ft. GFA and one per each 300 sq. ft. GFA for additional floor area in building or center Restaurants, excluding drive-through services, when within shopping centers One per each 70 sq. ft. UFA One per each 50 sq. ft. UFA, plus four standing spaces per each outside service window Restaurants, freestanding One per each 50 sq. ft. UFA, plus four standing spaces per each outside service window Retail with on site warehousing/distribution One per each 250 sq. ft. GFA of area used for retail sales plus one per each 2,000 square feet GFA of warehouse area Vehicle rental establishments One per each 500 sq. ft. GFA Service Animal hospitals and kennels One per each 400 sq. ft. GFA Commercial schools 12 per classroom or amount required in the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater Financial institutions One per each 200 sq. ft. GFA, plus, four standing space per each outside teller Funeral homes and crematoria Parking operations plan or one per 50 sq. ft. of parlor area Hair stylists Three per each stylist Hotels, motels One per each guest bedroom, plus one per each employee, plus amount required for accessory uses Laundromats One per each two washing and drycleaning machines Personal service establishments One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA Radio and television stations One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA Repair and service establishments One per each 800 sq. ft. GFA Vehicle fuel stations, vehicle repair-major and minor Two per each service stall, plus one per each employee, plus one per each service area Vehicle washes One per each employee Institutional, recreational and utilities Assisted living facilities, convalescent homes and nursing homes One per each three beds or two rooms, whichever is less, plus ten spaces signed for visitors Colleges and universities and high schools Eight per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Elementary and secondary schools Four per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Emergency medical centers 21/2 per exam or outpatient procedure room or station plus one per each lab or recovery room Hospitals Parking operations plan or two per each in patient bed plus one per 150 square feet for offices and administrative uses, plus required out patient parking (see clinic) Municipal and public service activities One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA, not including parking areas for municipal vehicles (police cars, public works vehicles, etc.) plus spaces required for assembly areas Private clubs or lodges Parking operations plan but not less than one per each three individual members and/or guests allowed within the maximum occupancy load Recreational facilities indoor Parking operations plan but not less than four per court or other recreational facility use plus parking required for any accessory uses. If athletic fields are included, there shall be provided 20 spaces per field Recreational facilities outdoor Parking operations plan but not less than one per each two miniature golf holes plus two per each batting cage plus one per each 50 sq. ft. with video games plus four spaces per court Office buildings One per 300 square feet GFA Clinic Three per each exam or outpatient procedure room or station plus one per each lab or recovery room Bowling alleys Five per bowling lane, plus 50 percent of amount required for any restaurant or banquet uses Assembly buildings One per each three seats or six feet of bleacher seating or each 100 sq. ft. whichever is greater Libraries, art galleries and museums One per each 400 sq. ft. GFA Day care centers Parking operations plan or one per each three clients computed on the basis of the greatest number of clients on site at a given time Places of religious worship Two per each five seats based on the maximum seating capacity of the main place of assembly up to 2,500 persons Parks Ten per athletic field plus one per each ten sq. ft. of play structure Golf courses Three per hole for par three, six per hole for others plus parking required for any accessory use Stadiums and sports arenas One per each two seats or five feet of bleachers  
2.  The respective side and rear yard setback for the off-street parking for nonresidential uses common to an adjacent residential use or district shall be a minimum of 45 feet of which 20 feet nearest the respective property line is developed as a buffer zone. No accessory buildings or storage is allowed in this 45-foot setback. Such buffer zone shall extend the entire depth of the side of the lot in the case of the side yard parking adjoining residential use, or the width of the rear of the lot in the case of rear yard parking adjoining the residential use. The required buffer zone shall incorporate a minimum six-foot high vertical screen. 

Residential District or Use 
D.  Development requirements for signs. See also chapter 16, signs for general requirements. 
Signs Permitted C-2, C-3, C-4 Districts Other 
Requirements Size Number Height Location Freestanding pole-On lots 190 lineal feet or less of frontage Two sq. ft. of sign for each four ft. of frontage One per lot 25 ft. Behind the ROW Ten-foot clear space necessary from bottom of sign to ground Freestanding pole-On lots of greater than 190 lineal feet of frontage Two sq. ft. of sign for each four ft. of frontage up to 190 lineal feet plus two sq. ft. of sign for each ten ft. of frontage exceeding 190 lineal feet One per lot 25 ft. Behind the ROW No sign shall exceed 100 sq. ft. Ten-foot clear space necessary from bottom of sign to ground Freestanding ground-On lots 190 lineal feet or less of frontage Two square feet of sign for each four feet of frontage One per street frontage Four ft. above mean grade if less than ten feet from ROW line Not permitted if a freestanding pole sign is used Ten ft. above mean grade if ten ft. or more from ROW line Freestanding ground-On lots greater than 190 lineal feet of frontage Two sq. ft. of sign for each four feet of frontage up to 190 lineal feet plus two sq. ft. of sign for each additional ten ft. of frontage One per street frontage Four ft. above mean grade if less than ten feet from ROW line Not permitted if a freestanding pole sign is used outside the clear vision area of the intersection of streets or driveway onto streets Ten ft. above mean grade if ten ft. or more form ROW line Additional freestanding (see other requirements) Same as freestanding One Same as freestanding Same as freestanding Permitted if: On a lot of five acres or more with multiple public street frontages; OR on through lots (excluding corner lots) Wall-Establishments 70 feet or less wall 11/2 sq. ft. for each one lineal foot of wall One per street frontage Cannot extend above roofline On wall Area of wall signs is calculated by using the wall to which the sign will be attached Wall-Establishments with more than 70 feet of wall 11/2 sq. ft. for each one lineal foot of wall for first 70 lineal feet plus 11/2 sq. ft. for each three lineal foot of wall in excess of 70 lineal feet One per street frontage Cannot extend above roofline On wall Area of wall signs is calculated by using the wall to which the sign will be attached Noncommercial 32 sq. ft. One per issue or candidate per street frontage Four ft. Behind the ROW Real estate 32 sq. ft. One Six ft. Setback at least ten feet from a side or rear lot line Permitted only when property is for sale, rent, or lease Institutional bulletin board 50 sq. ft. One Six ft. Setback at least 25 feet from front property line Directional Six sq. ft. Only to the extent necessary as determined by the zoning administrator for traffic safety, subject to approved plan for design, number, and location Window Shall not cover more than 25 percent of window area on any side of a building Balloon See height One 35 ft. from surface of resting point or point of tie downs Setback from any property line equal to 11/2 times its height See chapter 16 for additional requirements related to balloon signs Shopping center banner 30 sq. ft. for every 100 feet of setback from public ROW One banner for every 100 parking spaces 25 feet Setback at least 100 feet from the front lot line No banner shall exceed 100 sq. ft. in area Ten-foot clear space necessary from bottom of banner to ground Portable 32 sq. ft. One Four ft. above mean grade if less than ten ft. from ROW Behind the ROW and in a location where driver visibility is not impaired Limited to 50 days of display in any calendar year, display periods of a maximum ten days for tenants within multi-tenant buildings, a separate permit and fee for each multi-tenant display period and permit sticker affixed to sign for the entire display period for all portable signs Ten ft. above mean grade if more than ten ft. from ROW  
Signs Permitted Regional Shopping Centers (RSC) in C-3 Districts Other Requirements Size Number Height Location Monument sign for shopping center Maximum of 200 sq. ft. Not more than one for each street frontage Maximum of 25 feet Outside of ROW No more than 50 percent of sign area to consist of text and/or graphics and landscaped at the base Freestanding entrance sign Maximum of 100 sq. ft. Maximum of one at each driveway or street entrance to RSC Maximum of 25 feet Outside of ROW Must be at least 400 feet between each freestanding entrance sign Directional sign Maximum of 25 sq. ft. Maximum of ten feet, but greater height may be approved by zoning administrator Outside of ROW (1) May include name of use or tenant that has at least 18,000 sq. ft. in RSC; 
(2) May be permitted for full service restaurants, theaters, food courts, valet entrances, motor coach parking areas and convention and visitors bureau; 
(3) Signs shall be in a uniform style and appearance throughout RSC; 
(4) Signs may indicate location or route, provide identification, promote traffic safety or serve other related purposes Banner 30 sq. ft. for each 100 feet of setback from public street ROW, but no banner to be larger than 100 sq. ft. One banner for each 100 off-street parking spaces 25 feet Setback at least 100 feet from front lot line At least ten feet of clear space from bottom of banner to ground Entrance sign-Commercial establishment of more than 50,000 sq. ft. Maximum of 70 sq. ft. One per entrance of the commercial establishment Cannot extend above roofline On wall Wall sign-Commercial establishment of more than 50,000 sq. ft.-In addition to permitted entrance sign Maximum of five percent of the wall to which it is attached One on each exterior wall of commercial establishment, in addition to permitted entrance sign Cannot extend above roofline On each exterior wall Location of sign is subject to zoning administrator approval; area of sign is calculated with reference to the wall to which sign is attached Entrance sign-Commercial establishment with separate exterior customer entrance, except establishments with more than 50,000 square feet (covered above) 11/2 sq. ft. for each one lineal foot of wall for first 70 lineal feet plus 11/2 sq. ft. for each three lineal feet of wall in excess of 70 lineal feet One per entrance of the commercial establishment Cannot extend above roofline On wall Area of sign calculated with reference to tenant space wall to which sign is attached Wall sign-Commercial establishment of more than 20,000 square feet without an exterior entrance Maximum of 70 square feet One sign on an exterior wall of building in which commercial establishment is located Cannot extend above roofline On each exterior wall Location of sign is subject to zoning administrator approval Wall sign-RSC identification sign at pedestrian entrance Maximum of 300 sq. ft. One per pedestrian entrance Cannot extend above roof line At each pedestrian entrance of RSC  
E.  The separate land parcels comprising a regional shopping center shall be permitted to have signs only as determined by the sign regulations for regional shopping centers in the C-3 District, as provided in this ordinance; provided, however, that a commercial establishment that consists of a separate, free-standing building, not contiguous with the building constituting the regional shopping center, shall not be deemed included, for sign purposes, within the regional shopping center, and accordingly, the signs permitted for such building shall be determined in accordance with the sign regulations for buildings in the C-3 District that are other than regional shopping centers. 
F.  Subject to the provisions of this Section, the city commission, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall have the power to waive or alter the specific provisions of Section 8.03.B, 8.03.C only in cases involving a Regional Shopping Center where there is evidence that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this Ordinance; or 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure; or 
c.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
2.  The waiver or alteration will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  The granting of the waiver or alteration will better serve to achieve the Intent and Purpose of the C-3 Regional Commercial Zone District as described in Section 8.01. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  7(8.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 15-06,  2, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 12-08,  3, 9-26-2008; Ord. No. 9-16,  1, 14, 15, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016; Ord. No. 4-18,  1, 3-20-2018; Ord. No. 7-18,  8, 5-1-2018) 
CHAPTER 9. - C-5 NEIGHBORHOOD CORRIDOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 26. 

Section 9.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for certain high traffic corridors within the city that exhibit unique characteristics not found in other commercial districts in the city, and to encourage appropriate development and redevelopment to sustain the economic viability of the district. The regulations herein are based on the following findings: 
A.  The shallow depth and adjacent residential districts and uses of many of the parcels along arterial routes make it difficult to arrange a site plan that can meet the setback, parking and buffer standards required of other commercial districts in this ordinance. 
B.  The city wishes to encourage combinations of parcels to increase lot widths and depths to allow successful commercial development while allowing sufficient area to adequately protect adjacent residential land uses. 
C.  The longterm viability of single-family residential uses along some arterial corridors is a concern. These residential uses are subject to high traffic volumes and future street widening. These factors call into question the longterm use of residential properties with shallow front yard setbacks. 
D.  Uses appropriate for this district must be accommodated within relatively small lots and must be compatible with the adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
E.  Establishing setbacks closer to the street than what is required in other commercial districts is considered appropriate given the unique conditions of this district and an objective to increase pedestrian activity along the street. 
Section 9.02. - Table of uses and parking. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses and parking: 
P: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes by right. SLU: The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. NP: Use is not permitted in the district.  
Use Approval Type Parking Requirement Spaces per Unit of Measurement Residential Detached single-family homes existing at the effective date of this ordinance. Such homes may be improved, expanded and reconstructed as a conforming use P Two per dwelling unit Residential dwellings located on the same premises as nonresidential uses permitted by this chapter, provided that all such dwellings meet all applicable building codes P Two per dwelling unit Retail Building supply and equipment establishments SLU One per each 400 sq. ft. GFA Commercial enterprises producing merchandise on the premises SLU One per each 350 sq. ft. GFA Open air businesses SLU One per each 800 sq. ft. of lot area used for the open air business plus parking for any main use building and associated accessory uses Pawnshops SLU One per each 250 sq. ft. GFA Restaurants, freestanding and other establishments serving food and/or beverages, including outdoor seating areas, but not including drive-through facilities SLU One per 75 sq. ft. UFA, including outdoor seating areas Restaurants within shopping centers, excluding drive-throughs P One per each 100 sq. ft. UFA Retail businesses P One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA Convenience stores P Vehicle rental establishments SLU One per each 600 sq. ft. GFA Offices Office P One per each 400 sq. ft. GFA Clinic SLU Two per each exam or outpatient procedure room or station plus one per each lab or recovery room Service and repair establishments Animal hospitals and kennels SLU One per each 400 sq. ft. GFA Financial institutions, freestanding P One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA Financial institutions, drive-in SLU One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA plus three standing spaces per each outside teller or other outside service window Funeral homes and crematoria SLU One per each 50 sq. ft. of parlor area Personal service establishments P One per each 400 sq. ft. GFA Repair and service establishments SLU One per each 1,000 sq. ft. GFA Vehicle repair-major and minor SLU Two per each service stall, plus one per each employee Fuel stations SLU Two per each service stall, plus one per each employee Vehicle washes SLU One per each employee Institutional, recreational, and utilities Adult and child care institutions SLU One per each four beds, plus one per each daytime work shift staff, plus one per each four off-site visiting staff Assembly buildings SLU One per each three seats or six feet of bleacher seating or each 100 sq. ft. whichever is greater Bowling alleys or skating rinks SLU Four per bowling lane, plus 1/2 the amount required for accessory uses Commercial recreation, indoor SLU Parking operations plan but not less than three per court or other recreational use plus parking required for any accessory uses. If athletic fields are included, there shall be provided an additional ten spaces per field Commercial recreation, outdoor SLU Parking operations plan but not less than one per each miniature golf holes plus two per each batting cage plus one per each 50 sq. ft. with video games plus three spaces per court Commercial schools SLU Six per classroom or amount required for the auditorium place of assembly, whichever is greater Day care centers SLU Parking operations plan or one per each three clients computed on the basis of the greatest number of clients on site at a given time Elementary and secondary schools SLU Three per classroom or amount required for the auditorium place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pick up areas for buses must be provided High schools, colleges and universities SLU Six per classroom or amount required for the auditorium place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pick up areas for buses must be provided Housing for the elderly SLU One per dwelling unit plus one per each daytime work shift staff Libraries, art galleries or museums SLU One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA Municipal and public service activities SLU One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA, not including parking areas for municipal vehicles (police cars, public works vehicles, etc.), plus spaces required for assembly areas Parking lots to serve an adjacent permitted or approved special land use SLU N/A Places of religious worship P Two per each five seats based on the maximum seating capacity [of the main place] of assembly up to 2,500 persons Radio and television stations SLU One per each 250 sq. ft. GFA Radio, television, or microwave tower SLU None Theaters SLU Four per each ten persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, city, county, state-Fire, health, or building codes Utility substations, switching stations, and transmission lines SLU 2 Freestanding off-street parking P Parking operations plan  
(Ord. No. 11-05,  5, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 6-06,  3, 4-30-2006; Ord. No. 11-08,  2, 8-29-2008) 
Section 9.03. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan approval requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan approval. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02: 
Site Plan Approval Requirements Other Requirements Special land use, plats, site condominium projects, and shopping centers and municipal buildings All other new buildings with a permitted use shall be subject to approval by the staff review team in accordance with the requirements of section 13.05. See section 3.25 for site condominium requirements and procedures. See chapter 14 for site plan requirements. See chapter 15 for special land use requirements.  
B.  Lot and yard requirements. 
Requirement Other Requirements Minimum lot area 10,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 75 ft. Any nonresidential use on a corner lot must provide the minimum frontage along the arterial street; lot width is measured at the front setback line Front yard All main buildings shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from the front lot line Except for necessary driveways the required front yard shall be landscaped Parking within the front yard area of a side yard may be permitted to within five feet of the front lot line as a special land use; where permitted a three-foot high, brick screen wall with a limestone cap (or similar materials and design) or dense hedgerow shall be provided to screen the parking lot No storage, overnight parking, off-street loading areas or accessory structures shall be permitted Side yard (See definition of Yard, side in Section 2.02.Y.) Abutting residential districts or uses 20 ft. A six-foot high fence, masonry wall or vertical screen shall be provided for screening. Landscaping is required along the fence or wall. Dumpsters shall be placed adjacent to the main use building Abutting nonresidential districts Ten ft. If the building is not placed on the lot line None If the building is placed on the lot line Corner lots 15 ft. On secondary frontage Rear yard Abutting residential districts or uses 40 ft. All paved areas shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet A six-foot high fence, masonry wall, or vertical screen shall be provided for screening. Landscaping is required along the fence or wall Abutting nonresidential districts 25 ft. May be paved and used for parking Maximum building height Three stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower See chapter 2, definition for building height  
C.  Special design and operation standards. 
1.  Lighting for parking areas and buildings shall comply with the requirements of chapter 20. 
2.  Mechanical equipment and service areas shall be visually screened from adjacent properties and public streets. The architectural design of the building shall incorporate design features that screen, contain and conceal all heating, ventilation, air conditioning units, trash enclosures, dumpsters, loading areas and service yards. 
3.  The number and location of driveways within the C-5 district shall be determined according to the provisions outlined in chapter 17. 
D.  Development requirements for parking. 
1.  The amount of required off-street parking spaces for individual uses shall be determined in accordance with the table in section 9.02. 
2.  The design requirements for off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 17.04. 
E.  Development requirements for signs. See also chapter 16 signs for general requirements. 
C-5 District Signs Permitted Size Number Height Location Other 
Requirements Freestanding ground 50 sq. ft. 1 per lot 4 ft. above mean grade If less than 5 ft. from ROW line 6 ft. above mean grade If 5 ft. or more from ROW line Wall 11/2 sq. ft. for each one lineal foot of wall One per street frontage Cannot extend above roofline On wall facing street, parking area or public entrance Area calculated using the wall to which the sign is attached One sq. ft. for each two lineal feet of wall One per wall facing public parking area or public entrance not facing a street Noncommercial 32 sq. ft. One per issue or candidate or issue per street frontage Outside of ROW Real estate 32 sq. ft. One 6 ft. Setback at least ten feet from a side or rear lot line Permitted only when property is for sale, rent, or lease Institutional bulletin board 50 sq. ft. One Four ft. above mean grade If less than five ft. from ROW line Only permitted for institutional uses; not permitted if a ground sign is also used Six ft. above mean grade If five ft. or more from ROW line Directional Six sq. ft. Subject to zoning administrator approval where required for traffic safety, subject to approved plan for design, number, and location Window Shall not cover more than 25 percent of window area on any side of a building Signs Permitted Size Number Height Location Other 
Requirements Portable 32 sq. ft. One Same as freestanding ground Outside of ROW and in a location where driver visibility is not impaired Limited to 30 days of display in any calendar year  
(Ord. No. 11-08,  4, 8-29-2008) 
CHAPTER 10. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 26. 

Section 10.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The city is committed to the continued growth and vitality of the industrial tax and employment base within the community. This chapter is intended to present, in an organized format, the regulations of two of the city's industrial districts. I-1 light industrial is intended to organize modern technology based industrial uses that have the least impact on the community. This district includes support services convenient to the industrial workforce and serves as a transition to the more exclusive industrial district, I-2 general industrial. Uses within this district are generally the more traditional industrial uses requiring larger tracts of land to accommodate buildings and accessory uses. These uses require special attention to ensure the preservation of areas for strictly industrial use within the community. Industrial performance standards are utilized to regulate the results of an industrial activity. 
Section 10.02. - Table of uses. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses: 
P: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. SLU: The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. NP: Use is not permitted in the district.  
Use I-1 I-2 Industrial Central dry cleaning plant P P Contractor's yard SLU SLU Indoor vehicle sales SLU SLU Industry P P Industrial selling retail P P Industrial selling retail with drive thru service SLU SLU Petroleum based industries NP SLU Recycling facility, except tire or rubber products SLU SLU Tool and die P P Warehouse, distribution P P Institutional and utilities Heating and electric power generating plants NP SLU Municipal and public service activities SLU SLU Utility substations, transmission lines and switching stations P P Office Corporate offices associated with industrial operations P P Financial institutions SLU NP Office buildings or office uses within a building of less than 50,000 square feet P P Office buildings or office uses within a building of 50,000 square feet or more SLU SLU Research and development facility P P Trade or industrial schools P NP Service Clinics P P Day care centers SLU SLU Fuel depot SLU SLU Motor freight terminal P P Printing and publishing P P Animal hospital and kennels SLU SLU Commercial Lumberyards SLU SLU Restaurants, freestanding SLU NP Vehicle repair establishment, minor NP NP Vehicle repair establishment, major SLU SLU Wholesale establishment P P Other Accessory buildings and uses subject to sections 3.15 and 3.16 P P Billboards (see chapter 15) P P Mining NP SLU Wireless communication towers SLU SLU Wireless communications antenna when attached to an existing telecommunications tower, water tower or other structure P P Freestanding off-street parking P P Small group fitness and rehabilitation training facility SLU SLU Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles SLU SLU  
(Ord. No. 17-06,  1, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-08,  2, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 1-11,  2, 2-11-2011; Ord. No. 3-12,  5, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 4-14,  5, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 6-14,  1, 8-19-2014) 
Section 10.03. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan review requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan review. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02: 
District Site Plan Review Requirements Other Requirements I-1 and I-2 Special land uses, plats and site condominium projects Any new building with a permitted use shall be subject to approval by the staff review team in accordance with the requirements of section 13.05. See section 3.25 for site condominium requirements and procedures. See chapter 14 for site plan requirements. See chapter 15 for special land use requirements.  
B.  Lot, yard and building requirements. 
Requirement I-1 I-2 Other Requirements Minimum lot area 40,000 sq. ft. Two acres Minimum lot width 200 ft. 200 ft. Lot width is measured at the front building setback line. See section 3.05. Front yard (FY) W/FY parking Bldg. front wall 150 ft. or less 70 ft.-The front 25 ft. of which shall be landscaped Off-street loading areas shall not be provided in the front yard. Bldg. front wall more than 150 ft. 100 ft.-The front 35 ft. of which shall be landscaped In all industrial districts in the case of a corner lot, the building side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 35 feet for building widths of 150 feet or less; and a minimum of 45 feet for building widths of more than 150 feet. The landscaped parking setback on the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet. W/O FY parking Bldg. front wall 150 ft. or less 35 ft.-FY shall be landscaped Except for landscape improvements and necessary drives and walks, the required front yard shall not be used for loading, storage or accessory structures. Bldg. front wall more than 150 ft. 45 ft.-FY shall be landscaped Side yard 20 ft. Storage is not permitted in a required side yard. 
The side yard may be reduced to ten feet where adjacent to a railroad service to the lot. 
A side yard adjoining a residential or open space district shall comply with chapter 19 setback and screening provisions and the provisions of section 10.03.C.4. See definition of Yard, side in Section 2.02.Y. Rear yard 40 ft. 60 ft. Storage is not permitted in a required side yard. 
If the rear yard areas adjoin a residential district or use, and are to be used for parking, loading, unloading or servicing, they shall be effectively screened by a solid, uniformly finished wall, fence and/or landscape screen. Such screening shall be not less than six feet in height, and in no case be lower than the parking, loading or servicing activity to be screened. 
The rear yard may be reduced to ten feet where adjacent to a railroad service to the lot. 
Storage is not permitted in a required rear or side yard for sites immediately adjacent to a residential or commercial use or fronting on a public street. Maximum lot coverage 50 percent 50 percent Includes area of lot covered by main and accessory buildings and structures. Maximum building height Three stories or 45 ft. Three stories or 60 ft. See chapter 2, definition for building height. See section 3.03. Maximum accessory retail area Five percent or 1,000 sq. ft. (whichever is greater) Retail area shall be within the same building as the primary industrial use.  
C.  Site development requirements. 
1.  The fronts and sides of industrial buildings facing streets shall be finished consistent with the table below. A minimum building offset of 25 feet will be used to distinguish the front or side of the building subject to the finished material requirement. The finished treatment shall also be continued around on at least 20 percent of the sides adjacent to a street facing wall. 
Material Maximum Percent of Wall to be Covered by Certain 
Building Materials 100 75 50 25 Brick ? Glass ? Decorative masonry ? Stone ? Metal composite material panel ? Wood, vinyl and metal siding ? Finishes* ? *Includes dryvit, plaster, stucco or similar materials. Such materials shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur such as parking areas and traffic ways.  
2.  Written appeals of facade determinations made by the zoning administrator must be filed, within ten days of the decision to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission decision regarding such appeal shall be final. 
3.  Any outdoor storage of materials shall only be permitted in areas approved in advance as part of the site plan approval and must be screened from the view of neighboring properties or from a street through the use of an approved landscaped screen, wall or solid fence. 
4.  No building or storage shall be located closer than 100 feet to a residential district boundary, provided that a building may be permitted as close as 50 feet if the area between the building and the boundary is an unlighted landscaped buffer used for no other purpose and further provided no entrance other than a required emergency door shall enter upon such area. However, no such building wall shall be permitted closer than twice its height to the residential boundary. 
D.  Development requirements for parking. 
1.  The amount of required off-street parking spaces for individual uses shall be determined in accordance with the following table: 
Use Parking Requirement 
Spaces per Unit of Measurement Day care centers Parking operations plan or one per each three clients computed on the basis of the greatest number of clients on site at a given time Financial institutions One per each 200 sq. ft. GFA, plus one per each employee and four standing spaces per outside teller Indoor vehicle sales One space per each 800 square feet of building area used for the storage/display of vehicles plus parking required for office uses. Industrial, manufacturing One per 2,000 sq. ft. GFA plus parking required for office uses plus parking for any corporate vehicles Municipal and public service activities One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA, not including parking areas for municipal vehicles (police cars, public works vehicles, etc.), plus spaces required for assembly areas Office One per each 300 square feet GFA Research establishments one per 500 square feet GFA Restaurants, freestanding One per each 50 square feet UFA, plus four Standing spaces per each outside service window Trade or industrial schools 15 per seated classroom area plus one per 500 sq. ft. UFA for use areas outside of classrooms, including areas used for demonstration purposes Vehicle repair establishment One per each 800 square feet, plus two per each stall or service area Warehouses and storage buildings One per 1,500 sq. ft. GFA, plus parking required for office uses plus parking for any corporate vehicles  
E.  Development requirements for signs. See also chapter 16 for general requirements. 
Signs Permitted I-1 and I-2 Districts Other 
Requirements Size Number Height Location Freestanding -For each main building with less than 150 ft. of front wall width 48 sq. ft. One/main building 15 ft. At least 17 feet behind the public right-of-way Sign must complement the architectural details of the building and be appropriately landscaped Freestanding -For each main building of 150 ft. or greater front wall width Area equal to two percent of the area of the front wall up to 100 sq. ft. Directional 24 sq. ft. Only to the extent necessary as determined by the Zoning Administrator for traffic safety, subject to approved plan for design, number, and location. Industrial park identification sign 48 sq. ft. One/each park entrance 15 ft. At least 17 feet behind the public right-of-way May be freestanding or attached to a wall or fence; must be appropriately landscaped Wall-Main buildings with a wall width of up to 250 ft. One sq. ft. for each 21/2 lineal foot of wall One/street frontage Cannot extend above roofline On wall facing street frontage Area of wall signs is calculated by using the wall to which the sign will be attached Wall-Main buildings with a wall width of 250 ft. or more One sq. ft. for each 21/2 lineal feet of wall plus one sq. ft. for each five lineal ft. of wall in excess of 250 lineal ft. One/street frontage Cannot extend above roofline On wall facing street frontage Area of wall signs is calculated by using the wall to which the sign will be attached Noncommercial 32 sq. ft. One/issue or candidate per street frontage 4 ft. Behind the ROW Signs may remain until deemed unsightly through disrepair or action of the elements Real estate 32 sq. ft. One/premises or building Four ft. above mean grade if less than ten ft. from ROW line; six ft. above mean grade. If ten ft. or more from ROW line Behind the ROW Permitted only when property is for sale, rent, or lease Directional 24 sq. ft. One/lot Six ft. At least ten ft. from the front lot line Only permitted if no freestanding sign is present Portable 32 sq. ft. One/lot Four ft. above mean grade. If less than ten ft. from ROW line Behind the ROW and in a location where driver visibility is not impaired Limited to 30 days of display in any calendar year Six ft. above mean grade. If ten ft. or more from ROW line Billboard 300 sq. ft. One/lot as a principal use only 25 ft. Setback 100 ft. from street right-of-way line Approved by special land use in accordance with chapter 15  
F.  Performance standards. Uses of land and buildings permitted in the industrial districts shall conform to the following performance standards at all times. All new operations or changes in operations shall be certified by the owner, or by qualified representatives of the owner, to be designed and intended to comply with these standards. 
1.  All permitted activities, other than parking and loading, shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings. 
2.  Accessory storage or accessory equipment may be placed or conducted outdoors only if screened from the view of a pedestrian on any adjacent street or on the ground floor of any adjacent residential or office use or district property by a solid wall or berm. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted in any required yard. 
3.  No permitted activity shall emit or produce odor, fumes, dust, glare, vibration or heat which will adversely affect permitted uses on an adjacent property. 
4.  No permitted activity shall emit noise that is readily discernable to the average person in any adjacent residential zone district providing that air handling equipment in proper working conditions shall be deemed to comply with this provision if located on a roof with intervening noise reduction baffles or if located on the side of a building facing away from the residential zone. 
5.  No permitted activity shall emit fumes, smoke, dust or particulates which damage personal property or buildings located on adjacent properties. 
6.  No permitted use shall discharge effluent of any kind onto or into the ground or in violation of sewage treatment regulations. 
7.  No permitted use shall emit electromagnetic radiation which would adversely affect the operation of equipment beyond the confines of the building producing the effect. 
8.  Any permitted activity that may present danger of fire, explosion or other catastrophe shall have a current hazardous material management plan, shall be reviewed and approved by the Kentwood Fire Department and shall not represent any danger to property or persons beyond the property lines. 
9.  All uses shall conform to all other city, county, state and federal regulations pertaining to its operations. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  8(10.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5-04,  4, 5-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-08,  4, 6, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 3-12,  6, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 9-16,  7, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016; Ord. No. 10-17,  6, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 4-18,  2, 3-20-2018) 
CHAPTER 11. - OS OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC, SEMIPUBLIC DISTRICT 

Section 11.01. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to preserve, through zoning, selected open space land and uses from development pressures. This zone is intended for public purposes. It is not the intent of this zone to prevent private parks or recreation areas as provided for in other zoning districts. 
Section 11.02. - Table of uses. 
A.  The following abbreviations apply to the table of uses: 
P: Land and/or buildings in this district may be used for the purposes listed by right. SLU: The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. NP Use is not permitted in the district.  
Table of Uses-Open Space, Public, Semi-Public District Accessory buildings and uses subject to sections 3.15 and 3.16 P Cemeteries P Elementary, and secondary schools SLU Golf courses or country clubs SLU Municipal and public service activities P Parks, playgrounds and community centers P Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor P Recycling station SLU Utility substations, switching stations, and transmission lines SLU Wireless communications antenna when attached to an existing telecommunications tower, water tower or other structure P Wireless communication towers SLU  
Section 11.03. - Development requirements. 
A.  Site plan review requirements. The following chart provides requirements for site plan review. A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review in connection with the following, unless specifically exempted in section 14.02: 
District Site Plan Review 
Requirements Other Requirements OS district All special land uses See chapter 14 for site plan requirements. See chapter 15 for special land use requirements  
B.  Lot and yard requirements. 
Requirement OS District Other Requirements Minimum lot area None required Lot area shall be sufficient to accommodate all principal and accessory uses Minimum lot width None required Lot area shall be sufficient to accommodate all principal and accessory uses Front yard 35 ft. No parking is permitted in the required front yard Side yard 12 ft. Street side of a corner lot 25 ft. setback is required for main buildings and parking 
See definition of Yard, side in Section 2.02.Y Rear yard 50 ft. In the case of wireless communication towers, all yards shall be equal to or exceed the tower fall zone or 50 percent of the height of the tower, whichever is greater; for the purposes of this section, the term fall zone shall mean the calculated manner and extent to which a tower structure is designed to fall Maximum lot coverage 20 percent Lots may contain more than one principal building or use Maximum building height None specified See section 3.03  
C.  Development requirements for parking. The amount of required off-street parking spaces for individual uses shall be determined in accordance with the following table. See also chapter 17. 
Use Parking Requirement Spaces per Unit of 
Measurement Cemeteries Sufficient parking shall be provided within the site through the submission by the owner of a operations plan submitted with site plan Elementary and middle schools Four per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Golf courses Two per each hole for a par 3 course; Six per hole for other courses plus those required for accessory uses High schools Eight per classroom or amount required for the auditorium or place of assembly, whichever is greater; separate areas for student drop off and pickup areas for buses must be provided Municipal and public service activities One per each 300 sq. ft. GFA, not including parking areas for municipal vehicles (police cars, public works vehicles, etc.), plus spaces required for assembly areas Parks, playgrounds and community centers Ten per each athletic field plus one per each ten sq. ft. of indoor or outdoor play area Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor Parking operations plan but not less than four per court or other recreational facility use plus parking required for any accessory uses, including restaurants, offices, or other similar activities; if athletic fields are included, there shall be ten spaces per field provided  
D.  Development requirements for signs. See also chapter 16, signs for general requirements. 
Signs Permitted OS District Other 

Requirements Size Number Height Location On-site advertising 32 sq. ft. One per principal use Four ft. 25 ft. from front lot line Noncommercial Six sq. ft. One/issue per lot Four ft. Behind the ROW Signs may remain until deemed unsightly through disrepair or action of the elements May not be illuminated Real estate 32 sq. ft. One/premises or building Four ft. Behind the ROW Permitted only when property is for sale, rent, or lease Portable 32 sq. ft. if advertising a special event or community activity One/lot Four ft. Behind the ROW and in a location where driver visibility is not impaired Limited to 30 days of display in any calendar year Institutional bulletin board 50 sq. ft. One/public or semi-public institution Four ft. above mean grade if less than ten ft. from ROW line or six ft. above mean grade if ten ft. or more from ROW line Institutional wall sign 50 sq. ft. One/street frontage N/A N/A  
(Ord. No. 11-08,  4, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 10-17,  7, 9-19-2017) 
CHAPTER 12. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.584b. 

Section 12.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to offer design flexibility and coordinated development consistent for certain sites to meet the objectives of the city of Kentwood as listed herein. Six types of PUD zoning designations are provided: Single-family residential, high density residential, commercial, mixed use, office, and industrial. The submittal requirements and standards of this section are intended to guide preparation of submittals and serve as the basis for the evaluation by the Planning Commission and the city commission. The standards are based on the following objectives: 
A.  Encourage use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability through allowance of innovative and creative design solutions not permitted under conventional zoning; 
B.  Allow design flexibility that benefits the community and the environment and results in a better overall project than would be permitted under conventional zoning; 
C.  Create a package of amenities not typically achieved with conventional zoning, such as usable open space, preservation of key natural or historic resources, improvements to public roads or facilities, pathways, natural stormwater systems, more extensive landscaping, consistent and coordinated site design details among various projects (lighting, signs, building design, etc.), and high quality architectural design or materials; 
D.  Create a complementary mixture of housing types within a project that is consistent with the overall character of the area; 
E.  Ensure compatibility of design and use between various uses within the PUD and with neighboring properties; and 
F.  Encourage the use, redevelopment and improvement of existing sites. 
Section 12.02. - Qualifying conditions. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all planned unit developments: 
A.  Coordination. 
1.  A planned unit development submitted by an applicant shall be under the control of one owner or unified group of owners and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one integral unit. 
2.  A PUD initiated by the city shall be capable of being developed in a coordinated manner. If a PUD is approved, the requirements shall be transferred to all future owners, and any changes shall require approval of both the city and the affected landowners within the PUD. 
B.  A PUD zoning classification may be initiated by the city or property owner(s). 
C.  The following minimum project sizes shall apply: 
1.  RPUD-1-High density residential: Five acres. 
2.  RPUD-2-Single-family detached residential: Five acres. 
3.  Commercial PUD: Five acres. 
4.  Mixed use PUD: Five acres. 
5.  Office PUD: Five acres. 
6.  Industrial PUD: Ten acres. 
D.  All land included in a PUD application shall be contiguous. 
E.  The site shall be served by public sanitary sewer and water systems. 
F.  The application shall demonstrate the project will result in recognizable and substantial benefits to the residents or occupants of the site, visitors to the site, adjacent properties and the city in contrast to development permitted under conventional zoning. The applicant must provide compelling evidence that demonstrates these benefits through drawings, reports or other submittals that contrast development under conventional zoning with the design and uses proposed. Such benefits can be provided from amongst the following: 
1.  Transition areas from adjacent land uses. 
2.  High quality architectural design and materials, with clear guidelines that must be met with future site plan submittals. 
3.  Extensive landscaping and preservation of quality woodlands or trees. 
4.  Assured preservation of unique natural or historic site features, or viewsheds. 
5.  Greenways that link to adjacent greenway corridors. 
6.  Unified access and circulation that reduces the number of driveways. 
7.  Provision of open space and social space. 
8.  Provision of extensive pathway systems through the project. 
9.  Provision of recreational facilities, such as playground equipment and courts. 
10.  Use or enhancement of natural systems for stormwater detention. 
11.  More extensive setbacks or buffering between development and water features. 
12.  Coordinated site design elements such as lighting, signs and greenbelt design. 
13.  Coordinated development of several small parcels. 
14.  Design improvements (public and/or private) to mitigate traffic impacts, as demonstrated through a traffic impact study. 
15.  Elimination of nonconforming situations. 
16.  Removal or renovation of blighted buildings or remediation of contamination as documented through a phase I and phase II environmental site assessment and a baseline environmental assessment. 
Section 12.03. - RPUD-1 high density residential PUD-Specific regulations. 
    High density residential development under this category shall promote the high quality character of the community and contribute to the variety of housing options for city residents. To ensure RPUD-1 projects meet this intent and the described intent of the PUD designation, the following design requirements shall apply in addition to all other regulations set forth in this ordinance. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within an RPUD-1 development: 
1.  Any permitted use in the R-3 or R-4 districts. 
2.  Golf courses, tennis clubs and athletic clubs, when combined with any residential use. 
3.  Any permitted use within C-2 commercial district except regulated uses as described in section 3.26 when integrated into the residential development; however, it is further required that the gross area designated for commercial uses including parking, accessways and yards or open space shall not exceed five percent of the gross site area of a PUD. In addition no use provided for in this subsection shall be constructed until not less than 30 percent of the dwelling units proposed in the development have been completed. 
4.  State licensed adult and child care facilities in accordance with section 3.20. 
B.  Special land uses. Special land uses as provided in the R-3 or R-4 districts may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 and elsewhere are met. 
C.  Development requirements. 
1.  Density. Allowable density for the RPUD-1 district shall be dictated by the city's master plan and shall be determined by the Planning Commission at the preliminary PUD plan stage. Net density shall be consistent with the definition in chapter 2 except that up to 25 percent of the acreage of preserved floodplain may be computed in the PUD zones. 
2.  Minimum lot area. Lot sizes within this PUD district shall not be varied or reduced in area below the following standards: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings, 6,500 square feet of lot area. 
b.  Two-family dwellings, 8,500 square feet of lot area. 
c.  Townhouses or other similar permitted single-family attached dwelling types, 6,500 feet of lot area for the first dwelling unit in each structure plus 2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit within a structure. 
d.  For multiple-family dwelling structures the first dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 4,000 square feet of lot area and each additional unit shall require a minimum additional 2,250 square feet of lot area. 
3.  Minimum setback and building spacing requirements. Setbacks within this PUD district shall not be varied or reduced below the following standards: 
a.  Front yard, 20 feet for all dwellings. 
b.  Side yard: 
(1)  For all one- and two-family dwellings. Five feet minimum side yard, with no less than 12 feet of combined side yards per lot. The side yard on the street side of any lot shall be a minimum of 20 feet. Zero lot line units must provide at least a 20-foot side yard on one side of the unit. 
(2)  Townhouses or apartments. No side yard is required, provided that there shall be a minimum of 20 feet between ends of contiguous groups of dwelling units. 
(3)  For all dwellings. Side yard setbacks may be increased by the Planning Commission after consideration of the design relationship between individual lots, buildings, streets, parking areas, and the land. 
c.  Rear yard. 30 feet for all dwellings, provided that rear yard requirements may be varied by the Planning Commission after consideration of common open space areas or parks which abut the rear yard. 
d.  Perimeter setback. The following yard requirements at exterior boundaries of the PUD shall be required. Front yard, 40 feet; side yard, 15 feet, provided that on the street side of a corner lot a minimum of 25 feet shall be provided; rear yard, 35 feet. 
4.  Minimum floor area. The minimum required floor area shall be provided in the following amounts: 
a.  Single-family detached. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum finished living area of 950 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit with a minimum of 624 square feet on the main floor for units of more than one story. 
b.  Attached single-family including two family and townhouses. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum finished living area of 850 square feet per dwelling unit with a minimum of 600 square feet on the main floor for units of more than one story. 
c.  Multiple family dwellings: 
(1)  Efficiency-375 square feet. 
(2)  One bedroom-600 square feet. 
(3)  Two bedrooms-780 square feet. 
(4)  Three bedrooms-940 square feet plus an additional 80 square feet for each bedroom in excess of three bedrooms. 
5.  Minimum open space. A minimum 25 percent of the site shall be provided as common open space that meets the standards of section 12.10N. 
6.  Building height and architectural guidelines. Multiple family structures shall provide distinct and prominent architectural features that create a positive visual impression. Walls facing the street shall include windows, entrances to the units, porches, and other architectural features customarily found on the front facade of a residential structure. The city may require architectural diversity between various areas, or between adjacent single-family or two-family buildings. Architectural diversity may include: recessing garages behind or in line with the living area; provision of front porches extending across a portion of the living area; varied texture of building materials including brick and other natural materials; restricted use of privacy fencing; and restricted use and location of accessory buildings. The height of buildings within the PUD shall be determined by the use. Single-family detached uses shall be limited to the R1-A height requirements, all other residential uses shall be limited to the R-4 height requirements and commercial retail or office uses shall be limited to the commercial/office district height requirements. 
7.  [Consistency of materials.] Sign types and materials shall be consistent with the overall architectural design of the PUD. Signs for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the sign limitations allowed for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
8.  [Parking requirements.] Parking for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the parking requirements for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. In addition, the minimum off street parking spaces for single family detached housing shall include a garage to accommodate at least two vehicles. 
9.  For accessory structures, the size and location requirements may be varied from those specified in sections 3.15 and 3.16. 
D.  [Extraordinary circumstances.] Subject to the provisions of this section, the city commission, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall have the power to waive or alter the specific provisions of sections 12.02.C, 12.02.D and 12.03.C only in cases where there is evidence that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this ordinance; or 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure; or 
c.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
2.  The waiver or alteration will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  The granting of the waiver or alteration will better serve to achieve the intent and purpose of the PUD as described in section 12.01. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  9(12.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5-04,  5, 5-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-05,  6, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 15-06,  3, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-08,  7, 8, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 16-18,  6, 11-20-2018) 
Section 12.04. - RPUD-2 single-family [low density] residential. 
    Low density residential development under this category shall promote the high quality character of the community and contribute to the variety of detached housing options for city residents. To ensure RPUD-2 projects meet this intent and the described intent of the PUD designation, the following design requirements shall apply in addition to all other regulations set forth in this ordinance. 
A.  Density. The number of dwelling units allowed shall be determined through the alternative, conventional plan as described in section 12.09G and in accordance with the city land use plan of the city's master plan. Net density shall be consistent with the definition in chapter 2 and may include up to 25 percent of the acreage of preserved floodplain. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses of land and structures may be permitted within a single family detached PUD when the standards of this section and other applicable standards are met. 
1.  Any permitted use in the R1-C and D districts. 
2.  Golf courses, tennis clubs and athletic clubs when combined with a residential use. 
C.  Special land uses. Special approval uses in the R1-C, D districts may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. 
D.  Development requirements: 
1.  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot areas for the development shall not be less than 6,500 square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot dimensions and setbacks. Lot dimensions, including width, setbacks and yard requirements shall not be varied or reduced below the following standards: 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet. 
b.  Side yard: Five feet minimum side yard, with no less than 12 feet of combined side yards per lot. The side yard on the street side of any lot shall be a minimum of 20 feet. Zero lot line units must provide at least a 20-foot side yard on one side of the unit. Side yard setbacks may be increased by the Planning Commission after consideration of the design relationship between individual lots, buildings, streets, parking areas, and the land. 
c.  Rear yard: Thirty feet; provided that rear yard requirements may be varied by the Planning Commission after consideration of common open space areas or parks which abut the rear yard. 
3.  Minimum living area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum finished living area of 950 square feet of floor area, with a minimum of 624 square feet on the main floor. 
4.  Minimum open space. A minimum 25 percent of the site shall be provided as common open space that meets the standards of section 12.10N. 
5.  Building height and architectural guidelines. The city may require architectural diversity between adjacent single-family buildings. Architectural diversity may include: recessing garages behind or in line with the living area; provision of front porches extending across a portion of the living area; varied texture of building materials including brick and other natural materials; restricted use of privacy fencing; and restricted use and location of accessory buildings. The height of buildings shall be limited to the R1-A height requirements. 
6.  [Consistency of materials.] Sign types and materials shall be consistent with the overall architectural design of the PUD. Signs for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the sign limitations allowed for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
7.  [Parking requirements.] Parking for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the parking requirements for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. In addition, the minimum off street parking spaces for single family detached housing shall include a garage to accommodate at least two vehicles. 
8.  For accessory structures, the size and location requirements may be varied from those specified in sections 3.15 and 3.16. 
E.  [Extraordinary circumstances.] Subject to the provisions of this section, the city commission, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall have the power to waive or alter the specific provisions of sections 12.02.C, 12.02.D and 12.03.C only in cases where there is evidence that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this ordinance; or 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure; or 
c.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
2.  The waiver or alteration will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  The granting of the waiver or alteration will better serve to achieve the intent and purpose of the PUD as described in section 12.01. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  9(12.04), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  6, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 15-06,  3, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-08,  7, 8, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 16-18,  7, 11-20-2018) 
Section 12.05. - Commercial PUD. 
    It is the purpose of commercial PUD's to allow creative and imaginative approaches in the development of commercial elements in the city. The following regulations ensure conservation of the property value through optimum utilization of areas devoted to commercial use together with protection of the immediate environment. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses of land or structures may be permitted within a commercial PUD. 
1.  Any "permitted use" within the C-2, C-4 or C-5 districts. 
2.  Customary accessory uses as permitted in the C-2, C-4 or C-5 districts. 
3.  Adult and child care facilities in accordance with section 3.20. 
B.  Special land uses. The uses permitted by special land use approval in the C-2 community commercial, C-4 office and C-5 neighborhood corridor commercial districts may be permitted when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. 
C.  Development requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. The lot size requirements of the district from which the uses were taken shall apply. In case of uses from more than one district, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
2.  Setbacks and building spacing. Building and parking setbacks and spacing between buildings may be varied to meet the objectives and standards of this section, provided all building and fire codes are met. In no case shall the required building setback from adjacent residential land uses be decreased by more than 50 percent. 
3.  Parking. Parking requirements shall be equal to the sum of the parking requirements for all uses proposed. However, where it can be demonstrated by the applicant that due to nonconflicting hours of operation, design of the circulation, and parking plan or any other factor reasonably related to the need for parking, a portion of the parking requirement may be deferred by the Planning Commission. The site plan shall show adequate paved parking and, as applicable, adequate landscaped reserve unpaved parking area, exclusive of required yards, to meet these parking requirements. 
4.  Traffic circulation, operations and access. 
a.  Main access points shall be spaced from existing signalized intersections adequately to minimize conflicts with signal operations. If the site has access to a traffic signal or if the main access point has potential to be signalized, the site shall be designed and way-finding signs provided to direct traffic flow to use the signal. 
b.  Interior drives shall provide circulation between uses. 
c.  Any outlets shall use shared driveways and internal access connections rather than separate, individual access points. The preliminary PUD plan and PUD agreement shall clearly describe future access conditions and restrictions. 
d.  Stacking or queuing depth at site access points shall be sufficient to accommodate expected peak hour volumes without conflict to inbound or internal circulation. 
e.  Additional right-of-way shall be provided to accommodate improvements to the existing arterial roadway system that are planned or required to mitigate traffic associated with the PUD. 
f.  A pedestrian circulation system shall be provided throughout the site, along existing arterials, and to connect the public pedestrian system with building entrances. 
g.  Provision shall be made to accommodate improvements to public transit service including, but not limited to, shelter and stop locations, bus turnout lanes and pedestrian connections. 
5.  Site design guidelines. The following site elements shall be provided: 
a.  An extensively landscaped greenbelt, with an average width of 30 feet and minimum of 20 feet, shall be provided along public streets. Plantings within the greenbelt shall exceed the requirements of section 19.03.A. Low, undulating (horizontal and vertical) berms or an architectural feature (decorative stone or brick wall, wrought iron fencing, or combination) may be permitted as an alternative to the trees. 
b.  Site design and landscaping shall diminish the prominence of parking lots as viewed from public streets. Parking lot landscaping shall exceed the amount otherwise required. 
c.  A city entranceway landmark or entrance sign may be required near the intersection of two arterial streets or at an entrance point to the city. The type and conceptual design of said landmark shall be determined as part of the preliminary PUD plan approval, and the timing of installation described in the PUD agreement. 
d.  Extensive pedestrian gathering and seating plazas, greenways and tree lined drives shall be within parking lots and throughout the site to provide an inviting pedestrian environment, protection of the pedestrian from vehicular circulation and improved traffic operations and views. 
e.  Other site amenities to create a pedestrian scale environment shall be provided such as bike racks, benches, information kiosks, art, planters or streetscape elements to separate mainline buildings from the parking lots. 
f.  Any detention areas with predominant view from the roadway, parking lot, residential dwellings or primary entrances to buildings shall be designed to have a natural appearance, such as: variable shape; natural arrangement of landscape materials; aerated fountains; use boulder accent walls; or other similar design features. 
g.  Sign types and materials shall be consistent with the overall architectural design of the PUD. Signs for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the sign limitations allowed for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
h.  The site shall have a minimum open space of 30 percent exclusive of areas of deferred parking. 
6.  Maintenance and utilities. For any areas to be held under common ownership, a document ensuring the future maintenance provisions shall be submitted for approval to the Planning Commission. Such provision shall include mandatory membership of all property owners in any association designed for maintenance of the common area and the city shall have the right to require the recording of such documentation and other provisions deemed appropriate for the project by the Planning Commission. 
7.  Building height and architectural guidelines. Information on architecture and building design (elevations or perspectives, materials and description of design standards) shall be submitted and comply with the following: 
a.  Architecture throughout the development shall be compatible based on a design theme established with the preliminary PUD plan and described in the PUD agreement. 
b.  Compatibility of site use with nearby residential areas must be evidenced and can be determined in relationship to the following criteria: 
(1)  Uses have no harmful or unpleasant effects (noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke, vapors and gases, electrical emissions and industrial wastes.) 
(2)  The PUD site has direct access to a collector or arterial street. 
(3)  Appearance is harmonious with adjacent uses. This feature would include but not be limited to landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign control, low profile buildings and architectural controls. 
(4)  The distances separating all proposed uses and buildings from the surroundings are great enough to in fact constitute a buffer. 
(5)  Loading docks and truck maneuvering areas and terminals should be further removed from residential lot lines than the building. 
c.  Buildings shall utilize high quality architecture with variable building lines, peaked roofs or parapet walls, architectural accents, and brick facades. 
d.  Building heights will be as required by the commercial districts (chapter 8). 
e.  The depth of the front building line shall be varied to break up the building massing. 
f.  The predominant material utilized on facades which are visible from a public right-of-way or parking lots shall be brick. Other materials may be used for architectural accents, provided such materials shall have the appearance of wood or cut or cast stone. 
g.  A building or buildings shall face (front facade or side elevation with appearance of a front facade) the intersection of existing arterial streets. The building(s) shall have distinct architecture that creates a prominent landmark at the intersection, with no loading or utility areas that face the intersection. There shall be a landscaped plaza in front of the building or between buildings. Parking is encouraged behind buildings. 
h.  The type and amount of building materials utilized shall comply with the following table: 
Material Maximum Percent of Wall to be Covered by Certain 
Building Materials 100 75 50 25 Brick ? Glass ? Decorative masonry ? Stone ? Metal composite material panel ? Metal, wood and vinyl siding ? Finishes* ? *Includes dryvit, plaster, stucco or similar materials. Such materials shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur such as parking areas and traffic ways.  
D.  [Extraordinary circumstances.] Subject to the provisions of this section, the city commission, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall have the power to waive or alter the specific provisions of sections 12.02.C, 12.02.D, and 12.03.C only in cases where there is evidence that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this ordinance; or 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure; or 
c.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
2.  The waiver or alteration will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  The granting of the waiver or alteration will better serve to achieve the intent and purpose of the PUD as described in section 12.01. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  9(12.05), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  6, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 11-08,  7, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 3-13,  3, 3-13-2013; Ord. No. 4-18,  3, 3-20-2018) 
Section 12.06. - Mixed use PUD. 
    The mixed use PUD designation is intended to permit residential uses to be mixed with commercial uses in an innovative and unified manner. This will encourage responsible development of sites and more efficient use of the city's infrastructure. 
A.  Applicability. To qualify as a mixed use PUD the project must meet the following criteria: 
1.  Where the underlying district is zoned for nonresidential uses or designated for nonresidential in the land use plan of the master plan, the project shall contain the following uses: 
a.  Maximum 80 percent of the site may include uses permitted in the commercial and office districts 
b.  Minimum 20 percent of the site shall be devoted to recreation and open space area, as defined in section 12.10.N. 
c.  The remainder may be residential, institutional and/or public uses. 
2.  Where the underlying district is zoned for residential uses or designated for residential in the land use plan of the master plan, or the site is zoned or planned for both residential and nonresidential uses, the project shall contain the following maximum breakdown: 
a.  A minimum 60 percent of the site shall be devoted to residential, institutional and/or public uses if the underlying zoning is single family residential, no more than 50 percent of the units may be attached. Any attached units shall not be located adjacent to areas with existing or planned single family residential uses. 
b.  Minimum 20 percent of the site shall be devoted to recreation and open space area, as defined in section 12.10.J. 
c.  A maximum ten percent may be devoted to businesses, services and professional offices. Such uses shall be located along arterial roads, or to provide a transition between the residential component and more intense land uses in the surrounding area. If part of the PUD site is zoned or planned for non-residential use, this percentage may be increased to allow up to ten percent of additional area for nonresidential uses. 
B.  Permitted uses. Provided the proper mixture of uses complies with section 12.06(A), the following uses are permitted in a mixed Use PUD: 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-2, C-4, R-3 or R-4 districts. 
2.  Related recreational facilities such as tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools and health clubs. 
C.  Special land uses. Special land uses in the C-2, C-4, R-3 or R-4 districts may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. 
D.  Development requirements. 
1.  Residential density, floor area, lot size. Residential development in a mixed use PUD shall comply with the maximum density, minimum lot area and minimum floor area requirements outlined for the RPUD-1 designation in section 12.03. 
2.  Setbacks and building spacing. Front, side and rear yard requirements shall be the same as for buildings of a similar use built in the regular zoning districts; provided, however, the city may modify these requirements where necessary for the design of a quality project. The clustering, attaching and combining of uses within buildings is encouraged. 
3.  Building and architectural guidelines. Building materials and architectural design within the mixed use PUD shall comply with the regulations set forth in the previous PUD designations of RPUD-1, RPUD-2 and commercial PUD as determined applicable by the Planning Commission. 
4.  [Consistency of materials.] Sign types and materials shall be consistent with the overall architectural design of the PUD. Signs for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the sign limitations allowed for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
E.  [Extraordinary circumstances.] Subject to the provisions of this section, the city commission, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall have the power to waive or alter the specific provisions of sections 12.02.C, 12.02.D and 12.03.C only in cases where there is evidence that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this ordinance; or 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure; or 
c.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question; 
2.  The waiver or alteration will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  The granting of the waiver or alteration will better serve to achieve the intent and purpose of the PUD as described in section 12.01. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  9(12.06), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  6, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 11-08,  7, 8-29-2008) 
Section 12.07. - Office PUD. 
    It is the purpose of office PUD's to allow creative and imaginative approaches in the development of research and office elements in the city. The following regulations ensure conservation of the property value through optimum utilization of areas devoted to office use together with protection of the immediate environment. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses of land or structures may be permitted within an office PUD. 
1.  Any "permitted use" within the C-4 districts. 
2.  Any "special land uses" within the C-4 districts when all applicable standards and procedures as stated in chapter 15 and section 13.04. respectively, are met. 
3.  Research and development facilities. 
4.  Up to 33 percent of the business area for the aforementioned uses can be devoted to storage or prototype development of product. 
B.  Special land uses. Special land uses in the C-4 district may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met. 
C.  Development requirements: 
1.  Minimum lot size. Five acres. 
2.  Setbacks and building spacing. Setbacks and spacing between buildings may be varied to meet the objectives and standards of this section, provided all building and fire codes are met. In no case, shall the required setback from adjacent residential land uses be decreased by more than 50 percent. 
3.  Minimum building size. 40,000 square feet. 
4.  Maximum building height. 50 feet. 
5.  Parking. Parking requirements shall be equal to the sum of the parking requirements for all uses proposed. However, where it can be demonstrated by the applicant that due to nonconflicting hours of operation, design of the circulation, and parking plan or any other factor reasonably related to the need for parking, a portion of the parking requirement can be deferred by the Planning Commission. 
6.  Traffic circulation, operations and access: 
a.  Main access points shall be spaced from existing signalized intersections adequately to minimize conflicts with signal operations. If the site has access to a traffic signal or if the main access point has potential to be signalized, the site shall be designed and way-finding signs provided to direct traffic flow to use the signal. 
b.  Interior drives shall provide circulation between uses. 
c.  Any outlets shall use shared driveways and internal access connections rather than separate, individual access points. The preliminary PUD Plan and PUD agreement shall clearly describe future access conditions and restrictions. 
d.  Stacking or queuing depth at site access points shall be sufficient to accommodate expected peak hour volumes without conflict to inbound or internal circulation. 
e.  Additional right-of-way shall be provided to accommodate improvements to the existing arterial roadway system that are planned or required to mitigate traffic associated with the PUD. 
f.  A pedestrian circulation system shall be provided throughout the site, along existing arterials, and to connect the public pedestrian system with building entrances. 
g.  Provision shall be made to accommodate improvements to public transit service, including but not limited to, shelter and stop locations, bus turnout lanes and pedestrian connections. 
7.  Site design guidelines. The following site elements shall be provided: 
a.  An extensively landscaped greenbelt, with an average width of 50 feet and minimum of 30 feet, shall be provided along public streets. Plantings within the greenbelt shall exceed the requirements of section 19.03.A. Low, undulating (horizontal and vertical) berms or an architectural feature (decorative stone or brick wall, wrought iron fencing, or combination) may be permitted as an alternative to the trees. 
b.  Site design and landscaping shall diminish the prominence of parking lots as viewed from public streets. Parking lot landscaping shall exceed the amount otherwise required. 
c.  Extensive pedestrian gathering and seating plazas, greenways and tree lined drives shall be within parking lots and throughout the site to provide an inviting pedestrian environment, protection of the pedestrian from vehicular circulation and improved traffic operations and views. 
d.  Other site amenities to create a pedestrian scale environment shall be provided such as bike racks, benches, information kiosks, art, planters or streetscape elements to separate mainline buildings from the parking lots. 
e.  Any detention areas with predominant view from the roadway, parking lot, residential dwellings or primary entrances to buildings shall be designed to have a natural appearance, such as: variable shape; natural arrangement of landscape materials; aerated fountains; boulder accent walls; or other similar design features. 
f.  Sign types and materials shall be consistent with the overall architectural design of the PUD. Signs for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the sign limitations allowed for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. In addition, all freestanding signs shall be monument type with a base to match the building materials with landscaping around the sign integrated into the overall landscape plan. 
8.  Maintenance and utilities. For any areas to be held under common ownership, a document showing the future maintenance provisions shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. Where applicable, such provisions shall include mandatory membership of all property owners in any association designed for maintenance of the common area. 
9.  Building height and architectural guidelines. Information on architecture and building design (elevations or perspectives, materials and description of design standards) shall be submitted and comply with the following: 
a.  Architecture throughout the development shall be compatible based on a design theme established with the preliminary PUD plan and described in the PUD agreement. 
b.  Compatibility of site use with nearby residential areas must be evidenced and can be determined in relationship to the following criteria: 
(1)  Uses have no harmful or unpleasant effects (noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke, vapors and gases, electrical emissions and industrial wastes.) 
(2)  The PUD site has direct access to a collector or arterial street. 
(3)  Appearance is harmonious with adjacent uses. This feature would include but not be limited to landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign control, low profile buildings and architectural controls. 
(4)  The distances separating all proposed uses and buildings from the surroundings are great enough to in fact constitute a buffer. 
(5)  Loading docks and truck maneuvering areas and terminals should be further removed from residential lot lines than the building. 
c.  Buildings shall utilize high quality architecture with variable building lines, peaked roofs or parapet walls, architectural accents, and brick facades. 
d.  The depth of the front building line shall be varied to break up the building massing. 
e.  The predominant material utilized on facades which are visible from a public right-of-way or parking lots shall be brick. Other materials may be used for architectural accents, provided such materials shall have the appearance of wood or cut or cast stone. 
f.  A building or buildings shall face (front facade or side elevation with appearance of a front facade) the intersection of existing arterial streets. The building(s) shall have distinct architecture that creates a prominent landmark at the intersection, with no loading or utility areas that face the intersection. There shall be a landscaped plaza in front of the building or between buildings. Parking is encouraged behind buildings. 
g.  The type and amount of building materials utilized shall comply with the following table: 
Material Maximum Percent of Wall to be Covered by Certain 
Building Materials 100 75 50 25 Brick ? Glass ? Decorative masonry ? Stone ? Metal composite material panel ? Metal, wood and vinyl siding ? Finishes* ? *Includes dryvit, plaster, stucco or similar materials. Such materials shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur such as parking areas and traffic ways.  
h.  The height of buildings shall be limited to the commercial/office district height requirements. 
D.  [Extraordinary circumstances.] Subject to the provisions of this section, the city commission, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall have the power to waive or alter the specific provisions of sections 12.02.C, 12.02.D and 12.03.C only in cases where there is evidence that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this ordinance; or 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure; or 
c.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
2.  The waiver or alteration will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  The granting of the waiver or alteration will better serve to achieve the intent and purpose of the PUD as described in section 12.01. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  9(12.07), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  6, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 15-06,  3, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-08,  7, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 4-18,  3, 3-20-2018) 
Section 12.08. - Industrial PUD. 
    The industrial PUD is intended to permit and control the development of pre-planned, exclusively industrial areas and research and development centers. It is intended that this type of PUD afford industry reasonable protection from encroachment by retail commercial, residential and other incompatible land uses, and that reasonable protection will be afforded to adjacent uses. 
A.  Applicability. A site may be designated for industrial PUD provided it meets the following criteria: 
1.  Direct access to an arterial street. 
2.  The industrial PUD shall be located in an area previously master planned for industrial use. 
3.  Utilities, roads and other essential services must be available for the immediate use of occupants purchasing or leasing sites in the industrial PUD. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the industrial PUD. 
1.  Any use permitted by right in the I-1 light industrial district. 
2.  Corporate office buildings. 
3.  Research and development laboratories, offices and facilities for the development of new products and processes. 
C.  Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted by obtaining special land use approval when all applicable standards as cited in chapter 15 are met: 
1.  Special land uses in the I-1 light industrial district and uses allowed by right in the I-2 general industrial district. Vehicle fuel stations and vehicle rental establishments dealing strictly in passenger vehicles. 
2.  Related essential services that are ancillary to the industrial planned development including office equipment and supply sales and personal service establishments which perform personal services on the premises. 
D.  Covenants or restrictions. Any private covenants or restrictions applying to the parcels within the industrial PUD shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval to ensure consistency with the approved PUD agreement. 
E.  Development requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot and building size. The following shall apply for minimum lot area and width according to building size: 
a.  Industrial buildings with a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or less shall have a minimum lot size of 25,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 150 feet. 
b.  The minimum lot size for a building greater than 10,000 square feet shall be one acre and a minimum lot width of 200 feet. 
2.  Minimum setback requirements. The following setback requirements shall be met: 
a.  Front yard. A front yard of 35 feet is required which must be landscaped with grass and shrubbery or trees. For buildings with parking in front, there shall be a front setback of 75 feet the front 30 feet of which shall be landscaped. 
b.  Side yard. A side yard shall be no less than ten feet wide with 50 feet of side yard required if it includes parking. 
c.  Rear yard. A rear yard of no less than 25 feet shall be required. 
3.  Building height. The height of buildings within the PUD shall be determined by the use. I-1 uses shall be limited to I-1 height requirements, I-2 uses shall be limited to I-2 height requirements. 
4.  Outdoor storage. All business, service or processing shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings with the exception of outdoor contractor's storage yards which must be screened from view from any public street. 
5.  Architectural design. Architecture throughout an industrial development shall be compatible based on a design theme established with the concept plan and described in the PUD agreement. 
a.  The administrative/office segment of the building shall utilize quality architecture with variable building lines, architectural accents, and brick facades. 
b.  The administrative/office portion of the building shall be in the front with an appropriate architectural transition to the warehouse/manufacturing. 
c.  Techniques shall be utilized to break up building massing such as windows, varying building lines and landscaping. 
d.  The predominant material utilized on facades visible from a public right-of-way or parking lots shall be brick. Other materials may be used for architectural accents, provided such materials shall have the appearance of wood or cut or cast stone. 
e.  The type and amount of building materials utilized shall comply with the following table: 
Material Maximum Percent of Wall to be Covered by Certain 
Building Materials 100 75 50 25 Brick ? Glass ? Decorative masonry ? Stone ? Metal composite material panel ? Metal, wood and vinyl siding ? Finishes* ? *Includes dryvit, plaster, stucco or similar materials. Such materials shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur such as parking areas and traffic ways.  
6.  [Consistency of materials.] Sign types and materials shall be consistent with the overall architectural design of the PUD. Signs for uses or buildings located in the PUD shall be subject to the sign limitations allowed for uses or buildings of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
F.  [Extraordinary circumstances.] Subject to the provisions of this section, the city commission, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall have the power to waive or alter the specific provisions of sections 12.02.C, 12.02.D and 12.03.C only in cases where there is evidence that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the effective date of this ordinance; or 
b.  By reason of exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure; or 
c.  By reason of the use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property in question. 
2.  The waiver or alteration will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  The granting of the waiver or alteration will better serve to achieve the intent and purpose of the PUD as described in section 12.01. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  9(12.08), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  6, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 11-08,  7, 8-29-2008; Ord. No. 4-18,  4, 3-20-2018) 
Section 12.09. - Preliminary PUD site plan submittal requirements. 
    The purpose of the preliminary review is to provide the applicant with a substantive review of the proposed project in order to prepare final site engineering and architecture plans and to execute necessary agreements between the applicant and the city. Fifteen copies of each of the following items shall be submitted by the applicant. (Sheet size of submitted drawings shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches, with graphics at an engineer's scale): 
A.  Current proof of ownership of the land to be utilized or evidence of a contractual ability to acquire such land, such as an option or purchase agreement. 
B.  A completed application form, supplied by the zoning administrator, and an application fee. A separate escrow deposit may be required for administrative or consultant charges to review the PUD submittal. 
C.  A traffic impact or environmental assessment, if required, as described in section 13.02. 
D.  A complete draft PUD agreement for review by the planning commission and city attorney which shall: 
1.  Set forth the conditions upon which the approval is sought, with reference to approved plans and a specific description of all deviations from city regulations which have been requested and approved, and thus do not require approval of the zoning board of appeals. Such deviations shall be clearly listed in tabular form and may include: building and parking lot setbacks, building height, reduction in minimum lot size, reduction in road width, modifications to road geometric design, reduction on required parking, mixture of uses (if applicable), larger or additional signs, or driveways that do not meet the standards of this ordinance. 
2.  Convey in fee or commit otherwise common areas indicated in the PUD plan for use by the residents or the public at large. The use shall be irrevocably dedicated for the useful life of the residences, and retained as open space for park, recreation or other common uses. The transfer of responsibility from the developer to the association shall be clearly defined, to ensure all obligations will be met, or performance guarantees provided, to ensure common areas are left in a usable state. 
3.  Set forth a program and financing for maintenance of common areas and features, such as pathways, roads, signs, lighting, landscaping, recreational facilities and stormwater detention facilities. Adequate provision shall be made to insure common areas and features and to indemnify the city. 
4.  Assure that trees and woodlands indicated on the plan will be preserved as shown, or replaced on a caliper for caliper basis if damaged or removed during construction. 
5.  Assure the construction, improvement and maintenance of all streets and necessary utilities (including public water, wastewater collection and treatment and stormwater) to mitigate the impacts of the PUD project through construction by the developer, bonds or other satisfactory means, for any and all phases of the PUD. In the case of phased PUD's this requirement shall be reviewed at the time of any final site plan approval. 
6.  Confirm that variances from the zoning board of appeals cannot be sought for the PUD plan and describe whether individual landowners are eligible to seek variances in the future, once the PUD project or phase is constructed. 
7.  Address any other stated concerns of the city regarding construction and maintenance including phasing development plans. Adequate development assurances shall be provided for all proposed phased development. 
8.  Ensure that the obligations of the PUD are transferred to future buyers and note the process for approval of amendments to the PUD agreement, including the manner in which affected parties within the PUD must approve the change in addition to the city. 
9.  Narrative description of architectural treatment/features. 
10.  Narrative description of the walkability of the PUD (within and to the public walkways). 
11.  Narrative description of open space features. 
12.  Narrative description of the relationship between the PUD and the goals of the city master plan. 
E.  Cover sheet providing: 
1.  The applicant's name; 
2.  The name of the development; the preparer's name and professional seal of architect, engineer, surveyor or landscape architect indicating license in the State of Michigan; 
3.  Date of preparation and any revisions; 
4.  North arrow; 
5.  Property lines and dimensions; 
6.  Complete and current legal description and size of property in acres; 
7.  Small location sketch of the subject site and area within one-half mile; and scale; 
8.  Zoning and current land use of applicant's property and all abutting properties and of properties across any public or private street from the PUD site; 
9.  Lot lines and all structures on the property and within 100 feet of the PUD property lines; 
10.  Location of any access points on both sides of the street within 300 feet of the PUD along arterial streets and within 100 feet along other streets where access to the PUD is proposed. 
F.  A plan sheet(s) labeled "Existing Site Conditions", that includes the location of existing buildings and structures, rights-of-way and easements, significant natural and historical features, existing drainage patterns (by arrow), surface water bodies, floodplain areas, wetlands, the limits of major stands of trees and a tree survey indicating the location, species and caliper of all trees with a caliper over six inches, measured four feet above grade. This sheet shall also illustrate existing topography of the entire site at five-foot contour intervals and a general description of grades within 100 feet of the site. A reduced copy of this sheet(s) should also be included in the impact assessment outlined in section 13.02. of this zoning ordinance. 
G.  A conceptual plan that illustrates how the site could be developed under standard zoning regulations. This alternative plan must meet all the applicable requirements for lot size, setbacks, road and stormwater facilities, etc. The applicant may wish to submit the alternative plan for city review prior to submittal of the overall PUD package to identify where more documentation is needed to support the practicality of the alternative plan, or to obtain acceptance from city staff. The applicant may provide more than one alternative plan as a contrast with the PUD plan. The alternative, conventional plan, shall be used to determine the base density for PUD projects with a residential component and to evaluate whether the benefits of the PUD plan are substantial enough to support approval. 
H.  A preliminary PUD site plan sheet that includes the following: 
1.  Preliminary layout of proposed land use, acreage allotted to each use, residential density overall and by underlying zoning district (calculations shall be provided for both overall and net density), building footprints, structures, roadways, parking areas, drives, driveways, pedestrian paths, gathering areas and identification signs. 
2.  Building setbacks and spacing. 
3.  Parking lot areas, loading areas and setbacks. 
4.  General location and type of landscaping proposed (evergreen, deciduous, berm, etc.) noting existing trees over six inches in caliper to be retained, and any woodlands that will be designated as "areas not to be disturbed" in development of the PUD. The city may require cross sections that illustrate relationship to natural features and adjacent land uses. 
5.  A preliminary layout of contemplated stormwater drainage, detention pond location, water supply and wastewater disposal systems, any public or private easements, and a note of any utility lines to be removed. A preliminary layout of vegetation and/or grades that will be left undisturbed. 
6.  Calculations to demonstrate compliance with minimum open space requirements of this section. 
7.  Schematic architectural design information that, if approved, will serve as a guideline for approval of future site plan submittals. The city may require elevations, perspectives, color drawings and material descriptions or samples. 
8.  If a multiphase planned unit development is proposed, identification of the areas included in each phase. For residential uses, the number, type, and density proposed by phase. 
9.  Utility master plan shall be required based on guidelines provided by the city Engineer. The utility master plan shall show connection points to existing utilities, and concepts for layout, size and phasing of utilities. 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584d. 
Section 12.10. - Standards for approval of preliminary PUD site plan. 
    Based upon the following standards, the Planning Commission may recommend denial, approval, or approval with conditions, and the city commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions the proposed planned unit development. 
A.  The planned unit development meets the qualification requirements. 
B.  A draft PUD agreement has been submitted and found to meet the standards herein. 
C.  In contrast to development under conventional zoning, the proposed PUD shall have a significant beneficial effect in terms of public health, safety and welfare, as described in the sections above. 
D.  The uses proposed will not adversely affect the public utility and circulation system, surrounding properties, or the environment. 
E.  The planned unit development is generally consistent with the goals, objectives and land use map of the city's master plan. 
F.  Be designed, constructed and maintained to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such a use will not change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed. 
G.  Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as streets, public transit, pedestrian ways, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer facilities. 
H.  Not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services. 
I.  Be developed in accordance with the objectives of the planned unit development district. 
J.  Judicious effort has been used to preserve significant natural and historical features, surface and underground water bodies and the integrity of the land. 
K.  Public water and sewer facilities are available or shall be provided for by the developer as part of the site development. 
L.  Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular circulation within and to the site is provided. Drives, streets and other elements shall be designed to discourage through traffic, while promoting safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. 
M.  A comprehensive pathway system shall be provided that links all components within the PUD and links the PUD with existing or planned public sidewalk or pathway systems. The pathway system may consist of sidewalks, paved pathways or natural trails, as deemed appropriate by the city. 
N.  Common open space shall be provided including natural areas, community greens, community buildings, plazas and recreation areas. The open space and all other elements shall be in an appropriate location, suitably related to each other, site and surrounding lands. The required open space shall be: centrally located and of sufficient size to be usable for recreation; along the road frontage of the development; located to preserve significant natural features; located to connect open spaces throughout the development; or provide a buffer from adjacent land uses. Connections with adjacent open space, public land or existing or planned pedestrian/bike paths may be required by the city. Grading and utility installation in the open space shall be minimal, with the intent to preserve existing significant topographic features where such resources exist. 
Required open space shall be exclusive of all building setbacks or building spacing required under conventional zoning. Perimeter setbacks (including any area that overlaps with building setback) may be counted towards required open space. At least 25 percent of required open space shall be exclusive of ponds, stormwater detention facilities and wetlands. 
O.  Any approved deviations from the applicable zoning regulations meeting the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5-04,  5, 5-2-2004) 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584d. 
Section 12.11. - Final PUD site plan submittal requirements. 
    The final submittal shall include 15 copies of each of the following items: 
A.  All materials required by chapter 14 site plan review. 
B.  A hydrologic impact assessment describing the existing ground and surface water resources including, but not limited to, a description of the water table, direction of groundwater flow, recharge and discharge areas, lake levels, surface drainage, floodplains, and water quality and the projected impact of the proposed development on such resources, in particular impacts associated with water supply development, wastewater disposal, and storm water management. 
C.  A final copy of the approved PUD agreement. 
D.  Any other additional information required by the city to demonstrate compliance with the approved preliminary PUD plan, with the zoning ordinance and other ordinances, and the city's master plan. 
State Law reference- Site plan, MCL 125.584d. 
Section 12.12. - Standards for approval of final PUD site plan. 
    Based upon the following standards, the Planning Commission may recommend denial, recommend approval, or recommend approval with conditions. The city commission may deny, approve or approve with conditions the proposed planned unit development. 
A.  The final PUD plan and associated documents shall be reviewed for consistency with the approved preliminary PUD plan, PUD agreement and associated documents and any conditions required by the city. 
B.  The final PUD PLAN and associated documents shall be reviewed in accordance with chapter 14 site plan review, city subdivision regulations, and any other applicable legal requirements. 
C.  The final PUD plan shall comply with applicable specific regulations outlined in the sections below. 
D.  The city may impose additional reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with the standards of this section, and ensure that public streets, services and facilities will be capable of accommodating increased demands created by the PUD. 
State Law reference- Site plan, MCL 125.584d. 
Section 12.13. - Administration. 
A.  Amendments and deviations from approved final PUD site plan. 
1.  Deviations. Deviations from the approved final PUD site plan may occur only when an applicant or property owner granted final PUD site plan approval notifies the zoning administrator of the proposed amendment to such approved site plan in writing, accompanied by a site plan illustrating the proposed change, and receives approval consistent with this section. The request shall be received prior to initiation of any construction in conflict with the approved final PUD site plan. 
2.  Procedure. Within 14 days of receipt of a request to amend the final PUD site plan, the zoning administrator shall determine whether the change is major, warranting review by the Planning Commission, or minor, allowing administrative approval, as outlined in section 13.05.D.8. 
B.  Schedule of construction. Final site plan approval of a PUD, PUD phase or a building within a PUD shall be effective for a period of three years. Further submittals under the PUD procedures shall be accepted for review upon a showing of substantial progress in development of previously approved phases, or upon a showing of good cause for not having made such progress. 
C.  Appeals and violations. 
1.  Appeals. The board of zoning appeals shall have the authority to hear and decide appeal requests by property owners for variances from the zoning ordinance. However, the board of zoning appeals shall not have the authority to change conditions or make interpretations to the PUD site plan or written agreement. 
2.  Violations. A violation of the PUD plan or agreement shall be considered a violation of this ordinance. Notwithstanding any other relief available to the city pursuant to this ordinance or the law, the city commission may revoke its approval of a PUD plan for a violation of the PUD plan or agreement. 
D.  Validity of existing PUDs. The site plans of planned unit developments previously approved by the Planning Commission and the city commission shall remain in effect provided substantial progress has been made in development of approved phases. 
CHAPTER 13. - APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES 

Section 13.01. - Purpose and application. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter describe the general application submittal procedures and review processes for zoning approvals required by this ordinance. Additional specific information regarding each of the zoning reviews may be found in the chapters dealing with those reviews. 
B.  Compliance with all applicable city, state, or federal licensing ordinances and laws applicable to any use approved through the provisions of this chapter and this ordinance is required. 
Section 13.02. - Impact studies. 
A.  The city may require a development impact assessment, or traffic impact assessment or study of the potential impact of any development encompassing a total of five acres or more for site plan review, special land use review, or rezoning. The assessments will be in conformance with the requirements of B and C, below and prepared by persons qualified by education and experience. 
B.  Development impact assessment. 
1.  A development impact assessment may be required to permit the city to determine the potential impact of the proposed development on: 
a.  Municipal services (fire, police, sewer, water, library, roads, solid waste disposal and parks), 
b.  Natural environment (soils, wildlife, vegetation, stormwater, air and water quality and natural water courses), and 
c.  Adjacent land uses (noise, property values and compatibility in bulk, height, design and open space). 
2.  The development impact assessment will contain information adequate to allow a determination as to the overall effect of the proposed development on the area affected by the proposed development and to the city as a whole. The zoning administrator shall, upon consultation with the staff review team, determine the level of detail and the elements required in the development impact assessment. The extent to which the development conforms with the city's master plan shall be considered in determining the necessity and elements of the development impact assessment as well as the level of required detail. 
3.  The planning commission or city commission, upon review of the submitted development impact assessment, may require additional information it deems necessary to adequately assess the overall effect of the development. 
C.  Traffic impact assessment, traffic impact study. 
1.  [Level of details.] The level of detail required for either a traffic impact assessment or study is based upon the expected amount of traffic to be generated by the proposed use, based on generally accepted traffic engineering sources such as the Michigan Handbook "Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies." 
2.  Traffic impact assessment. A traffic impact assessment shall be required for projects expected to generate either between 50-99 directional trips during peak hour traffic or 500-750 directional trips during a typical day. The assessment shall evaluate current and future inbound and outbound traffic operations at site access points and shall support and describe proposed access design and other mitigation measures that will positively affect traffic operations at these points. 
3.  Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study shall be required for projects expected to generate either 100 or more directional trips in the peak hour or over 750 trips on an average day. The impact study shall evaluate current, background and future traffic operations at site access points and major signalized or nonsignalized intersections in proximity to the site. The impact study must also describe and support proposed access design and other mitigation measures that will positively affect traffic operations at the site and nearby intersections. The impact study shall evaluate pedestrian access, circulation and safety. The traffic impact study must take into account the master plan in analyzing future traffic developments. 
Section 13.03. - Zoning ordinance amendments. 
A.  Initiation of amendments. 
1.  Either the city commission or the Planning Commission may, at any time, initiate amendments to the map or text of this zoning ordinance. 
2.  Any property owner or holder of a valid option to purchase (with written permission from the property owner) may request an amendment to this zoning ordinance. An application for a rezoning shall be submitted through the zoning administrator. The application shall consist of the following: 
a.  An application form, completed in full by the applicant. 
b.  Fifteen copies of a land plan portraying the following information: north arrow; scale (not more than 1?=100'); name/address of firm who prepared land plan; name/address of property owner; location sketch to scale; property size in acres; all lot and/or property lines with dimensions; location of existing structures within 100 feet of property boundaries; existing zoning of all abutting properties; location and size of any established floodplain areas, bodies of water, wetlands areas and other unbuildable areas; and contours, a maximum of five-foot intervals. 
c.  One letter sized reduction of the land plan. 
d.  Payment of a fee as established by the city commission. 
e.  Legal and common/popular property description in writing and in electronic form. 
B.  Public hearings. 
1.  All amendments to this ordinance, both with reference to the text or the zoning of the land as appears on the zoning map, shall be made in the manner provided in the Zoning Act. 
2.  The planning commission and city commission shall each cause notice of hearing on any proposed amendment changing the zoning classification of any parcel of any land to be served in the manner required by the Zoning Act. (Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006) 
C.  Guidelines for amendment of the official zoning map. In considering any proposed amendment to the official zoning map, the Planning Commission shall consider the following as a guide in making its findings, recommendations and decision: 
1.  Consistency with the goals, policies and future land use map of the master plan, including any subarea or corridor studies. If conditions have changed since the master plan was adopted, the consistency with recent development trends in the area; 
2.  Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological and other environmental features with the uses permitted in the proposed zoning district; 
3.  The applicant's ability to develop the property with at least one of the uses permitted under the current zoning; 
4.  The compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values; 
5.  Whether the city's infrastructure and services are sufficient to accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising the "health, safety and welfare" of the city; 
6.  Where a rezoning is reasonable given the above guidelines, a determination that the requested zoning district is more appropriate than another district or amending the list of permitted or special land uses within a district. 
D.  Resubmittal. No petition for rezoning which has been disapproved by the city commission shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of disapproval, unless the zoning administrator finds the existence of new and significant facts or conditions which might result in favorable action upon resubmittal. 
(Ord. No. 15-06,  4, 10-20-2006) 
State Law reference- Amendments, MCL 125.584. 
Section 13.04. - Special land uses. 
A.  Applications. An application for a special land use shall be submitted through the zoning administrator. The application shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission for review and shall consist of the following: 
1.  An application form, completed in full by the applicant, including a statement by the applicant describing the application's compliance with the applicable review standards of chapter 15 and a detailed description of the proposed use. 
2.  A completed site plan, in sufficient folded copies, as specified in chapter 14. The site plan review associated with a special land use request shall encompass the entire site on which the proposed use is to be located. 
3.  One letter sized reduction of the site plan. 
4.  Payment of a fee as established by the city commission, unless the special land use is to be located entirely within an existing building, in which case, no fee is required. 
B.  Joint submittal. If necessary, applications for rezonings and special land uses may be submitted jointly. The procedures, standards, and specifications for each shall be followed as specified in this chapter and other applicable chapters of this ordinance. 
C.  Wireless communication towers. The zoning administrator shall conduct special land use review and approval of wireless communication towers if it involves a site designated as a preferred tower site in the wireless communication plan of the master plan. The Planning Commission shall review all other wireless communication tower applications. 
D.  Offices in industrial. The planning commission shall conduct special land use and site plan review of all office buildings or office uses congregate within a building of 50,000 square feet or more. 
E.  Short-term open air business: Short-term open air businesses shall be considered a permitted accessory use in all nonresidential zone districts subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator consistent with Chapter 26, Article 5, of this Code of Ordinances. 
F.  Service of alcoholic beverages: An Administrative Review Team consisting of the police chief, the city Clerk, and the community development director, or their designees, shall conduct a Special Land Use and Site Plan Review public hearing of any establishment seeking a license for the sale or consumption of beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages on-premises. Notice of the public hearing shall be served in the manner required by the Zoning Act. The Administrative Review Team shall make recommendations to the city commission whether the proposed special land use and accompanying site plan meet the criteria of the city Codes and should be approved. The recommendations may include conditions on any recommended approval that would be incorporated into a development agreement between the applicant and the city. The city commission shall determine whether to deny, approve, or approve with conditions the special land use and site plan review. 
G.  Public hearing. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider special land use applications subject to their review. 
2.  A notice of public hearing shall be served in the manner required by the Zoning Act. 
3.  Failure to Notify a party or an address not listed in city records shall not jeopardize compliance with this section. 
H.  Special land use decisions. 
1.  Before approval of any special land use application, the general standards of section 15.02, in addition to those specific standards established for each use in section 15.03 shall be satisfied. 
2.  Additional conditions and safeguards may be stipulated as deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and as reasonably necessary to ensure that the intent and objectives of this ordinance will be observed. 
3.  Special land use/site plan reviews conducted by the Zoning Administrator must be preceded by a notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and sent or delivered to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all buildings within 300 feet. Should the applicant or an adjacent property owner or occupant request a public hearing within ten days of the date of the notice, staff shall schedule the public hearing consistent with section 13.04.F.2-4. 
4.  The breach of any condition, safeguard, or requirement shall be considered as a violation of the special land use approval. The Planning Commission, following notice to the property owner, shall have the authority to revoke any special land use if the applicant fails to comply with any of the applicable requirements in this chapter or any other applicable sections of this Ordinance. 
5.  Special land uses granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. If construction has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion by the end of this one-year period, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the expiration of approval for the special land use. 
6.  Special land uses granted and established pursuant to this chapter shall terminate with the approval and establishment of an intervening permitted or special land use on the same site. 
7.  A single one-year extension may be granted by the Planning Commission, if applied for in writing prior to the date of expiration of the special land use approval. If construction has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion by the end of this period, including any extensions, the special land use approval will expire. Expired special land uses must be resubmitted for Planning Commission approval. 
I.  Resubmittal. No petition for a special land use which has been disapproved by the Planning Commission shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of disapproval, unless the Zoning Administrator finds the existence of new and significant facts or conditions which might result in favorable action upon resubmittal. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  10(13.04), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 11-05,  7, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 6-06,  4, 4-30-2006; Ord. No. 15-06,  4, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 17-06,  2, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 3-14,  1, 2, 5-14-2014) 
State Law reference- Special land uses, MCL 125.584a. 
Section 13.05. - Site plan review. 
A.  Applications. 
1.  An application for site plan review shall be submitted through the zoning administrator on a special form for that purpose. 
2.  The application shall consist of the following: 
a.  A special form shall be completed in full by the applicant as well as a general overview of the proposed use. 
b.  Fifteen folded copies of a completed site plan as specified in chapter 14, including any additional or related information required by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as established by the city commission. 
B.  Staff review. 
1.  Except for those plans exempted in section 14.02.B., any site plan not reviewed by the planning commission or city commission is subject to review by the staff review team. The staff review team shall consist of the zoning administrator, fire chief, and city engineer, or their respective designees. The staff review team may consult with other city staff members if, in the discretion of the staff review team, such input would materially assist in the review of a proposed site plan. The zoning administrator shall serve as chair of the staff review team. 
2.  Site plans reviewed by the staff review team shall contain the information required by section 14.04. Three copies of all plans shall be submitted. 
3.  No final decision regarding a site plan shall be made until all members of the staff review team are afforded an opportunity to review and comment on the plan. The members of the staff review team shall submit, in writing, any and all conditions that would warrant approval of the site plan or alternatively reasons for denial of the site plan. The basis for conditions or reasons for denial shall be specified. By majority vote, the staff review team shall either approve, with or without conditions, or deny the site plan. In the case of a tie vote by the staff review team, the site plan shall be sent to the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting for final disposition. 
4.  Prior to a vote by the staff review team, the zoning administrator may elect to submit any site plan to the Planning Commission for its review, in accordance with the procedures of section 13.05.C., if the zoning administrator determines that the proposed site plan may have a significant effect on either the surrounding area or the city as a whole. 
5.  Any person aggrieved by the approval or denial of a site plan by the staff review team shall have the right to request the submission of the site plan to the Planning Commission for review. In such circumstances, the Planning Commission's review shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures contained in section 13.05.C. The Planning Commission shall affirm or reverse the decision of the staff review team, stating its findings and the reasons for its action. A written copy of the commission's findings, reasons and actions shall be provided to the applicant. 
C.  Planning Commission review. 
1.  The Zoning Administrator shall cause the application to be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall set a date for consideration of the site plan review at its regular meeting. 
2.  Following the establishment of the date a work session shall be held on the proposal before consideration at the next regular meeting. 
3.  When considering site plans pursuant to section 13.05.C. a notice of public hearing shall be served in the manner required by the Zoning Act for other public hearings. 
D.  Site plan review decisions. 
1.  The planning commission, city commission, staff review team and zoning administrator, as applicable, shall have the responsibility and authority to approve, disapprove, or approve subject to conditions a site plan submitted and reviewed in accordance with this ordinance. 
2.  The planning commission, city commission, staff review team and zoning administrator, as applicable, shall utilize the review standards of section 14.04 in reviewing all site plans. These standards are also intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant in the preparation of site plans. These standards shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements nor are they intended to discourage creativity, invention or innovation. When approved by the Planning Commission, at least two copies of the final approved site plan shall be signed and dated by the secretary of the Planning Commission. When a variance is also involved, these two copies shall also bear a dated signature of the chairman of the board of appeals. One of these two approved copies shall be kept on file and the other approved copy shall be returned to the petitioner or his designated representative. 
E.  Subdivisions. In those instances in which Act 288, Public Acts of 1967, as amended, (MCL 560.101 et seq.) the Land Division Act, is involved, the owner shall apply for and obtain site plan approval. Thereafter, the proprietor shall submit the preliminary and final plats to the proper officer in conformance with Act 288, and in accordance with all other applicable codes, acts and ordinances. The plats shall remain in conformance with the approved site plan. 
F.  Site condominium project review. In those instances where a parcel is to be developed under Act No. 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended (MCL 559.101 et seq.), the owner shall apply for and obtain site plan approval through the Kentwood Planning Commission, in accordance with all other applicable codes, acts, and ordinances. 
G.  Appeals of site plan review decisions. 
1.  Any interested person aggrieved by a site plan review decision of the Planning Commission may appeal that decision in writing to the city commission. The appeal shall be filed with the city Clerk within ten days after the date of the decision appealed. 
2.  The city commission shall fix and notify the appellant of a time and place for a public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. All interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard. Informal procedural and evidentiary rules shall govern the appeal. 
3.  After the hearing, the city commission shall affirm or reverse the action of Planning Commission, stating its finding and the reasons for its action and a written copy of the findings, reasons and actions shall be given to the appellant. The decision of the city commission shall be based on the record prepared before the Planning Commission. 
4.  An appeal under this section shall stay all administrative and enforcement action relative to the matter that is the subject of the appeal, absent a determination by the city commission that a stay would otherwise not be in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare. 
H.  Period of validity. 
1.  A site plan approval granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. 
2.  A single one year extension may be granted by the Planning Commission, if applied for in writing prior to the date of expiration of the site plan approval. If construction has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion by the end of this period, including any extensions, the site plan approval will expire. Expired site plans must be resubmitted for Planning Commission approval. 
3.  After the permitted approval time has elapsed, including any extensions as provided in this chapter, the variance, if not exercised and substantial construction has not commenced and proceeded in a meaningful manner, shall become null and void. 
I.  Changes in an approved site plan. 
1.  Major changes to the approved final site plan shall be applied for by the applicant to the zoning administrator and processed in the same manner as the original site plan review. Any major changes approved in the final site plan shall be recorded with the site plan and shall bear the signature of the Planning Commission secretary and the date of the approval. 
2.  Any change not considered a minor change, shall be considered a major change. The zoning administrator may approve minor changes. The approved changes shall be noted on the site plan and bear the signature of the zoning administrator. Minor changes shall include the following: 
a.  Increase in the building size, up to 20 percent in total floor area. 
b.  Movement of buildings or other structures by no more than 20 feet. 
c.  Replacement of plant material specified in the landscape plan with comparable materials of an equal or comparable size. 
d.  Changes in floor plans that do not alter the character of the use or require an increase in parking requirements. 
e.  Changes required or requested by the city, or other county, state, or federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or regulations. 
3.  No changes are to be considered as a waiver of conditions or covenants, and all rights to enforce the conditions or covenants against any changes permitted by this ordinance are expressly reserved. 
(Ord. No. 15-06,  4, 10-20-2006) 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584d. 
Section 13.06. - Planned unit development. 
A.  Preapplication conference. Before submitting an application for approval of a PUD rezoning, or approval of a preliminary or final site plan, the applicant shall confer in a joint meeting with the zoning administrator, city planner and city engineer to obtain information and guidance regarding land development regulations, the city's master plan and the application process. At the preapplication conference, the applicant may submit a concept plan and written statement of the benefits of the proposed PUD. No formal action shall be taken at the preapplication conference and any discussion shall not be determined as a final decision on the part of the city or the applicant. The concept plan shall contain at a minimum: 
1.  A sketch plan of the proposed PUD; 
2.  A legal description of the property; 
3.  The total number of acres in the project; 
4.  A statement of the approximate number of any residential units; 
5.  The approximate number of acres to be occupied by each type of use; 
6.  The general deviations from the ordinance regulation to be sought; 
7.  The numbers of acres and percentage of land to be preserved as open or recreational space; and 
8.  The natural or other features to be preserved. 
B.  City initiated PUD rezoning. 
1.  For a city initiated PUD rezoning, a PUD concept plan as outlined in section 13.06.A. showing the entire PUD area must be submitted to the Planning Commission for review. The concept plan must include a narrative describing the concept as it relates to the master plan and the intent and purpose of the PUD sought. 
2.  Planning Commission review: 
a.  The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall review the PUD concept plan and rezoning application to determine its conformance with the master plan and the intent and purpose and qualifying conditions for a planned unit development, as described in section 12.01 and section 12.02 and the requirements of chapter 12 for the type of PUD under consideration. 
c.  Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the city commission approval, denial, or approval with conditions of the PUD concept plan and PUD rezoning. 
3.  After receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the city commission shall review the PUD concept plan and rezoning application, and the recommendation of the Planning Commission and shall make its finding as to denial, final approval or approval with conditions. Approval by the city commission will constitute approval of the rezoning to the appropriate PUD district. 
C.  PUD rezoning and preliminary PUD plan review. 
1.  For approval of a PUD rezoning not initiated by the city, or if the property has previously been rezoned to PUD, an application for a PUD preliminary plan showing the entire PUD area may be submitted to the Planning Commission for review. 
2.  The preliminary PUD plan shall include all information outlined in section 12.09. 
3.  Planning commission review: 
a.  The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary PUD plan (which includes associated materials including the PUD agreement) and rezoning application to determine its conformance with the city's master plan and the intent and purpose and qualifying conditions for a planned unit development, as described in section 12.01 and section 12.02, the review standards of section 12.10, and the requirements of chapter 12 for the type of PUD under consideration. 
c.  Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the city commission approval, denial, or approval with conditions of the preliminary plan and PUD rezoning. 
4.  After receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the city commission shall review the preliminary plan and rezoning application, and the recommendation of the Planning Commission and shall make its finding as to denial, final approval or approval with conditions. Approval by the city commission will constitute approval of the rezoning to the appropriate PUD district. 
D.  Final PUD plan review. 
1.  A final PUD plan shall be submitted within 12 months of approval of a preliminary PUD plan by the Planning Commission. Failure to submit the final PUD plan within this period will cause the preliminary PUD plan approval to lapse. 
2.  If the PUD is to be built in phases, a final PUD plan shall be required before the approval of each phase. 
3.  A final PUD plan shall consist of the material outlined in section 12.11. 
4.  The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of the zoning act. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the city commission approval, denial, or approval with conditions of the final PUD plan. The recommendation of the Planning Commission of the final PUD plan, including any conditions or agreements attached thereto, shall be forwarded as an amendment to the PUD ordinance, approved as part of the PUD rezoning. This determination shall be based on the standards for approval contained in section 12.12. 
E.  City commission review of major changes. 
1.  After receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the city commission shall review major changes to the final PUD plan and shall make its finding as to denial, final approval or approval with conditions of the major change to the final PUD plan. 
2.  The approval of the major change to the final PUD plan, including any conditions, agreements, or other conditions attached thereto, shall constitute an amendment to the PUD ordinance, approved as part of the PUD rezoning. 
3.  Following the approval of the city commission of the amendment to the PUD rezoning, a completed final site plan incorporating the conditions shall be presented to the zoning administrator. No building permit shall be issued until the zoning administrator has received the modified final site plan. 
F.  Other requirements. After approval of the final PUD plan, the following conditions shall apply where applicable. 
1.  Where the provisions of Act 288, Michigan Public Acts of 1967, as amended, the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), shall apply, the applicant shall thereafter submit the information and plans as may be required by Act 288 (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and all other local procedures or regulations pertaining to platting approval. 
2.  The city commission shall have legal documents prepared which involve the city and are required as a result of the conditions contained in the final PUD plan approval. All documents shall be recorded in the office of the Kent County Register of Deeds. 
3.  The zoning administrator shall inspect the development at each stage to ensure compliance with the final PUD plan and the approved schedule of improvements. 
4.  Conditions to the approved final PUD plan shall be treated in accordance with the requirements of section 12.13A. 
a.  Any major changes approved in the final PUD plan approved by the city commission shall be recorded with the site plan and shall bear the signature of the city Clerk and the date of the approval. 
b.  No changes are to be considered as a waiver of conditions or covenants, and all rights to enforce the conditions or covenants against any changes permitted by this ordinance are expressly reserved. 
G.  Resubmittal. No petition for a PUD rezoning which has been disapproved by the city commission shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of disapproval, unless the zoning administrator finds existence of new and significant facts or conditions which might result in favorable action upon resubmittal. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  10(13.06), 4-1-2003) 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.584b. 
Section 13.07. - Zoning board of appeals. 
A.  Applications. 
1.  An application for any review by the zoning board of appeals shall be submitted through the zoning administrator. The application shall consist of the following: 
a.  An application form completed in full by the applicant, including a statement by the applicant describing the application's compliance with the applicable review standards for the decision required by the zoning board of appeals. 
b.  Ten copies of an accurate, scaled site plan with enough information to clearly indicate the nature of the issue being considered. The zoning administrator shall determine the completeness of the plans. 
c.  Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as established by the city commission. 
2.  The application together with all required data shall be transmitted to the zoning board of appeals. 
B.  Public hearing. 
1.  When an application or appeal has been filed in proper form and with the required data, the board shall place or cause the application or appeal upon the calendar for hearing and cause notices stating the time, place and object of the hearing to be served. 
2.  These notices shall be served in the manner required by the Zoning Act. Any party so notified may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
3.  Upon the day for hearing any application or appeal, the board may adjourn the hearing in order to permit the obtaining of additional information, or to cause further notice as it deems proper to be served upon other property owners as it decides may be interested in the application or appeal. In the case of an adjourned hearing, persons previously notified and persons already heard need not be notified of the time of resumption of the hearing unless the board so decides. 
C.  Zoning Board of Appeals' decisions. 
1.  Nonuse variances. A nonuse variance may be allowed by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where there is evidence of practical difficulty in the official record of the hearing and that all of the review standards of section 21.04B. are met. 
2.  Appeals. 
a.  Any person or any governmental department affected or aggrieved by any ruling of the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or other administrative official administering any portion of this ordinance may appeal the ruling. 
b.  Appeals, accompanied by a fee set by the city commission, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall transmit the same, together with all plans, specifications and other papers pertaining to the appeal to the zoning board of appeals. 
c.  Appeals brought by any city governmental departments or personnel, acting in his official capacity shall not require payment of this fee. 
d.  An appeal to the board shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the office or body from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of Appeals after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of fact stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
e.  Appeals from other city ordinances will be processed according to their specified appeals procedures. 
3.  In authorizing a variance or deciding an appeal, the board may, in addition to the specific conditions of approval called for in this ordinance, attach other conditions regarding the location, use, character, landscaping, site improvements or treatment reasonably necessary to insure compliance with the required standards of review, further the intent and spirit of this ordinance, or protect the public interest. 
4.  The Board shall decide all applications and appeals within 30 days after the final hearing thereon, unless the applicant and the board agree to an extension. A copy of the board's decision shall be transmitted to the applicant or appellant, and to the Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector. The decision shall be binding upon these officials. 
5.  The Building Inspector shall incorporate the terms and conditions of the decision in the issuance of any permit required by the city to the applicant or appellant. 
6.  Period of validity. 
a.  If the board grants a variance to an appellant, the variance shall be exercised within one year from the date of the approval, unless more time is specifically granted by the board. 
b.  A single one-year extension may be granted by the board, applied for in writing prior to the date of expiration of approval of the variance. 
c.  After the permitted approval time has elapsed, including any extensions as provided in this chapter, the variance, if not exercised and substantial construction has not commenced and proceeded in a meaningful manner, shall become null and void. 
d.  Once executed the approval, with any associated conditions, runs with the land. 
D.  Decisions final. The decision of the board of appeals shall be final, however, any person having an interest affected by any decision shall have the right of appeal to the circuit court as provided by law. 
E.  Resubmittal. No application which has been disapproved by the zoning board of appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of disapproval, unless the zoning administrator finds the existence of new and significant facts or conditions which might result in favorable action upon resubmittal. 
(Ord. No. 15-06,  4, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 3-12,  7, 6-24-2012) 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeals, MCL 125.585, 125.585a. 
Section 13.08. - Art display venue. 
A.  Review authority. Upon receipt of art display venue proposals, the Community Development Director will submit applications to the Arts Commission (AC). 
1.  Arts Commission (AC) which shall be composed of five members, who shall be appointed and serve at the pleasure of the city commission. The AC shall be composed of: 
a.  The Community Development Director or designee; 
b.  A current Commissioner of the city commission; and 
c.  Three private citizens who live and/or work in the city. 
2.  Either as part of the AC review or in separate communications, any city staff or other consultant that the Community Development Director deems is advisable may be asked to consult with the AC with respect to a specific art display venue proposal. 
B.  Review standards for art display venues. For proposals to utilize an art display venue viewable from a public right-of-way, the AC and any consultants shall consider the following in its review and determination: 
1.  The suitability of the proposed art display venue based on the following: 
a.  Compatibility with the character and architectural style of the building and building faade. For example, an art display venue may not be appropriate on: 
i.  Building faades with a substantial number of windows. 
ii.  Ornate building faades. 
iii.  Faades made of shingles, shakes or other materials that create a non-stable surface. Art display venues on brick faades may be permitted. 
b.  Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area, including without limitation consideration of whether an art display has historically existed or occurred in the area. 
c.  Effect on safety. The art display venue shall not create optical illusions or visual distortions that would represent a distraction for motorists or obstruct clear vision for motorists, pedestrians and/or non-motorized users. 
d.  Does not include imagery or language that describes or depicts, in a manner patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards, sexually or excretory activities or organs (which include the female breast) or similar matters. 
e.  Complies with any permitted conditions imposed as part of site plan approval by the staff review team. 
2.  As a condition of the permit, the property owner shall agree to coat art associated with the art display venue with protective anti-graffiti coating, and to reapply such coating at least every five years. 
3.  Details about maintenance, repainting or replacing the art associated with the art display venue as weather conditions and aging affect its appearance. 
4.  As a condition of the permit, the property owner shall agree in writing to remove the art display venue if it is not maintained so as to result in visual or structural deterioration or is otherwise in a state of disrepair. 
C.  Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the AC may appeal to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2-18,  3, 1-16-2018) 
Editor's note- Per Ord. No. 2-18,  3, adopted Jan. 16, 2018, the former  13.08, review standards, has been renumbered as  13.09 to facilitate inclusion of a new  13.08 as laid out herein. 
Section 13.09. - Review standards. 
    In all cases where the city commission, Zoning Administrator, staff review team, Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals is required to make a decision under this ordinance, the following standards shall be relied upon by such body, in addition any standards which may be specifically required for a particular approval type: 
A.  Whether or not the request reasonably preserves the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
B.  Whether or not the request is generally consistent with the master plan and provisions of this ordinance that are designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers. 
C.  Whether or not the request will unduly interfere with the provision of adequate light and air, cause an overcrowding of land, or cause an undue concentration of population. 
D.  Whether or not the request will unduly interfere with or adversely affect traffic patterns and streets, water supply, wastewater collection and disposal systems, park and recreational facilities and other public services. 
E.  Whether or not the request may have a substantial and permanent adverse effect on neighboring property. 
F.  Whether or not the request may have a tendency to create any type of blight within the immediate area. 
G.  Whether or not the request is generally aesthetically compatible with its surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 2-18,  3, 1-16-2018) 
State Law reference- Discretionary decisions, MCL 125.584c. 
Editor's note- See editor's note to  13.08. 
CHAPTER 14. - SITE PLAN APPLICATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584d. 

Section 14.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The required site plan information and review criteria contained in this chapter are intended to provide a consistent and uniform method by which to review proposed development plans. Requiring consistent information will ensure that each plan is in full compliance with standards contained in this ordinance, other applicable local ordinances, standard engineering practices, and county, state and federal rules and laws, as applicable. The site plan review criteria set forth in this chapter are intended to coincide with and enhance the requirements of this ordinance in order to: 
A.  Achieve efficient use of the land; 
B.  Ensure high quality site design; 
C.  Promote safe and efficient motorized and non-motorized circulation; 
D.  Protect natural resources; 
E.  Minimize adverse impacts on adjoining or nearby properties; and 
F.  Ensure proper redevelopment and improvements to existing sites. 
Section 14.02. - Uses subject to site plan review. 
A.  A site plan shall be furnished in the following circumstances for review and approval by the Planning Commission, staff review team or city Commission, as applicable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and chapter 13: 
1.  Permitted uses in R-3, R-4 and R-5 
2.  Special land uses in any zoning district 
3.  Condominium or site condominium projects 
4.  Planned unit developments 
5.  Platted subdivisions 
6.  Municipal and public service activities 
7.  Manufactured housing communities 
8.  Single and two family dwellings 
B.  The following uses and structures shall be subject to approval by the zoning administrator. The review shall ensure that the proposed uses and structures conform to the applicable setbacks, yards, parking and other specific zoning ordinance requirements: 
1.  Temporary buildings and uses 
2.  Accessory uses or structures 
3.  Individual manufactured home sites. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  11(14.02), 4-1-2003) 
Section 14.03. - Process. 
    When a site plan review is required, as stipulated in section 14.02 above, the applicant shall follow the site plan review process as described in chapter 13 zoning approval application and review procedures. 
Section 14.04. - Site plan information requirements. 
    The following information shall be included with and as part of the site plan submitted for review. Each category of site plan items shall be included on a separate sheet. The Planning Commission shall not review incomplete applications. Where circumstances warrant the zoning administrator or Planning Commission has the discretion to eliminate or add to any of the following items as required information or may allow the information to be organized differently than as listed below: 
Required Site Plan Data Prelim 
Site Plan Final 
Plan A. All Sheets All sheets shall be drawn to an engineer's scale of not less than one inch = 50 feet for a site less than three acres, or one inch = 100 feet for a site of three acres or more; sheet size should be at least 24  36 inches; for large developments shown in sections on multiple sheets, an overall composite sheet shall be included.   Title block with sheet number/title; name, address and telephone number of the applicant and firm or individual who prepared the plans; and date(s) of submission and any revisions (month, day, year)   Scale and northpoint   Identification and seal of architect, engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared drawings   B. Project and Site Data Written project description, including proposed use, building(s) and site improvements   Location map with north-point, showing surrounding land, and streets within a quarter mile   Legal and common description of property   Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels   Proximity to major thoroughfares   Net acreage (minus rights-of-way) and total acreage   C. Site Analysis Survey of existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site   Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and streams, and wetlands with elevations   Surface drainage flows including high points, low points and swales   All existing easements   Existing roadways and driveways within 100 feet of the site   Existing sidewalks and nonmotorized pathways   D. Site Plan Details Proposed lot lines, lot dimensions, property lines and setback dimensions   Building, structure, parking and driveway improvements   Proposed easements   Location of exterior lighting (site and building) in accordance with chapter 20  Location of trash receptacle(s) and transformer pad(s) and method of screening  E. Access and Circulation Dimensions, curve radii and centerlines of existing and proposed access points, roads and road rights-of-way or access easements   Cross section details of proposed roads, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks and nonmotorized paths illustrating materials and thickness  Dimensions of acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes  Dimensions of parking spaces, islands, circulation aisles and loading zones   Calculations for required number of parking and loading spaces   Designation of fire lanes  Traffic regulatory signs and pavement markings  Location of existing and proposed sidewalks/pathways within the site or right-of-way  Traffic impact study, where required   F. Building and Structure Details Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed buildings or structures   Building floor area by use (e.g., office, retail, warehouse) and total floor area   Location, size, height, and lighting of all proposed site and wall signs  Location and type of obscuring wall(s) or berm(s) where required   Location, type, size, height and material of construction for all obscuring wall(s) or berm(s) with cross sections, where required  Building facade elevations for all sides, drawn at an appropriate scale  Description of exterior building materials and colors (samples may be required)  G. Drainage, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Location and size of existing and proposed storm sewers; and retention and detention ponds   Stormwater retention and detention ponds, including grading, side slopes, depth, high water elevation, volume and outfalls  Stormwater drainage and retention/detention calculations  Indication of site grading, drainage patterns and stormwater management measures  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures  Existing and proposed contours   H. Utilities Location of sanitary sewers and septic systems, existing and proposed   Location and size of existing and proposed water mains, well sites, water service and fire hydrants   I. Additional Information Required for Residential Developments The number and location of each type of residential unit (one bedroom units, two bedroom units, etc.)   Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling units per acre)   Garage and/or carport locations and details, if proposed   Location, dimensions and elevations of common building(s) (e.g., recreation, laundry, etc.), if applicable  Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of fence, if applicable  Location and size of recreation and open space areas   Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for recreation area   For condominium projects, master deed and bylaws  J. Landscape plan (See chapter 19) Description of methods to preserve existing plant materials  The location of existing and proposed landscaped areas   Location and type of all proposed shrubs, trees, and other live plant material   Planting list for proposed landscape materials with caliper size or height of material, method of installation, botanical and common names, and quantity  Table demonstrating compliance with all landscaping calculation requirements that lists required and proposed amount of plantings  Proposed dates of plant installation  K. Lighting Plan (See chapter 20) Location of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and building elevations   Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in footcandles)  Specifications, graphic depiction, and details for the type of fixture being proposed including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of shielding  Use of the fixture proposed    
(Ord. No. 7-03,  11(14.04), 4-1-2003) 
Section 14.05. - Site plan review standards. 
    Site plan approval shall be granted only if the site plan meets all applicable standards set forth by law, in this ordinance and the general criteria outlined below: 
A.  Adequacy of information. The site plan shall include all required information in sufficiently complete and understandable form to provide an accurate description of the proposed use(s) and structure(s). All sheets must be consistent. 
B.  Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and type of lot, the character of adjoining property, and the type and size of buildings. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal, safe, secure and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted under this ordinance. The site shall be designed to conform to all provisions of this ordinance. Redevelopment of existing sites shall be brought into conformance with all site improvement provisions of this ordinance related to the of redevelopment, as determined by the Planning Commission. 
C.  Buildings. Buildings and structures shall meet or exceed setback standards, height and other dimensional standards, and be placed to preserve environmentally sensitive areas. Redevelopment of existing structures shall meet or exceed all standards for which a variance has not been obtained. 
D.  Architecture. With the exception of single and two family dwellings, all proposed development subject to site plan approval shall comply with the following architectural guidelines: 
1.  The applicant shall use quality architecture to ensure that buildings are compatible with surrounding uses, protect the investment of adjacent landowners, blend harmoniously into the streetscape, and maintain a positive image for the city. 
2.  Building and sign materials and colors shall relate well and be harmonious with the surrounding area. Subtle colors should be used for building and roofing material. 
3.  Buildings shall possess architectural variety, but enhance the overall cohesive community character. The scale and proportion of existing structures in the area should be considered. Roof shape and materials shall be architecturally compatible with adjacent buildings and enhance the predominant streetscape. 
4.  Any side of a building facing a public or private road shall be covered with, or constructed of, at least 50 percent of the following materials: 
a.  Brick 
b.  Decorative concrete block 
c.  Cut stone 
d.  Windows 
Other materials approved as part of the site plan. 
5.  Architectural features of the buildings shall include details and ornaments such as archways, colonnades, cornices, peaked roof lines or towers. 
6.  Building walls over 100 feet in length shall be broken up with varying building lines, windows, architectural accents and trees. Building entrances shall utilize windows, canopies and awnings; provide unity of scale, texture, and color; and provide a sense of place. Unless immediately adjacent to a residential zoning district or premises used residentially, the sides of industrial warehouse or manufacturing buildings that do not face a public or private street shall be exempted from this requirement. 
E.  Preservation of natural systems. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by minimizing tree and soil removal, alteration to the natural drainage courses, and the amount of cutting, filling and grading. Insofar as practical, existing site natural features and topography shall be incorporated into the proposed site design. 
F.  Privacy. The site design shall provide reasonable visual and sound privacy for dwelling units located therein and adjacent thereto. Fences, walks, barriers, buffers and plantings shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants. 
G.  Emergency vehicle access. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be arranged so as to permit practicable emergency vehicle access consistent with other city ordinances. 
H.  Ingress and egress. Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the site shall be provided. Drives, streets, parking and other elements shall be designed to discourage through traffic, while promoting safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. Access to the site shall be designed to minimize conflicts with traffic on adjacent streets. The number, design, and location of access driveways and other provisions for vehicular circulation shall comply with current city standards. Shared curb cuts and service drives shall be utilized as necessary to reduce traffic conflicts and improve the functionality of the site. 
I.  Nonmotorized circulation. The site plan shall provide a nonmotorized circulation system that is insulated as completely as is reasonably possible from the vehicular circulation system for safety. The design shall also address the security of the nonmotorized route. 
J.  Vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation layout. The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect the safety and pattern of existing or planned streets, existing or planned public transit routes, and pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. The width of streets and drives shall be appropriate for the volume of traffic they will carry, on-street parking, where appropriate and the desired character of the streetscape and neighborhood. 
K.  Drainage. Stormwater management system and facilities shall preserve the natural drainage characteristics and enhance the aesthetics of the site to the maximum extent possible. 
L.  Soil erosion. The proposed development shall include measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation. 
M.  Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be designed subject to the requirements of chapter 20 so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and so that it does not impede the vision of drivers on public streets. 
N.  Public services. The scale and design of the proposed development shall facilitate the adequate provision of services currently furnished by or that may be required of the city or other public agency including, but not limited to, fire and police protection, public transportation, stormwater management, sanitary sewage removal and treatment, traffic control and administrative services. 
O.  Traffic impact. The expected volume of traffic to be generated by the proposed use shall not adversely impact existing roads, circulation patterns on the roads, or access to the site. 
P.  Hazardous materials. Sites which include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater or nearby surface water bodies. The sites shall be designed to meet all applicable state and federal regulations. 
Q.  Master plan. Sites shall be designed in a manner which is consistent with the city master plan and any applicable subarea or corridor plans. 
R.  Landscaping. Site landscaping shall be designed subject to the requirements in chapter 19. 
(Ord. No. 11-08,  9, 8-29-2008) 
State Law reference- Discretional decisions, MCL 125.584c. 
CHAPTER 15. - APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL LAND USES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Special land uses, MCL 125.584a; discretionary decisions, MCL 125.584c. 

Section 15.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    This chapter provides a set of standards for special uses of land or structures that, because of their unique characteristics, require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole. The regulations and standards, herein, are designed to allow, on one hand, practical latitude for the investor or developer, but at the same time maintain adequate provision for the protection of the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the community. These standards are in addition to the standard regulations of the zone districts within which the use is proposed. 
Section 15.02. - Special land use general approval standards. 
    The procedure for the review and approval of a special land use is outlined in chapter 13, application and review procedures. Prior to approving a special land use application, the following standards shall be satisfied for the use at the proposed location, in addition to specific standards for individual special land uses listed in section 15.03 below. The proposed special land use and its location shall: 
A.  Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance, with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that a use will not change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed. 
B.  Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities or schools. 
C.  Not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services. 
D.  Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, and equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, electrical or electromagnetic interference or odors. 
E.  Be compatible and in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the master plan and promote the intent and purpose of the zoning district in which it is proposed to locate. 
F.  Be subject to stipulations by the Planning Commission of additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and for insuring that the intent and objectives of this ordinance will be observed. The breach of any condition, safeguard, or requirement shall automatically invalidate the granting of the special land use. 
G.  Comply with all applicable licensing ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  12(15.02), 4-1-2003) 
Section 15.03. - Special land use specific approval standards. 
    The special land use general standards of section 15.02 are basic to all uses authorized by special land use approval. Except as noted below the following sections identify specific requirements that shall be complied with by individual special land uses, in addition to the general standards of section 15.02. The special land uses with specific site and/or use standards described on the following page are as follows: 
A.  Adult care: adult foster care small group home.* 
B.  Adult care: adult day care.* 
C.  Animal hospitals. 
D.  Auto related: vehicle fuel stations. 
E.  Auto related: vehicle repair establishments.* 
F.  Auto related: vehicle wash establishments. 
G.  Auto related: vehicle rental establishments. 
H.  Auto related: fuel depot. 
I.  Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles. 
J.  Child care: foster family group home.* 
K.  Reserved. 
L.  Child care: child care center.* 
M.  Child care: child caring institution. 
N.  Places of religious worship. 
O.  Hotels and motels.* 
P.  Hospitals, convalescent homes, nursing homes, and assisted living group facilities. 
Q.  Housing for the elderly. 
R.  Kennels. 
S.  Funeral homes and crematoria. 
T.  Open air businesses. 
U.  Wireless communication towers. 
V.  Recreation: amusement parks. 
W.  Recreation: golf courses, country clubs. 
X.  Recreation: golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses. 
Y.  Recreation: recreation facility, indoor. 
Z.  Recreation: recreation facility, outdoor. 
AA.  Recycling stations.* 
BB.  Restaurants or other establishments with drive-in or drive-through facilities.* 
CC.  Industrial selling retail. 
DD.  Horse riding stables. 
EE.  Zero lot line, single-family detached dwellings. 
FF.  Commercial enterprise producing merchandise on premises. 
GG.  Office in industrial. 
HH.  Indoor vehicle sales in industrial. 
II.  Service of alcoholic beverages. 
*In the Form Based Code zone district special land use evaluation will be based only upon the general special land use standards set forth in section 15.02. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  12(15.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 12-08,  1, 9-26-2008; Ord. No. 1-11,  3, 2-11-2011; Ord. No. 3-12,  8, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 3-13,  4, 3-13-2013; Orrd. No. 3-14,  3, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 6-14,  2, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 10-17,  8, 9-19-2017) 
Section 15.04. - Site design standards. 
    The special land use general standards of section 15.03 are basic to all uses authorized by special land use approval. The following subparagraphs identify specific requirements that shall be complied with by individual special land uses in addition to the general standards of section 15.02. 
A.  Adult care; adult foster care small group home. 
1.  The use shall be registered with the city and shall continually have on file with the city documentation of a valid license as required by the state. 
2.  The applicant shall submit documentation of compliance with state building and fire codes. 
3.  Nonresidential parking setback and screening provisions shall apply. 
4.  The building shall have an appearance that is nonintrusive and consistent in color, materials, roofline and architecture with the district and neighborhood in which it is located. 
B.  Adult care; adult day care. 
1.  The use shall be registered with the city. 
2.  Nonresidential parking setback and screening provisions shall apply. 
3.  The building shall have an appearance that is nonintrusive and consistent in color, materials, roofline and architecture with the residential district and neighborhood in which it is located, as determined by the Planning Commission. 
4.  An on-site drive shall be provided for drop offs/loading. This drive shall be located to allow maneuvers without creating a hazard to traffic flow on the public street. 
5.  The lot shall be located so that at least one side abuts an arterial or collector street and all access shall be from an arterial or collector street. 
6.  The facility may operate a maximum of 16 hours per day. 
C.  Animal hospitals. 
1.  All principal use activities shall be conducted within a totally enclosed main building. 
D.  Auto related. Vehicle fuel stations. 
1.  A vehicle fuel station building and its accessory uses and buildings shall be located not less than 50 feet from any right-of-way line or from any side or rear lot line abutting a residential district. This setback requirement shall not apply to accessory parking. 
2.  Where adjoining a residential use or residential district, buffer zone "B" is required (see chapter 19, landscaping). In addition, the Planning Commission may require a solid wall or solid fence along the lot line having a maximum height of six feet. 
3.  The minimum frontage shall be 150 feet and the minimum lot area one acre. 
4.  Accessory auto related facilities located on the premises such as wash facilities, vehicle rental and vehicle repair are allowed; however must obtain separate special land use permits as provided for in this chapter. 
5.  The lot shall be located so that at least one side abuts an arterial street. 
6.  The site shall be limited to no more than one driveway for each street on which it has frontage. 
7.  All storage of material, merchandise and equipment shall be within the building. 
8.  Gasoline or other flammable mixtures shall not be used to wash down the premises. 
9.  In the event that a vehicle fuel station has been abandoned or not used as a vehicle fuel station for a period of more than one year, any application to operate the premises as a vehicle fuel station shall be considered as an application for a new vehicle fuel station. 
10.  The applicant shall comply with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) requirements. 
E.  Auto related. Vehicle repair establishments. 
1.  A vehicle repair establishment building and its accessory uses and buildings shall be located not less than 50 feet from any right-of-way line or from any side or rear lot line abutting a residential district. This setback requirement shall not apply to accessory parking. 
2.  Where adjoining a residential use or residential district, buffer zone "B" (see chapter 19, landscaping) is required. In addition the Planning Commission may require a solid wall or solid fence along the lot line having a maximum height of six feet. 
3.  The minimum frontage shall be 100 feet and the minimum lot area one-half acre. 
4.  Accessory auto related facilities located on the premises such as wash facilities, vehicle rental and vehicle repair are allowed; however, must obtain separate special land use permits as provided for in this chapter. 
5.  The lot shall be located so that at least one side abuts an arterial street. 
6.  The site shall be limited to no more than one driveway for each street on which it has frontage. 
7.  Overhead doors shall not face any roadway, except as approved by the Planning Commission for any of the following circumstances: 
a.  For through garages where doors are provided on the front and rear of the building; or 
b.  Garages located on corner or through lots; or 
c.  Where it is determined that a rear garage door would have a negative impact on an abutting residential district. 
7.  Accessory buildings shall not be permitted. 
8.  All repair work shall be done within the building. 
9.  All outdoor storage of vehicles, material, merchandise, equipment and other material incidental to the operation shall be enclosed by a six-foot high solid wall or solid fence meeting the minimum design requirements of chapter 19. 
10.  Outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be properly graded and drained to dispose of stormwater. 
11.  Outdoor storage areas are not permitted in the front yard of the site and shall meet the side and rear yard setback requirements. 
12.  No operator shall permit outdoor storage of automobiles, trucks or trailers within the parking lot. It is presumed that vehicles on the site for a period in excess of 72 hours would represent a violation of this section. 
13.  Gasoline or other flammable mixtures shall not be used to wash down the premises. 
14.  The applicant shall comply with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) requirements. 
F.  Auto related; vehicle wash establishments. 
1.  Additional auto related facilities located on the premises such as vehicle fuel and fuel stations are allowed, however they must obtain separate special land use permits as provided for in this chapter. 
2.  All washing activities must be within a building. 
3.  Vacuuming activities, if outdoors, shall be set back at least 100 feet from any lot line adjoining a residential use or district. 
4.  The vehicular exit from the building shall be at least 75 feet distant from the driveway egress. 
5.  No vehicle wash establishment operator shall permit patrons to extend lines of vehicles off of the premises. 
6.  Wastewater shall be filtered or otherwise cleansed so as to minimize discharge of soap, wax and solid matter into the public sewer. 
7.  The site shall be limited to no more than one driveway for each street on which it has frontage. 
8.  Each wash bay shall be provided ample space for required stacking spaces that is not located within the public or private right-of-way and that does not conflict with vehicle maneuvering areas and does not conflict with other activities on the site such as gasoline pumps or vacuums. 
9.  A by-pass lane around the building is required for automated drive-through wash facilities. 
10.  Overhead doors shall not face any roadway, except as approved by the Planning Commission for any of the following circumstances: 
a.  For through garages where doors are provided on the front and rear of the building; or 
b.  Garages located on corner or through lots; or 
c.  Where it is determined that a rear garage door would have a negative impact on an abutting residential district. 
11.  A vehicle wash establishment building and its accessory uses and buildings shall be located not less than 100 feet from any right-of-way line or from any side or rear lot line abutting a residential district. 
12.  No permitted activity shall emit noise that is readily discernible to the average person in any adjacent residential zone district providing that air handling equipment in proper working condition deemed to comply with this provision is located on a roof with intervening noise reduction baffles. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to relieve the property owner or operator of the need to comply with all noise regulations of the city. 
G.  Auto related. Vehicle rental establishments. 
1.  The lot area used for parking display or storage shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. 
2.  The area dedicated for parking and storage of vehicles shall be limited to a maximum of 50 vehicles at any given time. 
3.  Accessory buildings and uses will not be permitted, including car washes, repair and maintenance facilities or other servicing of vehicles or car sales. 
H.  Auto related; fuel depot. 
1.  Automated dispense system with quantity restrictions. 
2.  Limited to privately owned commercial/industrial fleet sales. 
3.  Product sales restricted to only petroleum fuels and motor oils. 
4.  No washing, maintenance or service facilities. 
5.  On-site containment system around the fueling area. 
6.  Overfill and wash down procedures approved by the state fire marshal. 
7.  The applicant shall comply with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) requirements. 
I.  Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles. 
1.  In the industrial zone districts recreational vehicle outdoor storage is only allowed as an accessory use to a mini storage facility. 
2.  The use shall be limited to the rear yard of the property and not to exceed 25 percent of the area of the lot. 
3.  The surface of the outside storage area for recreational vehicles must be paved with an asphalt, concrete or slag binder. 
J.  Child care; foster family group home. 
1.  The use shall be registered with the city and shall continually have on file with the city documentation of a valid license as required by the state. 
2.  The applicant shall submit documentation of compliance with state building and fire codes. 
3.  Nonresidential parking setback and screening provisions shall apply. 
4.  The building shall have an appearance that is nonintrusive and consistent in color, materials, roofline and architecture with the residential district and neighborhood in which it is located, as determined by the Planning Commission. 
K.  Reserved. 
L.  Child care; child care center. 
1.  The use shall be registered with the city and shall continually have on file with the city documentation of a valid license as required by the state. 
2.  The applicant shall submit documentation of compliance with state building and fire codes. 
3.  Nonresidential parking setback and screening provisions shall apply. 
4.  The building shall have an appearance that is nonintrusive and consistent in color, materials, roofline and architecture with the residential district in which it is located, as determined by the Planning Commission. 
5.  Documentation of sufficient indoor classroom, crib and play area meeting state requirements shall be provided. Documentation of approved areas, as licensed by the state, shall be provided. 
6.  There shall be sufficient outdoor play area to meet state regulations. All required outdoor play areas shall be fenced with a four-foot tall fence, provided that no fence shall be located in a front yard. 
7.  An on-site drive shall be provided for drop offs/loading. This drive shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without creating a hazard to traffic flow on the public street. 
8.  The lot shall be located so that at least one side abuts an arterial or collector street and all access shall be from an arterial or collector street. 
9.  As an accessory use, the child care center shall be located within the same building as the primary use. 
10.  Dormitory facilities are not permitted. 
11.  The perimeter building and/or play area setback may be adjusted to take into account the existing or planned use of adjacent properties. 
M.  Child care; child caring institution. 
1.  The use shall be registered with the city of Kentwood and shall continually have on file with the city documentation of a valid license as required by the state. 
2.  The applicant shall submit documentation of compliance with state building and fire codes. 
3.  Nonresidential parking setback and screening provisions shall apply. 
4.  Documentation of sufficient indoor classroom, crib and play area meeting state requirements shall be provided. Documentation of approved areas, as licensed by the state, shall be provided. 
5.  There shall be sufficient outdoor play area to meet state regulations. All required outdoor play areas shall be fenced with a four-foot tall fence, provided that no fence shall be located in a front yard. 
6.  An on-site drive shall be provided for drop offs/loading. This drive shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without creating a hazard to traffic flow on the public street. 
7.  The lot shall be located so that at least one side abuts an arterial or collector street and all access shall be from an arterial or collector street. 
N.  Places of religious worship. 
1.  Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. 
2.  The lot location shall have at least one property line that abuts a collector or arterial street. 
O.  Hotels and motels. 
1.  Where the front yard is used to provide access, a 25-foot wide greenbelt shall be provided along the front property line, except for drive openings. 
2.  Each guest unit shall contain a minimum of 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  A minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet is required together with a minimum lot width of 150 feet, plus there shall be an additional 400 square feet of lot area for each guest unit. 
4.  Where adjoining a residential use or residential district, buffer zone "B" (see chapter 19, landscaping) is required. In addition the Planning Commission may require a solid wall or solid fence along the lot line having a maximum height of six feet. 
P.  Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes and assisted living group facilities. 
1.  Minimum lot area shall be three acres. 
2.  The lot location shall have at least one property line [that] abuts an arterial street as classified on the "Major Street Plan." The ingress and egress for off-street parking facilities shall be from the major thoroughfare. 
3.  Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be visually screened from the view of adjacent residential uses by a structure or by a six-foot high vertical screen. Access to and from the ambulance and delivery area shall be directly from an arterial street. 
4.  A minimum of 200 square feet of greenspace shall be provided per bed. 
5.  No power plant or laundry shall be located nearer than 300 feet to any adjacent residential use. 
6.  No more than 25 percent of the gross site area shall be occupied by buildings. 
7.  The principal use building must maintain a minimum 20-foot side yard, and a minimum 35-foot front yard and a minimum 50-foot rear yard. 
8.  The nonresidential parking setback and screening requirements of each district shall apply. 
Q.  Housing for the elderly. 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be two acres. 
2.  A retail food store (existing or under construction) with a minimum area of 10,000 square feet shall be located within a 1,500-foot radius of the proposed site. 
3.  If no retail food stores are available within the required distance, provisions shall be made for regular shuttle access to a retail food store. 
4.  Maximum height of building shall not exceed 72 feet. 
5.  The maximum allowable density shall be 32 units per acre. 
6.  One parking space per dwelling unit shall be required, of which 25 percent shall be designated for nonresident (visitor) parking. 
7.  All dwelling units in the building shall have a minimum of 450 square feet per unit. 
8.  For every residential unit a minimum of 65 square feet of the site shall be provided as common open space that meets the standards of subsection 12.10.N of the zoning ordinance. 
9.  For every 50 residential units a minimum of 1,500 square feet of indoor recreation space is required. 
10.  Retail and service uses may be permitted on the site if accessory to the elderly housing use. All such uses shall be within the walls of the main structure. No freestanding signs for such uses shall be allowed. 
11.  Front and rear setbacks shall be equal to the height of the building. A side yard of at least 20 feet is required on each side of any portion of the building. 
R.  Kennels. 
1.  The minimum parcel size shall be three-quarters of an acre. 
2.  The maximum number of dogs or cats occupying the facility shall be one dog or cat per 60 square feet of building floor area. 
3.  Animals cared for on the premises shall be limited to dogs or cats. 
4.  Services provided on the premises shall be limited to grooming, training, exercising, socializing and overnight boarding of dogs or cats. 
5.  Accessory uses permitted on the premises may include the retail sale of products related to the operation, provided that the total floor area devoted to the display of retail merchandise shall be limited to ten percent of the total floor area occupied by the business, or 500 square feet, whichever is less. 
6.  All dogs in the care of the facility shall be kept within a completely enclosed building at all times, with the exception that dogs may be placed in an outdoor play area for limited periods of time, under personal supervision by staff of the facility. 
7.  The location and size of an outdoor exercise area shall be at the full discretion of the planning commission. Outdoor exercise areas shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from the boundary of a residential zoning district, and shall be located on the site so as to minimize a direct line-of-site orientation to adjacent residential uses. 
8.  An outdoor exercise area shall be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence designed and constructed to provide secure containment of dogs in care. 
9.  An outdoor exercise area shall be cleaned at least daily. Liquid animal waste shall be disposed of in accordance with best management practices. 
10.  The facility shall utilize impervious, washable materials for all wall finish materials a minimum of 48 inches from the floor (e.g., sealed masonry, ceramic title, glassboard, or marlite). 
11.  Floor finish shall be sealed concrete or other approved impervious surface. Liquidtight curbing, at least six inches high, shall be installed along all walls for sanitary confinement and wash-down cleaning. 
12.  Floor drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. 
13.  Refuse pick-up shall be a minimum of two times a week, unless the zoning administrator determines additional disposal is required. Animal wastes shall be stored in enclosed containers of sufficient construction to eliminate odors. 
14.  Parking operations plan to account for all principle and accessory uses. 
15.  The applicant shall comply with applicable state and/or federal requirements associated with kennels and animal care. 
S.  Funeral homes and crematoria. 
1.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre with a minimum width of 150 feet. 
2.  A well-designed and landscaped off-street vehicle assembly area shall be provided to be used in support of funeral procession activity. This area shall be in addition to required off-street parking area or its related maneuvering space. 
3.  A caretaker's residence may be provided within the principal building. 
4.  The proposed site shall front upon an arterial or collector street. All ingress and egress shall be from this street. 
T.  Open air business. 
1.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
2.  Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet. 
3.  A six-foot high vertical screen and/or a buffer zone may be required along the side and rear lot lines to enclose and screen the open air sales and/or storage area. 
4.  All open air businesses shall comply with all applicable health department regulations regarding sanitation and general health conditions. 
5.  The Planning Commission may, to insure strict compliance with any regulation contained herein and required as a condition of the issuance of a permit for an open air business use, require the applicant to furnish a performance guarantee satisfactory to and in an amount determined by the Planning Commission to be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance hereunder. In fixing the amount of the performance guarantee, the Planning Commission shall take into account the size and scope of the proposed open air business use, current prevailing cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator of the use, estimated expenses to compel the operator to comply by court decree, and other factors and conditions as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in the light of all facts and circumstances surrounding each application. 
6.  The lot areas used for parking, display or storage shall be provided with a bituminous or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. 
7.  Ingress and egress shall be provided as far as practicable from two intersecting streets and shall be at least 150 feet from an intersection. 
8.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential areas. 
9.  The height of all materials and equipment stored in an outdoor storage area shall not exceed the height of any landscape screening, wall or fence. 
10.  The storage and display of materials is not permitted in any required front yard and shall meet all the yard setback requirements applicable to any building in the district. In the FBC context areas the minimum front yard open air display/storage setback is 20 feet and a minimum two-foot high screen wall or hedge shall be provided to screen the display and provide separation between the product and the sidewalk. 
11.  All loading activities and parking areas shall be provided on the same premises (off-street). 
12.  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or similar loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently contained to prevent any adverse effect upon adjacent properties. 
13.  In the C-3 zone district the open air business approval is limited to January 1 through November 15 of the calendar year. The open air events are limited to farmers markets, Halloween themed costume and accessories, and the sale of new and late model cars, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, recreational vehicles, boat, and power water craft. A zoning permit for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days must be secured from the Zoning Administrator for each individual open air sales event. 
14.  Within the FBC context areas, the primary building wall shall be built to a minimum of 25 percent of the overall width of the primary street property line. 
U.  Wireless communication towers. 
1.  Aside from the installation or use of a wireless antenna, supporting structure or pole for a wireless antenna, or accessory equipment within a city public right-of-way expressly authorized in writing by the city through the issuance of a license or franchise, wireless communications towers must be installed on a lawful lot for the zoning district in which it is located, either as a principal use, or as an accessory use related to the principal use. 
2.  For the purposes of this section, the term "fall zone" and the associated affected area shall mean the calculated manner and extent to which a tower structure is designed to fall. Towers, except lawful nonconforming structures and those licensed or franchised to be in the public right-of-way, must be set back from all lot lines (and in the case of a park site from areas of unrestricted public use) at a distance equal to the fall zone for the tower proposed or 50 percent of the height of the tower (whichever is greater). The fall zone shall be certified by a State of Michigan licensed and registered professional engineer. 
3.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the tower conforms to the city's wireless communication plan including the provision of all information required by a qualified and licensed professional engineer to validate the need for the proposed facility at the specified height and location. The city shall have the right to retain independent technical consultants and experts that it deems reasonably necessary to properly evaluate applications for wireless communication towers and to charge the costs for services to the applicant. 
4.  A proposal for a new wireless communication support structure outside the public rights-of-way not specified in the city's wireless communication plan shall not be approved unless and until it is documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer that the communications equipment planned for the proposed wireless communication support structure cannot be feasibly collocated on an existing structure or at a location designated in the wireless communications plan due to at least one of the following reasons: 
(a)  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved wireless communication support structure or building and the existing or approved wireless communication support structure cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment. 
(b)  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the wireless communication support structure or other existing structure and the interference cannot be prevented by any other means. 
(c)  Existing or approved wireless communication support structures and buildings cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary for the coverage area and capacity needs to reasonably function. 
(d)  Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned communications equipment upon an existing wireless communication support structure or at a location designated in the wireless communications plan as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer. 
(e)  The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city taking into consideration the several standards contained within this subsection. 
5.  The owner and operator of a tower, wireless antenna, supporting structure or pole for a wireless antenna, or accessory equipment outside public rights-of-way shall agree to permit other communication service providers, including local governmental agencies, to use the tower, upon commercially reasonable terms and conditions. As used herein, "commercially reasonable terms and conditions" shall mean a rental or license rate consistent with the market for metropolitan Grand Rapids and without mandating the use of another entity's towers. This obligation shall not require the owner or operator to permit access where doing so will interfere with the owner or operator's ability to provide or receive signals or with contractual obligations to unrelated third parties. 
6.  The proposed tower will be structurally sound and constructed in accordance with all federal, state or local legal requirements and otherwise capable of being used in accordance with the requirements of this section. The owner or operator shall inspect towers annually and the record of this annual inspection shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. In addition, an engineering inspection and certification will be required: when the tower is put into service; every five years thereafter; and whenever a structural change is made. 
7.  In residential districts, the height of antenna towers or support structures outside of public rights-of-way shall not exceed that minimally required to meet federal, state and local performance requirements. Any tower and/or antenna placement in a residential district shall not be erected at a height to require lighting. 
8.  Gerald R. Ford International Airport zoning administrator shall approve the tower site plan and proposed tower for compliance height and lighting requirements dictated by the Gerald R. Ford International Airport Zoning Ordinance and FAA standards. 
9.  The applicant shall include with the application for special land use an analysis of the visual impact of the tower on the surrounding area. The analysis shall include point of view renderings of the tower in its proposed setting, with special attention given to adjacent residential uses, including any proposed landscaping. The tower or other support structure may be required to be disguised or stealthed with natural or manmade features such as landscape features, clocktowers, steeples, flagpoles etc. Landscape screening and similar environment-blending measures shall be required by the planning commission to help screen the ancillary buildings from the surrounding uses, with special consideration for residential uses. 
10.  As a condition of any tower's installation, the applicant acknowledges and agrees that a tower that remains unused for the original purpose and intent for a period of 12 months (or longer if approved by the city commission) shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Under such circumstances the tower must be removed within 90 days of written notification by the zoning administrator. Furthermore, the applicant shall post a performance guarantee in a satisfactory form to the city in an amount that shall cover 100 percent of the cost of removing the tower in the event that the applicant fails to complete the removal of the abandoned tower within the prescribed time period. 
11.  Only one tower structure per OS district site is permitted. 
12.  Towers erected outside of public rights-of-way in nonresidential districts shall be constructed to accommodate at least four antennae platform levels. Collocation terms, including rates, for compatible providers shall be included in the application. Terms shall be consistent with the market for metropolitan Grand Rapids. In addition applicants shall submit a signed statement agreeing to permit collocation consistent with those rental rates. The colocation requirement may be waived if the tower or other support structure is disguised or stealthed with natural or manmade features such as landscape features, clocktowers, steeples, flagpoles etc. 
13.  Towers shall not be erected on cemetery sites. 
14.  Towers proposed on public park property are subject to the advisory review of the city's parks and recreation commission. The parks and recreation commission shall file a report and recommendation with the planning commission considering in part the evaluation of tower design relative to the maximization of open space preservation. 
15.  A temporary antenna support facility may be used by a provider in any zoning district for the purpose of providing temporary wireless services for special short-term events such as a sporting event or entertainment event; to allow for modification, replacement, and/or repairs to a permanent facility; or as necessary to aid in post disaster relief efforts. 
16.  One identification sign is required, measuring no more than 36 inches wide by 24 inches high, identifying the primary party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility, the address and telephone number of that party and, if appropriate, the FCC/FAA registration number of the structure shall be permanently attached to the fence, tower or wall of the ancillary building. The identity of the various carriers shall also be indicated on this sign. The only additional signs that may be permanently attached to the fence, tower or wall shall be security or safety signs. No advertising signs are allowed. 
17.  Outside of public rights-of-way each carrier on a tower will be allowed an equipment cabinet or structure. No one provider shall occupy more than 250 square feet of interior floor space or have an eave height of more than ten feet. The equipment cabinet or structure shall be required to be of a design consistent with surrounding development. The equipment cabinet or structure compound shall provide for the equipment of future third parties co-locating on the tower and shall be fenced and landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the compound subject to the approval of the city. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
18.  Except as otherwise required by law, a wireless communications tower shall not exceed a height of 195 feet. Any tower and/or antenna placement adjacent to a residential zone that requires lighting shall be a continuous red beacon at night. 
V.  Recreation; amusement parks. 
1.  The minimum lot size shall be ten acres. 
2.  The lot shall be located so that at least one side abuts an arterial street and all access shall be from the arterial street. 
3.  The main and accessory buildings shall not be located nearer than 300 feet to any adjacent dwelling. 
4.  Maximum building coverage shall be 25 percent. 
5.  Any amusement enterprises located within 500 feet of any adjacent dwelling shall close not later than 10:00 p.m. 
6.  The entire premises shall be surrounded by a six-foot cyclone fence at or near the boundary property lines. 
7.  No entrances or exits shall be from a collector or residential street. 
W.  Recreation; golf courses, country clubs. 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be 40 acres. 
2.  The main and accessory buildings shall be set back at least 75 feet from all property and street lines. 
3.  Lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged and maintained as to direct the light away from all residential lands which adjoin the site. 
X.  Recreation; golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses. 
1.  All traffic ingress and egress shall be from an arterial or collector street. 
2.  Whenever any use that may be permitted in this subsection abuts property within a residential district, a transition strip at least 100 feet in width shall be provided between all operations and structures and the residential property. Grass, plant materials, and structural screens of a type approved by the Planning Commission shall be placed within the transition strip. 
3.  A minimum yard of 100 feet shall separate all uses, operations and structures permitted herein, from any public street or highway used for access or exit purposes. This yard shall be landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the Planning Commission. 
Y.  Recreation; recreation facility, indoor. 
1.  The principal and accessory uses and buildings shall not be located within 100 feet of any residential district or use. 
2.  All uses shall be conducted completely within a fully enclosed building. 
Z.  Recreation; recreation establishments, outdoor. 
1.  Uses shall include, but need not be limited to, the following: recreational fields, rinks or courts, including football, softball, soccer, tennis, basketball, ice skating, and similar activities, swimming pools open to the general public or operated by a private nonprofit organization, archery and shooting ranges, animal racing, go-cart, automobile or motorcycle tracks, music concert pavilions and bandshells, amusement parks and uses accessory to the above uses, such as refreshment stands, retail shops selling items related to the above uses, maintenance buildings, office for management functions, spectator seating and service areas, including locker rooms and rest rooms. 
2.  The site shall be adequate to accommodate the intended use(s), parking and adequate buffer areas without significant impact on nearby properties in terms of noise, traffic, lighting glare, views, odors, trespassing, dust or blowing debris, as determined by the Planning Commission. The applicant shall provide documentation the site size is adequate using national facility standards. 
3.  The site shall be located on a street that is classified as an arterial. 
4.  No building or spectator seating facility shall be located within 100 feet of a property line. 
AA.  Recycling stations. 
1.  Paved loading and stacking spaces shall be provided for at least three automobiles. 
2.  All storage of recycled materials shall be within appropriate containers, with access through doors on the sides of the container. 
3.  The Planning Commission may require a totally obscuring fence or wall around the perimeter of the recycling center. 
4.  The hours of operation and materials accepted shall be clearly posted. 
BB.  Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or drive-through facilities (including retail and financial institutions). 
1.  Point of drive-through transaction shall be setback 50 feet from any adjacent public right-of-way line or property line. 
2.  Establishments constructed adjacent to other office and commercial developments shall have a direct vehicular access connection where possible. 
CC.  Industrial selling retail. 
1.  Retail sales restricted to those goods manufactured, compounded, processed, packaged, treated or assembled on site from previously prepared materials. 
2.  Retail operation must be housed within the same building as the primary industrial use. 
3.  All retail activities must be entirely within the enclosed building. No outside storage or display. 
4.  Parking and circulation must not conflict with primary industrial use. 
5.  Freestanding and wall sign identification as set forth in chapter 16 must be incorporated within primary industrial sign display 
6.  The area devoted to retail sales shall not exceed the greater of five percent of the total floor area or 1,000 square feet. 
DD.  Horse riding stables. 
1.  For breeding, rearing and housing of horses, mules and similar domestic animals, the minimum lot size shall be ten acres except that up to two saddle horses or ponies may be housed and reared on lots of two acres or more. 
2.  A building used as a stable shall not be located nearer than 60 feet to any property line and not nearer than 100 feet to any dwelling on adjacent property. 
3.  Animals shall be confined in a suitably fenced area, or paddock, to preclude their approaching nearer than 60 feet to any dwelling on adjacent premises. 
4.  The facility shall be so constructed and maintained that odor, dust, noise and drainage shall not constitute a nuisance or hazard to adjoining premises. 
EE.  Zero lot line, single-family detached dwellings. 
1.  Dwellings must be generally compatible in size and design with neighboring properties if placed within plats existing at the time of the enactment of this provision. 
2.  A minimum side yard of 20 feet shall be maintained between the main dwelling and side yard on the side not placed on the lot line (nonzero lot line side). 
3.  Zero lot line dwellings constructed on lots with adjoining side yards to nonzero lot line dwellings shall maintain at least a 15-foot distance between dwellings. 
4.  The side of the structure placed on, or near, the side lot line shall not have openings, doors or windows of any kind. 
FF.  Commercial enterprise producing merchandise on premises. 
1.  No more than 15 persons in merchandise production are employed on the premises. 
2.  Production shall not be to the detriment to the adjacent occupied premises. 
3.  The finished product is sold at retail on the premises. 
[GG.  Office in industrial .] 
HH.  Indoor vehicle sales in industrial. 
1.  All activities to occur within the enclosed building. 
2.  No open-air display or storage of inventory. 
3.  No vehicle repair or maintenance to occur on-site. 
4.  Vehicle display and/or storage area limited to 5,000 square feet. 
II.  Service of alcoholic beverages. 
1.  Any new establishment seeking a license for the sale or consumption of beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages on-premises shall require special land use approval and site plan review in accordance with this section. 
2.  Applicant shall provide a copy of any licensing materials submitted to the Liquor Control Commission. 
3.  Applicant shall provide a site plan illustrating the proposed location where the alcohol sales would occur, as well as all other locations where on-premises sales presently exist within a one thousand-foot radius of the closest lot lines of the subject site. 
4.  The proposed establishment must promote the city's economic development goals and objectives, and must be consistent with the city's master plan and zoning ordinance. 
5.  Given the character, location, development trends and other aspects of the area in which the proposed use or change in use is requested, the applicant shall demonstrate that the use will: rejuvenate an underutilized property or an identifiable area within the city; or provide a unique business model, service, product, or function; or add to the diversity of the city or to an identifiable area within the city; or that the addition of the use or proposed change in use will be otherwise a benefit or asset to the city or identifiable area. 
6.  The applicant must demonstrate that the use or change in use as constructed and operated is compatible with the area in which it will be located, and will not have appreciable negative secondary effects on the area, such as: 
(a)  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic, particularly during late night or early morning hours that might disturb area residents. 
(b)  Noise, odors, or lights that emanate beyond the site's boundaries onto property in the area on which there are residential dwellings. 
(c)  Excessive numbers of persons gathering outside the establishment. 
(d)  Peak hours of use that add to congestion or other negative effects in the neighborhood. 
(e)  Fighting, brawling, outside urination, or other behavior that can accompany intoxication. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  12(15.04), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 6-06,  5, 4-30-2006; Ord. No. 17-06,  3, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 12-08,  1, 9-26-2008; Ord. No. 3-09,  2, 6-26-2009; Ord. No. 7-09,  1, 9-25-2009; Ord. No. 1-11,  3, 2-11-2011; Ord. No. 3-12,  9, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 5-12,  2, 7-1-2012; Ord. No. 3-13,  5, 6, 3-13-2013; Ord. No. 3-14,  4, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 6-14,  3, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 9-16,  11, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016; Ord. No. 2-17,  4, 2-7-2017, eff. 2-17-2017; Ord. No. 10-17,  9-11, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 7-18,  9, 10, 5-1-2018) 
CHAPTER 16. - SIGNS 

Section 16.01. - Intent and purpose. 
A.  This chapter is intended to regulate the use, construction, reconstruction, placement and design of signs in order to protect the public health, safety, peace and general welfare. Specifically, this chapter seeks to establish reasonable regulations regarding the size, type of construction and manner of anchoring signs and to regulate the time, place and manner of their display. 
B.  This chapter involves a determination by the city that the individual user's rights to convey a message must be balanced against the public's right to be free of signs which unreasonably compete, distract drivers and pedestrians, and produce confusion. In balancing the individual user's desire to attract attention with the public's right to be free of unreasonable distractions, it is recognized that sign regulations should afford businesses a reasonable opportunity to attract the public. It is also determined; however, oversized, projecting or crowded signs can lead to pedestrian and driver confusion and distraction, and endanger the public health, safety and welfare. To lessen such adverse consequences, reasonable limitations are appropriate with respect to the placement, construction, size, and design of signs particularly in relation to the location of buildings and the availability of other means of communication. In addition, new advanced sign display technologies may have adverse impacts that must be minimized by reasonable restrictions on size and permitted locations. 
C.  The city further determines that overall regulations for signs, especially number, size and placement, are desirable in order to: 
1.  Prevent or limit traffic or pedestrian accidents, injuries, deaths, and property damages resulting from obstructed vision, distraction or confusion to the public or to emergency safety personnel; 
2.  Minimize the risk of damage and injuries from signs that are dilapidated, wind blown, electric shock hazards, etc.; 
3.  Achieve some uniformity and balance in the size, number and placement of signs; 
4.  Enhance the aesthetics of the community; 
5.  Prevent blight; 
6.  Encourage equality among business and property; 
7.  Otherwise protect the public health, safety, peace and general welfare; and 
8.  Accommodate special circumstances or events that may create a need for portable signs for a limited and reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 1-11,  4, 2-11-2011) 
Section 16.02. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definition of a sign in chapter 2, the following definitions shall apply to specific types of signs. 
A.  Balloon sign. A portable sign that is inflated by air or any gas. 
B.  Banner. A sign having characters, letters or illustrations applied to cloth, paper, flexible plastic, or fabric of any kind, with only nonrigid material as background 
C.  Banner, promotional. A banner that promotes an on-premises business, product or service. 
D.  Banner, shopping center. A banner that uses any of a variety of images or colors of an ornamental nature with its advertisement function limited to no more than an emblem of the shopping center. 
E.  Billboard. A sign that directs attention to commercial or noncommercial goods, services, uses/ideas not located on site. 
F.  Commercial sign. A sign advertising commerce, trade or location. 
G.  Construction sign. A sign that identifies the name, owners, financiers, contractors, architects, or engineers of a project under construction. 
H.  Directional sign. Any on-premises sign that includes information assisting the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic such as enter, exit and one-way. 
I.  Flag, public. A flag displaying the name, insignia, emblem, or logo of any nation, state, municipality, or noncommercial organization. 
J.  Freestanding sign. A sign supported by one or more up-rights, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground surface and not attached to any building. 
K.  Identification sign. A sign that identifies the business, owner or resident. 
L.  Illuminated sign. A sign illuminated by internal lighting or by reflected light from an external source. 
M.  Incidental signs. Signs which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, are necessary to indicate building entrances and exits, safety precautions, including identifying logos without text, and other incidental language. 
N.  Institutional bulletin board. A sign containing a surface area upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library, community center or similar institution and the announcement of its institutional services or activities. 
O.  Legal notices. Notices regarding hearings, legal rights, public sales or other matters which are required to be posted by a court or governmental agency or entity of competent jurisdiction or by an applicable statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. 
P.  Marquee sign. Identification sign attached to a marquee, canopy or awning projecting from and supported by the building. 
Q.  Monument sign. A sign where the base of the sign structure is on the ground or a maximum of 12 inches above the adjacent grade. 
R.  Noncommercial sign. A sign not advertising commerce, trade or location. 
S.  Nonconforming sign. A sign lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the current sign regulations. 
T.  Official sign. Identification, informational, or directional sign erected, accredited, or required by the city and approved by the city commission with recommendation from the planning and police departments. 
U.  On-site identification sign. An advertising sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises or the idea or political candidates supported by the owner or occupant of the premises. It does not include any sign leased, rented or used by or to advertise the products, accommodations or activities not conducted or available on the premises. 
V.  Plat entry sign. A sign or pair of signs placed at the primary entrance to a subdivision, containing only the name of the subdivision. This term also refers to signs at the primary entrance to a manufactured home park. 
W.  Reserved. 
X.  Regional commercial center identification sign. A sign to identify a regional commercial center in excess of 500,000 square feet of gross leasable area. 
Y.  Portable sign. A sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to, "A" frame, "T" or inverted "T" shaped sign structures and signs on movable trailers. Promotional banners, balloon signs, or sign's objects or devices shall also be considered portable signs. Streamers and pennants are not considered portable signs. 
Z.  Window sign. Any sign placed inside or upon a window which is intended to be seen from the exterior. 
AA.  Electronic message center. A sign or portion of a sign whose message content or display may be changed by means of electrical, electronic or computerized programming without physically altering the face of the surface of the sign. 
BB.  Tri-vision billboard. The tri-vision sign is an off-premises sign composed of a series of vertical or horizontal cylinders each of which has a triangular cross section. Each partial rotation of the group of triangular cylinders produces a different image. A single tri-vision sign may display no more than three images in total. Although the final composite image does not provide motion, there is movement due to the transition from one image to another as the cylinders rotate. 
CC.  Dynamic display . A type of sign that has or appears to have movement or that appears to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the real or apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other part of the sign. This includes a type of sign that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. A dynamic display sign also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digitalink," electronic message centers, or any other method or technology that allows the sign face to present different images or displays. 
DD.  Flags, Commercial. A flag displaying the name, insignia, emblem or logo of the commercial entity located on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 12-08,  2, 9-26-2008; Ord. No. 3-09,  3, 6-26-2009; Ord. No. 10-09,  1, 12-25-2009; Ord. No. 9-16,  12, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016) 
Section 16.03. - Signs permitted or prohibited. 
A.  Nonconforming signs. 
1.  Nonconforming signs may not be converted, altered, expanded, enlarged, or extended; however, nonconforming signs may be maintained and repaired so as to continue the normal useful life of the sign. 
2.  Any nonconforming sign destroyed by fire or other casualty loss shall not be restored or rebuilt if reconstruction will constitute more than 50 percent of the value of the sign on the date of loss. 
3.  Any sign which for a period of one year or more no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold shall be deemed abandoned and removed by the owner of the building, structure or property on which the sign is located. 
B.  Flagpoles and Flags. 
1.  Height. Flagpoles shall not exceed the maximum permitted building height for buildings within the zoning district in which the flagpole is located. 
2.  Number. One commercial identification flag and not more than three noncommercial flags, exclusive of the display of one United States flag shall be permitted on any lot. The commercial and noncommercial flags may not exceed the size of any United States flag if also displayed or 32 square feet, whichever is less. 
C.  Official signs. 
1.  Area. Official signs not exceeding 75 square feet in area are allowed in all zoning districts and are permitted in addition to other on-site advertising provisions. 
2.  Location. Official signs placed within the public right-of-way, directly on the ground shall not exceed 30 inches in height from the mean grade unless it can be shown not to interfere with vehicular, bike, or pedestrian clear vision. 
3.  Lighting. Official signs may be illuminated. 
D.  Noncommercial signs. 
1.  Location. Noncommercial signs are allowed in all zoning districts subject to the size and placement requirements set forth in the different districts. 
2.  Billboard. Noncommercial signs erected on billboards may be permitted as a principal use after approval as a special land use in accordance with this ordinance. 
3.  Duration. Noncommercial signs may remain until the signs are in disrepair and are deemed no longer to be in compliance with section 16.06 of this ordinance. 
E.  Signs for PUDs and use variances. 
1.  PUDs. Signs for uses or buildings located in PUDs shall be subject to the sign limitations allowed for buildings or uses of a similar type built in the respective zoning districts, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
2.  Use variances. Signs for use variances granted by the zoning board of appeals shall be subject to the size limitations of the district in which the use is located. 
F.  Construction signs. Construction signs are permitted within any zone district but shall not be erected until a building permit has been issued for the project that is the subject of the proposed sign and construction activity has begun, subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Number. One construction sign may be placed on the lot where the construction is taking place. 
2.  Size. A construction sign shall be no larger than 100 square feet in area. 
3.  Height. A construction sign shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
4.  Location. Construction signs must be setback at least 15 feet from the front and side property lines. 
5.  Duration. Construction signs shall be displayed for not more than 12 months, or until issuance of the initial occupancy permit, whichever shall occur first. 
G.  Incidental signs. Incidental signs pertaining to any conforming accessory activity being conducted on the premises are permitted in any district. 
H.  Shopping center banner signs. 
1.  Banners must be stationary, properly maintained and not allowed to become unsightly through disrepair or action of the elements. 
2.  Banner signs are restricted to vertical pole mountings. 
I.  Balloon signs. 
1.  A balloon sign shall not be more than 35 feet high from the point where the balloon rests on any surface if the balloon rests on a surface, or from the point of tie-down if it does not rest on a surface. 
2.  All balloon signs shall be securely anchored to the ground or to a building in accordance with the requirements of the Kentwood codes as amended. All anchoring devices shall be inspected and approved by the Kentwood Building Inspection Department. Balloon signs over 15 feet high shall be anchored with a minimum of six ropes or similar tie-down devices. Additional ropes or tie-down devices may be required by the Building Inspector to ensure proper anchoring. 
3.  Any electrical motor, pump or similar device used to inflate the balloon sign shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Kentwood codes as amended. 
4.  A balloon sign shall be setback a minimum distance of one and one-half times its height from all property lines. 
5.  A balloon sign placed on the ground shall not, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, interfere with on-site or off-site traffic circulation, utility lines, hamper visibility of drivers or obstruct fire lanes. The placement of a balloon sign on the ground shall not result in a reduction of the number of parking spaces required herein for that site on which the balloon sign is located. 
6.  A barricade shall be installed completely around a balloon sign to deter easy access. This barricade must be clearly visible and be rope, portable fence or other similar materials excluding barbed wire. 
7.  A balloon sign, if mounted on top of a building, shall not protrude over the edge of that building. 
8.  All balloon signs shall be equipped with a quick deflation system so that the balloon sign will deflate instantly if it breaks loose from its anchor. The Kentwood Building Inspections Department shall inspect the balloon sign to ensure that this system is installed properly. 
9.  All balloon signs shall be taken down if wind speeds exceed 30 knots (35 mph). The installer of the sign shall be responsible for monitoring weather conditions. 
10.  Balloon signs are considered portable signs and shall comply with the portable sign regulations in each zoning district in which they are permitted, but shall not be permitted on a site for more than a total of 30 days in any calendar year. 
11.  Balloons signs may be illuminated from the inside or by exterior lights placed to direct the glare away from adjacent roadways and properties. Balloon signs shall not have any flashing, colored or glaring lights. 
12.  A balloon sign installer shall carry at least $1,000,000.00 in liability insurance coverage and shall provide proof of this to the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of the sign permit. 
13.  Balloon signs shall be installed so as not to interfere with utility lines, flight paths or radio and television reception. 
J.  Billboards. 
1.  Billboards are only allowed as the principal use of a lot meeting the standards of the relevant zoning district. 
2.  Billboards must be located at least 200 feet from any freeway right-of-way line and 100 feet from any other street right-of-way line. 
3.  A maximum sign area of up to 300 square feet is permitted for billboards. 
4.  Billboards must be continuously and properly maintained at all times. A billboard which is not maintained or utilized for a period of six months is deemed abandoned. 
5.  One billboard per lot may be approved except that no billboard shall be located within 600 feet (measured radially) of any other billboard, regardless of jurisdiction. 
6.  Except for time and temperature signs or dynamic display signs as otherwise regulated herein, all signs must be stationary and may not contain any visible moving parts, alternating or moving messages or have the appearance of having moving parts or messages. Under no circumstances may any type of sign contain a message or display that appears to flash, undulate, pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking lights or otherwise appears to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist or make other comparable movements. 
7.  Billboards are limited to 25 feet in height. 
8.  No billboard may be installed or utilized within 1,000 feet (measured radially) of a residential structure. 
9.  Dynamic display billboards are not permitted and existing billboards may not be converted or otherwise modified to become a dynamic display billboard. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  13(16.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 10-09,  2, 12-25-2009; Ord. No. 1-11,  4, 2-11-2011) 
Section 16.04. - Sign measurements. 
A.  Sign area shall be the entire area within a circle or four sided polygon enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character. This area shall also include any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign is placed. The maximum width of necessary supports shall be two feet. 

B.  Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
C.  In the case of a sphere, the total area of the sphere is divided by two for purposes of determining the maximum permitted sign area. 
D.  Separated sign elements, not part of any frame, or separated by other material or color forming an integral part of the display that may be used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, shall have each element of the sign calculated separately and summed for the purposes of determining the total area. The signs elements shall not exceed the total sign display permitted by the district in which it is located. 

E.  Height. 
1.  No sign shall exceed the maximum height of 25 feet (except for balloon signs, wall signs, and dynamic display billboards in the C-4 zone district along I-96 as provided in this chapter). 

2.  The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the highest point of the sign to the grade of the adjacent street or the average grade of the ground immediately beneath the sign, whichever is less. 
3.  Any freestanding sign shall maintain a minimum clear space of ten feet from the bottom of the sign to the ground. 
F.  Sign area calculation for buildings with multiple tenants: 
1.  The sign areas for wall signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, and awning signs shall be determined by taking that portion of the front wall of the building applicable to each tenant space, and computing sign requirements for that portion of the total wall. 

2.  For buildings with more than one street frontage, the wall area related to the tenant space on the second street frontage shall be used to calculate the sign area for the second wall sign, awning sign, or projecting sign, where the signs are otherwise permitted. 
3.  Permitted wall signs shall be attached to the same wall used to determine its size. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  13(16.04), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 3-09,  4, 6-26-2009) 
Section 16.05. - General standards and requirements. 
A.  General. 
1.  A sign not expressly permitted by this ordinance is prohibited. 
2.  With the exception of billboards, official signs, and noncommercial signs, all signs shall pertain only to the business or activity conducted on the premises. 
3.  Signs are permitted according to the district in which they are located or intended to be located. Specific sign requirements for each zoning district may be found in the development requirements of each district. 
4.  Signs meeting the requirements of this ordinance are allowed as a matter of right but shall be required to obtain a permit from the zoning administrator in accordance with the requirements of section 16.06. 
5.  With the exception of official signs, directional signs, and plat entry signs placed within a boulevard, no sign shall be permitted within the public right-of-way or upon any utility pole. Signs must be placed at a location where the minimum lot width required by the zone district is attained. If any sign is placed on any public right-of-way including, but not limited to, the parkway, or on any other public property, the city shall have the right to remove the sign immediately. Any sign removed by the city shall be claimed within ten days, otherwise the sign will be destroyed. If the owner or person responsible for the sign wishes it returned, a fee set by resolution of the city commission shall be charged for each sign. 
6.  All wall signs shall be placed flat against the building and shall not project beyond a wall or architectural feature by more than one foot. 
7.  A plat entry sign of up to 20 square feet in area and up to 30 inches in height from the mean grade is permitted within the boulevard of a collector street. Such boulevard signs shall be set back a minimum of 17 feet from an arterial street right-of-way. A sign permit and highway permit are required in order to place a plat entry sign within a boulevard. Plat entry signs placed within the boulevard and improperly maintained may be removed by the city. 
B.  Movement. Except for electronic message centers as otherwise permitted herein, and a minimum one minute interval between time and temperature changes, all signs must be stationary and may not contain any visible moving parts, alternating messages or moving messages or have the appearance of having moving parts or moving messages. The display may not and shall not appear to, flash, undulate, pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights or otherwise appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist or other comparable movements. 
C.  Illumination and depictions. 
1.  Except for electronic message centers there shall be no flashing, moving or intermittent illumination of any sign. 
2.  If permitted, signs may be illuminated only by continuous indirect white light. Only the sign face shall be illuminated. 
3.  The illumination of any sign shall not be detrimental or annoying to occupants of surrounding property as set forth in chapter 20 nor constitute a safety hazard, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
4.  No sign shall contain any photograph, silhouette, drawing or pictorial representation, or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities (as those terms are defined in chapter 2). 
D.  Dynamic display signage. 
1.  The content of a dynamic display sign, of any type, may change no more than once every one minute. The display or message must otherwise comply with section 16.05.B. and must have installed ambient light monitors which shall continuously monitor and automatically adjust the brightness level of the display based on ambient light conditions consistent with this section. 
2.  Maximum brightness levels for dynamic display signs shall not exceed two-tenths foot-candles over ambient light levels measured within 150 feet of the sign. To obtain a sign permit, certification must be provided to the city demonstrating that the sign has been pre-set to automatically adjust the brightness to these levels or lower. Reinspection and recalibration may be required by the city to ensure that the specified brightness levels are maintained at all times. 
3.  The dynamic display portion of an on-premises sign shall not exceed 60 percent of the total sign area or 100 square feet whichever is smaller. 
(Ord. No. 5-04,  6, 5-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-05,  8, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 12-08,  2, 9-26-2008; Ord. No. 3-09,  5, 6, 6-26-2009; Ord. No. 1-11,  4, 2-11-2011; Ord. No. 9-16,  3, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016) 
Section 16.06 - Permits, construction, and maintenance. 
A.  Permits. 
1.  A sign permit shall be required for the erection, use, construction or alteration of any sign exceeding six square feet. The zoning administrator shall issue a permit if the sign conforms to the requirements of this chapter and the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  Portable sign permits: 
a.  Sign permits are required for all portable signs regardless of size. 
b.  The portable sign permit will specifically state the date by which the sign must be removed based upon the applicant's representation as to the existence of a special circumstance or event. 
c.  If there has already been a portable sign on the premises, the sign must be removed on a date so that, except as is otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the total number of days portable signs are located on the premises within a calendar year does not exceed the allowance specified for the zoning of the property. 
B.  Construction. The construction of any sign shall withstand all wind and vibration forces that can be normally expected to occur in the vicinity. 
C.  Maintenance. All signs shall be properly maintained and shall not be allowed to become unsightly or hazardous through disrepair or action of the elements. For purposes of this chapter, properly maintained shall mean that no part of the sign or supporting structure is broken, punctured, or contains loose parts or elements, or has any other condition deemed by the zoning administrator to constitute a hazard or nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 10-17,  12, 9-19-2017) 
Section 16.07. - Special exceptions for signs in regional. 
A.  As a part of its approval of a site development plan for a regional shopping center in the C-3 district, the Planning Commission may approve special exceptions from the provisions for signs as otherwise provided in the C-3 district, in accordance with this section. 
B.  Such special exceptions may include variations in the required size, placement, number and height of signs in commercial developments. 
C.  Any such special exceptions shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The need or suitability of the special exception shall be based upon the nature, size, density, location or design of the commercial development. 
2.  The special exception shall result in an enhancement or improvement of a sign function or purpose, by reason of improved aesthetics, more convenient identification, improved pedestrian or vehicular safety or other sign improvement within the development. 
3.  The special exception shall not have a serious adverse effect upon other lands or the public streets or the use thereof. 
CHAPTER 17. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking,  66-61 et seq. 

Section 17.01. - Scope. 
    In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be provided as prescribed in this chapter. This space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as the main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this ordinance. 
Section 17.02. - Location of parking. 
A.  Accessory uses. Off street parking and loading spaces are considered accessory uses and shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Zoning district. Unless otherwise permitted by this ordinance, all parking spaces and structures serving the primary use of the parcel must be in the same zoning district as the primary use. 
C.  Shared parking. 
1.  In the case of mixed uses in the same building, the total requirements for off-street parking and loading shall be the sum of the requirements for the separate individual uses computed separately. 
2.  Joint or collective provision of off-street parking for buildings or uses on two or more properties shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the participating individual uses computed separately. 
D.  Deferred parking. 
1.  Where it is determined by the city that the parking requirements for a particular proposed use would be excessive a parking lot plan shall be prepared and approved designating portions of required parking spaces and paving reserved for future use. Likewise, a parking deferment may be imposed upon a finding that parking in excess of the standard parking requirements would be initially excessive. 
2.  The approval shall require reserved areas to be covered with lawn and shall include conditions under which the reserved parking areas must be paved. 
3.  Alterations to the deferred parking area to add parking spaces may be initiated by the owner or required by the zoning administrator, based on parking needs, and shall require the submission and approval of an amended site plan, as required by chapter 14. 
4.  The zoning administrator may require construction of additional parking within the deferred parking area if a change of use occurs for the building or property for which the deferred parking was approved. 
E.  Other land uses. The off-street parking required may be located on each site or in parking lots conveniently located and readily accessible to each site. The consideration of convenience and accessibility shall include: 
1.  Parking spaces located within 300 feet of building entrances. 
2.  Access to parking does not involve crossing a public or private street. 
3.  Defined pedestrian route provided through the parking area. 
Section 17.03. - Parking lot plans. 
A.  The construction of any parking lot shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. Construction shall be completed and approved by the staff review team before actual use of the property as a parking lot and before a certificate of occupancy is issued. Each parking space must meet the minimum area requirements and meet any other engineering standards as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Parking lot plans. 
1.  All parking lots exceeding ten percent coverage of any lot shall require a permit. The plans are to be prepared in a presentable form by person or persons competent in parking lot design. 
2.  Plans for the layout of the proposed parking lot must be submitted to the zoning administrator, prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet and indicating: 
a.  existing and proposed grades; 
b.  drainage, including pipe sizes; 
c.  dimensions of parking spaces (including barrier free), drives and aisles; 
d.  type and locations of curbing; 
e.  lighting, including fixture types and pole heights; 
f.  adjacent main buildings; 
g.  sidewalks; 
h.  landscaping (in accordance with the requirements of chapter 19); 
i.  surfacing and base materials to be used; and 
j.  transit access and stop locations. 
Section 17.04. - Parking spaces. 
A.  The number of parking spaces required for individual uses are contained in the development requirements of the zoning district in which the use is located. Parking requirements for a use not mentioned within the zoning district shall be the same for that use which is most similar to the use not listed, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
B.  Each parking space shall have a reasonably direct means of ingress and egress from an alley or a street. 
C.  The minimum parking space dimensions for a layout not provided for in this section shall be nine feet in width, 18 feet in length, and 162 square feet in area. 
D.  For the purpose of this chapter the average parking area consisting of a parking space and adjacent maneuvering aisle space, shall be deemed to be 300 square feet. 
E.  Parking and maneuvering areas must be designed in accordance with the following schedule: 
Parking 
Pattern 
(in degrees) Maneuvering Lane 
Width (ft.) Parking Space 
Width (1) (ft.) Parking Space 
Length (2) (ft.) Total Width of Two Tiers of Spaces Plus 
Maneuvering Lane (ft.) One-way Two-way One-way Two-way 0 to 29 11 18 81/2 25 28 35 30 to 53 12 20 9 21 54 62 54 to 74 13 24 9 21 55 66 75 to 90 15 24 9 18 51 60 (1) measured perpendicular to the longitudinal space centerline. (2) measured along the longitudinal space centerline.  

Parking Space Dimensions 
Section 17.05. - Units of measure. 
A.  Fractional requirements. When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to, and including one-half may be disregarded and fractions of one-half or more shall require one parking space. 
B.  For purposes of parking computations for nonresidential uses the following floor area definitions shall apply: 
1.  Usable floor area (UFA) shall mean the floor area used for service to the public. It shall not include floor area used for storage or the processing and packaging of merchandise where it is carried on in a room in which service to the public is not involved. 
2.  Gross floor area (GFA) shall include usable floor area and that devoted to storage, processing, packaging and utilities. 
C.  In hospitals, bassinets shall not be counted as beds. 
D.  Where benches, pews or other similar seating facilities are used as seats, every 24 inches of these seating facilities shall be counted as one seat. 
E.  In the cases of mixed uses in the same building, the total requirements for off street parking and loading shall be the sum of the requirements for the separate individual uses computed separately. 
Section 17.06. - General requirements. 
A.  Construction requirements. 
1.  All parking facilities, including driveways and maneuvering areas, required for uses located within each zoning district shall be hard-surfaced with a pavement having an asphalt or concrete binder, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon the paved area, and shall be completely constructed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. 
2.  No surface water from the parking area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property unless a watershed easement has been obtained. 
3.  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot, by means of limited and clearly defined drives, shall be provided for all vehicles. 
4.  Wheel stops shall be provided and so located as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over walkways or the lot or setback lines. All parking areas providing more than five parking spaces shall be designed so as to not make it necessary for vehicles to back directly onto a street. 
B.  Illumination. 
1.  All illumination for or on parking lots shall be deflected away from adjacent residential areas and roadways and shall be installed in a manner to allow the reduction of the amount of light on other than normal parking hours each day. 
2.  The source of illumination in all parking lots abutting or within 100 feet of a residential district or use shall not be more than 20 feet above the parking lot surface. 
3.  Light fixtures shall be provided with light cut-off fixtures that direct light downward. 
4.  Lighting shall not be attached to buildings or other structures that permit light to be directed horizontally. Lighting shall also comply with the requirements of chapter 20. 
C.  Nonresidential parking area abutting residential district or use: 
1.  Except for the C-5 zone district, the respective side and rear yard setback in which the parking is located shall be a minimum of 45 feet of which 20 feet nearest the respective property line is developed as a buffer zone. In the C-5 zone the respective side and rear yard setback in which parking is located shall be consist of a minimum of a 15-foot buffer zone C along the respective property line equipped with a six-foot high vertical screen. 
2.  The buffer zone shall extend the entire depth of the side of the lot in the case of the side yard parking adjoining residential use, or the width of the rear of the lot in the case of rear yard parking adjoining the residential use. 
3.  The required buffer zone shall incorporate a minimum six-foot high vertical screen except in required front yard areas or within 17 feet of a side lot line fronting a street. 

Residential District or Use 
D.  Maintenance. All paved areas shall be continuously maintained including striping, labeling, patching and snow removal. 
(Ord. No. 11-08,  10, 8-29-2008) 
Section 17.07. - Existing off-street parking at effective date of ordinance. 
A.  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance serving an existing use shall not be reduced in size to less than that required under the terms of this ordinance. 
B.  Additional parking shall be provided and maintained in proper ratio to any increase in floor area or building use capacity. 
Section 17.08. - Parking restrictions. 
A.  After the effective date of this ordinance it shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or lessee of any lot, parcel or tract of land in a residential district or in the residential area of any other district, to permit or allow the open storage or parking, either day or night, thereon of heavy equipment, semi-tractors and/or semi-trailers or other commercial vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds. It is provided, however, that the owner, tenant or lessee of a farm may openly store the machinery and equipment used on his farm; and it is further provided that equipment necessary to be parked overnight on a lot, parcel or tract of land during construction work thereon shall be exempted from this restriction. The zoning administrator may issue up to a one week temporary special exception permit to park a semi-trailer in the parking lot of an institutional use located in a residential area. 
(Ord. No. 4-10,  5, 10-22-2010; Ord. No. 9-16,  4, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016) 
Section 17.09. - Off-street loading requirements. 
A.  On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected and occupied for commercial, industrial or other similar use involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading or unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with street or parking areas. 
B.  Off-street loading space areas shall not be construed, as, or counted towards, the supplying of area required as off-street parking space area. 
C.  The loading and unloading space, unless completely and adequately provided for within a building, shall be a minimum area of ten feet by 25 feet with 14-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule: 
GFA (sq. ft.) Loading and Unloading Spaces Required by Square Footage 0-2,000 none 2,000-20,000 one space 20,000-100,000 one space plus one space for each 20,000 sq. ft. in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. 100,000-500,000 five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 sq. ft. in excess of 100,000 sq. ft. over 500,000 fifteen (15) spaces plus one space for each 80,000 sq. ft. in excess of 500,000 sq. ft.  
D.  Loading deferment. 
1.  Where an applicant demonstrates that the loading requirements for a particular proposed use would be excessive a parking lot plan can be approved designating portions of required loading spaces and paving reserved for future use. Likewise, a loading deferment may be imposed upon a finding that the standard loading requirements would be initially excessive. 
2.  The approval shall include conditions under which the reserved loading areas must be provided. 
3.  Alterations to the deferred loading area to add loading spaces may be initiated by the owner or required by the zoning administrator, based on loading needs, and shall require the submission and approval of an amended site plan, as required by chapter 14. 
4.  The zoning administrator may require construction of additional loading within the deferred loading area if a change of use occurs for the building or property for which the deferred loading was approved. 
Section 17.10. - Access management and driveway spacing standards. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to establish standards for driveway spacing and the number of driveways along arterial roads for application during the site plan review process. The need for these standards is based on findings through several national studies (which studies are on file with the city) that the number of driveways has a direct relationship to the number of crashes and efficiency of traffic flow. Recommendations on access management have also been included in several studies and plans in which the city was a participant. 
2.  The standards of this section are intended to promote safe and efficient travel, reduce potential for vehicle crashes, minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflicts; separate traffic conflict areas; protect the substantial public investment in the street system; improve accessibility to help maintain economic prosperity, and ensure reasonable access to land uses, through not always the most direct access. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  These standards apply to site plans and subdivisions along arterial streets as defined in the master plan. Some of these streets are under the jurisdiction of the Kent County Road Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). Construction within the public right-of-way still must also meet the permit requirements of the road agency. Where any conflicts arise, the more stringent standard shall apply. Applicants should first obtain site plan approval prior to a request for an access permit from the road agency. 
2.  Major and minor arterials as classified in the city master plan include: 
a.  28th Street 
b.  29th Street 
c.  32nd Street 
d.  36th Street 
e.  44th Street 
f.  52nd Street 
g.  60th Street 
h.  Breton Avenue 
i.  Burton Street 
j.  Division Avenue 
k.  East Beltline (M-37) 
l.  Eastern Avenue 
m.  East Paris Avenue 
n.  Kalamazoo Avenue 
o.  Patterson Street 
p.  Shaffer Avenue 
Section 17.11. - Standards for access location, spacing and design. 
A.  General. Driveways shall be located so as to minimize interference with the free movement of traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway grade. 
B.  Number. The number of driveways shall be the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access for regular traffic and emergency vehicles. Typically one access point may be provided per lot. 
C.  Spacing from median crossovers. Driveways along arterials with a median shall be located to ensure proper distance for vehicles to weave between the median crossover and the driveway. The location shall be based on consideration of existing traffic conditions, expected number of movements associated with the driveway, types of vehicles (autos versus trucks), topographic constraints and similar operational factors. The city may seek recommendations from other agencies, as applicable, prior to site plan approval. 
D.  Offsets. To reduce left-turn conflicts, new commercial/industrial driveways should be aligned with driveways or streets on the opposite side the roadway where possible. If alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset a minimum of 250 feet (spacing measured between centerlines). Longer offsets may be required depending on the expected inbound left-turn volumes of the driveways. 

Driveway Spacing Measurement 
E.  Spacing from intersections along arterial streets. 
1.  Minimum spacing requirements between a proposed driveway and an intersection shall be established on a case-by-case basis during site plan review. Consideration will be given to: present traffic conditions; typical length of queuing (vehicles stopped waiting at the intersection) during peak times; and relationship to other access points provided that the spacing shall not be less than the distance listed below. Spacing at signalized intersections in particular may need to be greater than the minimum listed. The following measurements are from the near edge of the proposed driveway, measured at the throat perpendicular to the street, to the near lane edge of the intersecting street or pavement edge for uncurbed sections. 
2.  For sites with insufficient street frontage, construction of a driveway along a side street, a shared driveway with an adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line farthest from the intersection, or a service/frontage road may be required. 
F.  Spacing from intersections along nonarterial streets. When a site has frontage along a nonarterial road, that access shall be a minimum of 150 feet from the intersection, provided a longer distance may be required based on traffic conditions at a particular intersection. 
G.  Service drives. 
1.  Access from a side street, connections between uses to create a shared driveway, a frontage road or a rear service drive connecting two or more properties or uses may be required, in the following cases: 
a.  Where recommended in a corridor plan. 
b.  When the driveway could potentially interfere with traffic operations at an existing or potential traffic signal location. 
c.  The property frontage has limited sight distance. 
d.  The fire department recommends a second means of emergency access. 
2.  Service roads shall generally be parallel or perpendicular to the front property line and may be located either in front of, adjacent to, or behind, principal buildings and may be placed in required yards. In considering the most appropriate alignment for a service road, setbacks of existing or proposed buildings and anticipated traffic flow for the site shall be considered. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the service/frontage road and a shared access and maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the city recorded with the Kent County Register of Deeds. The burden for recording shall lie with the property owners. 
H.  Elevation. Service drives shall have a minimum width of 24 feet and be designed to facilitate extensions or connectors in the future, where appropriate. The site plan shall indicate the proposed width and elevation of the service/frontage road at the property line. The planning department shall maintain a record of service road elevations so design grades can be coordinated for connections and extensions. 
I.  Temporary access. Temporary access points may be approved where a continuous service road is not yet available and a performance bond or escrow is created to assure elimination of temporary access when the service road is continued. 
J.  Driveway width. For high traffic generators, or for commercial/industrial driveways along roadways experiencing or expected to experience congestion, two egress lanes may be required (one as a separate left turn lane). 
K.  Modification of standards for special situations. During site plan review the standards of this chapter may be modified upon consideration of the following without review by the zoning board of appeals. The city may require submittal of a traffic impact study, and a concurring report from the city Engineer to demonstrate a public benefit if the modification is approved. 
1.  The standards of this section would prevent reasonable access to the site. 
2.  Access via a shared driveway or service/frontage road is not possible due to the presence of existing buildings or topographic conditions. 
3.  Roadway improvements (such as the addition of a traffic signal, a center turn lane or bypass lane) will be made to improve overall operations prior to project completion, or occupancy of the building. 
4.  The use involves the redesign of an existing development or a new use, which will generate less traffic than the previous use. 
5.  The modification shall be of the minimum amount necessary. 
L.  Closure of preexisting curb cuts. As part of a zoning review, the city shall order the closure of preexisting curb cuts where necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
CHAPTER 18. - PRIVATE STREET REGULATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54. 

Section 18.01. - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the private street regulations is to ensure that private streets and driveways meet minimum drive and emergency access standards for developments within the city. Private streets may also help preserve safe and efficient traffic movement by providing reasonable access to public roadways. The easements in which private streets are located allow for the efficient location of utilities. This chapter does not apply to private streets within planned unit developments or open space zone districts; however, these requirements for private streets may be used as standards or guidelines in planned unit developments or open space zone districts. This chapter shall not apply to private streets or driveways for mobile home parks, schools, hospitals, apartments, nursing homes or other group homes, maneuvering lanes within a group of apartment or industrial buildings, or other similar uses as determined by the zoning administrator provided that these uses have direct public street frontage, there is adequate access for emergency vehicles, and that the private street does not provide access to any abutting lot or parcel of land. 
Section 18.02. - General private street regulations. 
    Private streets are considered to be permitted accessory uses within all zoning classifications. Where a private street is to be built, a private street permit is required to ensure that all lots have access to a private or public street. All buildings or uses must be located on a lot which has legal access to or abuts a public or private street. Private streets shall: 
A.  Be approved by the staff review team prior to the issuance of a building permit for a proposed structure to be served by the private street. The private streets shall be located within private street easements. The required easement width varies based on the uses that the private street serves. Standards for easement widths are outlined within section 18.03. 
B.  Be designed to provide sufficient frontage to all lots. 
C.  Be paved with an asphalt or cement binder and shall be constructed to permit effective stormwater drainage so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate upon the private street. No surface water from a private street shall be permitted to drain onto an adjoining property. 
D.  Be able to support 20 tons on a single axle with dual wheels and standard road tires. 
E.  Be named so it is not the same or similar to another street within the city. Where private streets intersect a public street, the signs shall meet the Kent County Road Commission standards as to design, location and maintenance. 
F.  Maintain a height clearance of at least 14 feet. 
G.  Not exceed a street grade of nine percent, except that a private street shall have a maximum grade of four percent for a minimum distance as approved by the city Engineer from its intersection with a public right-of-way or another private street. Street curvature regulations shall be in accordance with the design specifications of the Kent County Road Commission or the city of Kentwood as amended from time to time. 
H.  Be upgraded to appropriate standards consistent with these regulations where additional lots are allowed access to the private street, or where a private street is to become a public street. The private street shall be built to public construction standards to be accepted as public. The city reserves the right to reject a street as public if it so chooses. The upgrade of the street will be required from the drive access of the additional lot out to the public street. Exemptions from the upgrade requirement are as follows: 
1.  Lots of record in existence as of January 1992; 
2.  Lots altered subsequent to January 1992 due solely to governmental action; and 
3.  Lots altered subsequent to January 1992 where the additional site(s) otherwise has alternate approved and recorded access to a public street. 
I.  Include maintenance provisions to accommodate emergency vehicles and allow safe access of emergency vehicles to the site. The maintenance provisions shall include, but not be limited to, removal of snow upon an accumulation of four or more inches, sealing and filling cracks or holes in the street as reasonably necessary, and the removal of vegetative overhang which might obstruct emergency vehicle access or constitute a safety hazard as well as an adequate means of ensuring that maintenance will occur. 
Section 18.03. - Specific private street dimensions. 
A.  Private streets serving more than one lot must be paved and meet the following minimum requirements: 
Residential Classification Base Width 
(in feet) Pavement Width 
(in feet) Easement Width 
(in feet) Sidewalks 
Required On-Street 
Parking Driveway 
(2-10 lots) 18 16 30 None None Minor private 
(11-15 lots) 19 18 36 None None Major private 
(16-46 lots) 25 24 50 One side One side Subcollector private 
(46 plus lots) 31 30 60 Two sides Two sides  
Nonresidential Classification Base Width 
(in feet) Pavement Width 
(in feet) Easement Width 
(in feet) Sidewalks 
Required On Street 
Parking 31 30 60 None None  
B.  The pavement width for nonresidential private streets shall include two feet of curb (valley gutter type) on each side of the street. 
C.  The sidewalk within the public street right-of-way, where required, may be replaced by alternate sidewalks or walkways located throughout the development. 
D.  Where a major private street or a subcollector private street intersect a public street, a 60-foot easement width shall be required for the private street for a distance of 100 feet from the public right-of-way. Within that expanded easement width, a major private street shall be required to have a pavement width of at least 30 feet and subcollector private street shall be required to have a pavement width of at least 40 feet. Landscape islands to assist in traffic separation are encouraged. 
Section 18.04. - Cul-de-sacs. 
    A private street that involves a dead end or cul-de-sac street shall have a maximum length of 1,320 feet if a public hydrant is available within 500 feet of any proposed building site. The maximum length shall be 500 feet in the absence of a public hydrant. Residential cul-de-sacs of major private streets and subcollector private streets shall have a paved circular terminal area of at least a 70-foot diameter. All nonresidential cul-de-sacs shall have a paved circular terminal area of at least a 100-foot diameter. 
Section 18.05. - Procedures. 
A.  The plans for private street construction must be reviewed and approved by a staff review team consisting of representatives of the city's Fire Chief, engineer, zoning administrator or their designees. The members of the staff review team shall submit, in writing, any and all conditions that would warrant approval of or, alternatively, reasons for denial of the private street. The conditions shall be those necessary to ensure that a private street will not adversely affect the provision of public services and facilities, the natural environment, adjacent uses of land or the community as a whole and which are otherwise consistent with the ordinances, standards and policies of the city. After consideration, the staff review team, by majority vote, shall either approve, with or without conditions, or deny the private street. Prior to obtaining a building permit for any proposed structure that does not have direct access to a public street or existing private street, a permit for the private driveway or street must be obtained from the staff review team. A permit is not required for a private driveway which serves only one lot. 
B.  No private street shall be constructed or utilized until a permit for the private street has been obtained from the city. No private street permit shall be issued by the city until the private street (as well as all lots fronting on the private street) has been approved pursuant to this chapter. No building permit shall be issued for any proposed structure that does not have direct access to a public street or existing installed private street until the new private street has obtained all required approvals and permits and has been fully installed. 
C.  The application for a private driveway or private street permit includes the submission of three copies of the following: 
1.  A site plan sketch, showing all existing and future proposed parcel splits and proposed structures. 
2.  Drawings showing proposed utilities, sidewalks, curb openings, pavement width, water and storm drainage facilities, topography and vegetation. 
A fee shall be required as set by the city commission for the review of private driveways and private streets. Fees will be revised from time to time as necessary to cover the costs associated with the review procedure. 
A recorded easement agreement, including location, access, and maintenance provisions for the private street. The maintenance provision shall require that the road be kept in a condition that will accommodate emergency vehicles and allow the safe access of emergency vehicles to the site. 
D.  Prior to the issuance of the permit for the private street, the applicant must provide to Kentwood proof of other permits that are required from the State of Michigan and Kent County. 
Section 18.06. - Review standards. 
    In addition to the standards and requirements specified in this chapter, no private street shall be approved pursuant to section 18.05, unless the staff review team also finds that the private streets and lots fronting the private street meet all of the following conditions and requirements: 
A.  The private street will be safe for traffic and pedestrians. 
B.  The proposed development will not adversely affect adjacent uses of properties and shall be designed, constructed and maintained in a manner harmonious with the character of adjacent properties and the surrounding area. 
C.  The private street will not place demands upon public services and facilities in excess of their current capacities. 
D.  The private street will be designed to preserve environmental features, such as trees, natural areas, streams and floodplains. 
E.  The private street will be harmonious and consistent with the intent of the city's zoning ordinance and master plan. 
F.  The private street shall comply with all applicable stormwater ordinances and regulations. 
CHAPTER 19. - LANDSCAPING/SCREENING REGULATIONS 

Section 19.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards for the design, installation, and maintenance of landscape improvements. Landscaping is viewed as a critical element contributing to the aesthetics, development quality, stability of property values, and the overall character of the city. The standards of this section are intended to help achieve a number of functional and environmental objectives such as: 
A.  Promote the implementation of the master plan. 
B.  Define, articulate, and integrate outdoor spaces, architectural elements, and various site elements. 
C.  Reduce the physical impact between adjacent land uses by requiring complementary landscape treatments and providing a transitional area adjacent to natural areas. 
D.  Screen headlights to reduce glare and incidental pollution. 
E.  Control soil erosion by slowing the effects of erosive winds and water. 
F.  Respond to the varied and unique conditions throughout the city. 
G.  Provide reasonable standards to bring developed sites, which existed prior to the adoption of these standards, into compliance with the requirements contained herein. 
H.  Recognize and preserve the aesthetic value of natural areas such as woodlands, wetlands and floodplains within and adjacent to a development site. 
Section 19.02. - Landscape plan specifications. 
    A separate detailed landscape plan shall be submitted as part of all site plan reviews. Planting plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect. The landscape plan shall demonstrate that all requirements of this chapter are met and shall be prepared in accordance with the following: 
A.  Illustrate location, spacing, species, and size of proposed plant material; 
B.  Separately identify compliance with the minimum numeric requirements for greenbelts, buffer zones, parking lot trees, detention ponds, and other required interior landscaping. Required trees or materials can not be double counted; 
C.  Provide, where required by the Planning Commission, typical cross sections to illustrate views from adjacent land uses, and the slope, height, and width of proposed berms or landscape elements; 
D.  Identify trees and other landscape elements to be preserved; 
E.  Delineate the location of tree protection fence and limits of grading at the perimeter of areas that are to be preserved. Tree preservation fencing shall be established at the drip line of the tree, or a detail of the fence provided; 
F.  Provide significant construction details to resolve specific conditions such as limits of grading adjacent to areas with trees and vegetative cover to be preserved, tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns; 
G.  Provide details to ensure proper installation and establishment of proposed plant material; 
H.  Identify grass areas and other methods of ground cover; and 
I.  Identify a landscape maintenance program including a statement that all diseased, damaged or dead materials shall be replaced in accordance with standards of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 9-16,  10, 12-20-2016; eff. 12-30-2016) 
Section 19.03. - Required landscaping. 
A.  Greenbelt along street frontage. Within any R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 district, commercial/office districts, industrial districts, and the OS district the following minimum greenbelt is required along each public street right-of-way or private road easement on which the site has frontage: 
1.  Ten-foot wide greenbelt. 
2.  One canopy tree, rounded upward, for every 40 linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Seven shrubs for every 40 linear feet of frontage. 
4.  The provision of a planting berm may be required at least three feet in height in addition to the plant materials required along and outside the public right-of-way parallel to a major arterial street. 
5.  The Planning Commission and planning staff may approve substitution of evergreen trees for up to 50 percent of the required trees. 
B.  Street trees in residential projects. Street trees are required within all residential projects in accordance with the following: 
1.  One canopy street tree shall be provided for every 80 feet of lot frontage along a public or private street. 
2.  Single and two family and site condominium lots. Where possible, street trees shall be provided between the sidewalk and the curb, but at a minimum within the front yard on each lot. 
3.  Multiple family developments. Where possible, street trees shall be provided within the front yard area of the units. 
4.  Existing trees three-inch caliper or greater, preserved in good condition, may be allowed to be counted towards this requirement. 
5.  Where the installation of street trees is deferred until after construction of housing units, the city shall require a performance guarantee for street tree planting. 
6.  Where overhead power lines exist, the type and/or location of street trees shall be adjusted to avoid conflict as the trees mature. 
C.  Buffer zones. 
1.  A buffer is an area intended to provide visual barrier and noise abatement between specified land uses. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall determine whether landscaping, a wall, berm, decorative fence or combination thereof is needed to attain the intended screening. 
3.  The landscape buffer yard requirement is waived where adjacent commercial and/or office developments share a common drive or parking lot on the common lot line. 
4.  Buffers shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements unless otherwise exempted within this section. 
Table 19.01. Buffer Zone Requirements Proposed Use Adjacent to R-1 Districts Adjacent to R-2 through R-5 Districts Adjacent to C-2 and C-3 Districts Adjacent to C-4 District Adjacent to OS District Single-family residential None None None None None Two-family residential None None None None None Multiple-family residential B C C C C Manufactured housing community B C C C C Community commercial B C C C C Regional commercial A B C B C Neighborhood commercial B C C C C Office-Business C C C C C Industrial A A B B A Open space, public, semipublic B B C C C  
Table 19.02. Description of Required Buffer Zones Buffer Zone Minimum Width Screen Minimum Plant Materials A 50 ft. Six ft. high vertical screen or four ft. high berm One canopy tree, three evergreen trees and three shrubs per each 40 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward B 20 ft. None required One canopy tree, one evergreen tree and five shrubs per each 40 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward C Ten ft. None required One canopy or evergreen tree and five shrubs per each 40 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward  
D.  Parking area landscaping. All sites that provide parking shall comply with the following requirements, as applicable. 
1.  Off-street parking areas containing ten or more parking spaces shall be provided with landscaping in accordance with the following table. 
Table 19.03. Minimum Required Trees in the Parking Area 10-100 spaces One canopy tree and 100 sq. ft. of landscaped area per ten spaces. 101-200 spaces One canopy tree and 100 sq. ft. of landscaped area per 12 spaces. Over 200 spaces One canopy tree and 100 sq. ft. of landscaped area per 15 spaces.  
2.  A minimum of one-third of the trees shall be placed on the interior of the parking area, defined as the area within 18 feet surrounding the parking lot. 
3.  Parking lot landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in order to break up large expanses of pavement. 

Front Yard Landscaping 
4.  Where off-street parking areas are located within the front yard, a hedgerow, three-foot tall masonry wall or berm shall be provided between the parking spaces and the public or private right-of-way. The hedgerow shall be planted with two-foot tall evergreen or deciduous shrubs, 21/2 feet on center. 
5.  The respective side and rear yard setback for the off-street parking for nonresidential uses common to an adjacent residential use or district shall be a minimum of 45 feet of which 20 feet nearest the respective property line is developed as a buffer zone. No accessory buildings or storage is allowed in this 45-foot setback. Such buffer zone shall extend the entire depth of the side of the lot in the case of the side yard parking adjoining residential use, or the width of the rear of the lot in the case of rear yard parking adjoining the residential use. The required buffer zone shall incorporate a minimum six-foot high vertical screen. 

Residential District or Use 
E.  Detention/retention pond landscaping. Ponds shall be designed to provide a natural appearance through the use of gradual side slopes, rock walls, and plant material. Detention and retention ponds shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Side slopes shall not exceed requirements that require the perimeter of the pond to be fenced. 
2.  One canopy or evergreen tree and nine shrubs are required per 50 feet of pond perimeter, as measured along the top of the bank elevation. The required landscaping shall be planted in a random pattern, not limited to the top of the pond bank. 
3.  Where a natural landscape is found not to be particular or desirable, the Planning Commission may require some type of decorative fencing. 
F.  Dumpsters. Dumpsters, including waste receptacles and compactors, shall be designed, constructed and maintained according to the following: 
1.  Dumpster location and details of construction shall be shown on site plans. 
2.  A change in dumpster location or size shall require modification to the enclosure, as warranted by this subsection. 
3.  Dumpsters shall be located in the rear yard or nonrequired side yard, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission and shall be as far as practical, and in no case be less than, 20 feet from any adjacent residential district. 
4.  Dumpsters shall be easily accessed by refuse vehicles without potential damage to automobiles parked in designated parking spaces. 
5.  Dumpsters shall have an enclosing lid or cover. 
6.  Dumpsters shall be located within an enclosure that meets the following design standards barring a security consideration raised by the police department and affirmed by the staff review team. 
(a)  The enclosure shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 12 feet in size. 
(b)  The base of the enclosure shall be constructed of six inches of reinforced concrete pavement that shall extend six feet beyond the base or gate to support the front axle of a refuse vehicle. 
(c)  The enclosure shall be a minimum of three sides with a gate on the fourth side. 
(d)  The minimum height of the enclosure walls shall be six feet. 
(e)  The enclosure shall be constructed of brick or decorative concrete material that complements the material of the principal structure. 
(f)  A wooden enclosure may be used provided the lumber is treated to prevent decay or is determined to be durable and suitable for outdoor use. Suggested timber materials include Cedar, No. 2 Cedar rough sawn seasoned, Redwood, No. 2 Common Finish (S4S), Douglas Fir-larch or Southern Pine. 
(g)  Landscape plantings may be required, where appropriate, along the wall of the enclosure to better screen the dumpster and enhance the view of the site. 
G.  Accessory site components. In addition to required screens or walls, necessary site elements such as air conditioner units, utility boxes, road medians, site entrances and other similar components shall be appropriately screened or landscaped with plant material. 
H.  Minimum landscaping. Seeding or sodding shall be the minimum acceptable landscaping of any lot or parcel of land within the city. This minimum landscaping shall be completed within one year of the completion of the construction project or occupancy, which occurs first, and shall be reasonably maintained and replaced thereafter. 
I.  Right-of-way landscaping. The area between the street paving or curb line and the property line or sidewalk, with the exception of driveways and walkways, shall be used exclusively and maintained as landscaped area with grass, trees and other plants and materials as approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  15(19.03), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5-04,  7, 5-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-05,  9, 7-17-2005; Ord. No. 6-06,  6, 4-30-2006) 
Section 19.04. - Required landscape general provisions. 
A.  Waiver from landscaping and screening requirements. Existing landscaping or screening intended to be preserved may be determined to provide adequate landscaping and screening. Dimensional conditions unique to the parcel may also be determined to prevent development of required buffer zones, off-street parking area landscaping, greenbelts or required buffer zones. If such determination is made, in whole or in part, the landscaping provisions of this chapter may be waived. Criteria which shall be used when considering a waiver shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Existing natural vegetation; 
2.  Topography; 
3.  Existing wetland, floodplain and poor soils areas; 
4.  Existing and proposed building placement; 
5.  Building heights; 
6.  Adjacent land uses; 
7.  Distance between land uses; 
8.  Dimensional conditions unique to the parcel; 
9.  Traffic sight distances; 
10.  Traffic operational characteristics on and off site; 
11.  Visual, noise and air pollution levels; and 
12.  Health, safety and welfare of the city. 
B.  Unless approved as stipulated in section 19.04.A. above, all landscape plans shall meet each required calculation individually and in no case shall any required plantings and planting areas be counted towards other landscape requirements. 
C.  When units of measurements, utilized in determining the number of required plantings, result in a fractional planting, any fraction shall be rounded upwards and counted as one additional planting. 
D.  Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns on site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for safety of ingress or egress. 
E.  A raised standard or rolled concrete curb shall protect all landscaped areas. 
F.  All landscaped areas shall be arranged to simulate a natural setting such as staggered rows or massings. 
G.  Remaining lawn areas shall include only living materials with the exception of permitted driveways, sidewalks, signs, and utilities. 
H.  All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and orderly state free from refuse and debris. Any dead or diseased plants shall be removed and replaced within six months. 
I.  The Planning Commission may require a performance guarantee in accordance with the requirements of section 22.06 of sufficient amount to ensure the installation of all required landscaping. 
J.  All deciduous trees and evergreens must have a heavy soil type root ball. 
K.  Slopes 3 on 1 or less can be grassed. Slopes greater than 3 on 1 should be planted with ground cover perennials or course grass. 
Section 19.05. - Minimum landscape material standards. 
A.  Plant material. All plant material shall be hardy to Kent County, be free of disease and insects and conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock of the American Association of Nurserymen. 
B.  Plant sizes. Minimum plant sizes at time of installation shall be according to the following: 
Plant Type Minimum Size Deciduous canopy tree 2.5 in. caliper Deciduous ornamental tree 2 in. caliper Evergreen tree 6 ft. height Deciduous shrub 18 in. height Upright evergreen shrub 2 ft. height Spreading evergreen shrub 18-ft. 24 in. spread  
C.  Mixing of species. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 25 percent of any one plant species. 
D.  Berm. Where a berm is provided for the purposes of screening and buffering, it shall have a maximum slope of one foot of vertical rise to three feet of horizontal distance (1:3) with a crest area at least four feet wide. 
E.  Wall. Where a wall is provided for the purposes of screening and buffering, it shall have a maximum height of six feet and shall be constructed of brick, stone or decorative masonry material. 
1.  The colors and materials of the wall shall complement that of the main building or structure. 
2.  A residential privacy fence may be approved in place of a solid wall if it is more compatible with the character of the area. The privacy fence must be six feet tall, completely opaque and, if wooden, treated to prevent decay. Cyclone fencing with plastic covering is not permitted. 
F.  Suggested plant material. Botanical species containing trees native to west Michigan are identified with an asterisk (*). The use of trees native to the area, and mixture of trees from the same species association, is encouraged. 
1.  Canopy trees. Oaks*, Hard Maples*, Hackberry*, Sycamore*/Plane Tree, Birch*, Ginko (male), Honeylocust* (thornless varieties), Sweetgum, Hophornbeam*, Linden*, Ash*, Hickory* and Hornbeam*. 
2.  Evergreen trees. Fir, Hemlock, Pine* and Spruce. 
3.  Narrow evergreens. Red Cedar, Arborvitae and Juniper. 
4.  Ornamental trees. Serviceberry*, Redbud*, Dogwood*, Hawthorn*, Flowering Crab, Flowering Pear, Magnolia and Rose of Sharon. 
5.  Large shrubs. Northern Bayberry, Dogwood*, Cotoneaster, Forsythia, Mock-Orange, Sumac*, Lilac, Viburnum*, Witchhazel*, Euonymus, Sargent Crab and Ninebark*. 
6.  Small shrubs. Bayberry, Quince, Cotoneaster, Euonymus*, Forsythia, Hydrangea, Holly*, Privet, Potentilla*, Lilac, Viburnum* and Weigela. 
7.  Evergreen shrubs. Juniper, Yew, Dwarf Mugo Pine, Euonymus varieties and Winter Creeper. 
G.  Prohibited species. The following trees are not permitted as they split easily; their wood is brittle and breaks easily; their roots clog drains and sewers; and they are unusually susceptible to disease or insect pests: 
Prohibited Species Common Name Horticultural Name Box elder Acer Negundo Ginkgo Ginkgo Biloba (female only) Honey locust Gleditsia Triacanthos (with thorns) Mulberry Morus Species Poplars Populus Species Black locust Robinia Species Willows Salix Species American Elm Ulmus Americana Siberian Elm Ulmus Pumila Slippery Elm; Red Elm Ulmus Rubra Chinese Elm Ulmus Parvifola  
H.  Planting beds. Clusters of plantings should be located in planting beds. Planting beds shall be edged with either plastic or metal edging in residential districts, and metal edging in all other zoning districts. Bark used as mulch shall be maintained at a minimum of two inches deep. 
I.  Topsoil. Topsoil shall consist of a four-inch base for lawn areas and an eight-12 inch base within planting beds. 
J.  Lawn grasses. Lawn grasses shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Kent County. Grasses may be plugged, sprigged, seeded or sodded. Rolled sod, erosion reducing net or suitable mulch shall only be used in swales or other areas susceptible to erosion and shall be staked where necessary for stabilization. When complete sodding or seeding is not used, nursegrass seed shall be sown and mulched for immediate protection until permanent coverage is achieved. Grass sod and seed shall be free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. 
CHAPTER 20. - LIGHTING STANDARDS 

Section 20.01. - Intent and purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by recognizing the need for buildings and sites to be illuminated for safety, security and visibility for pedestrians and motorists balanced against the often detrimental affects associated with the use of outdoor lighting. This chapter provides standards for various forms of lighting that will: minimize light pollution; reduce the potential for off-site impacts; preserve the restful quality of nighttime by eliminating intrusive artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily contributes to sky glow; reduce light pollution and light trespass from light sources onto adjacent properties; enhance customer and employee safety; contribute to improving visibility by requiring illuminated areas to have uniform light; and curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment. 
Section 20.02. - Applicability. 
    The standards in this chapter shall apply to any light source visible beyond the property from which it is emanating. The zoning administrator may review any building or site to determine compliance with the requirements under this chapter. Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical permit for outdoor lighting or illuminated signs, a special land use approval, subdivision approval or site plan approval from the city, the applicant shall submit sufficient information to enable the zoning administrator or his/her designee and/or Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed lighting will comply with this chapter. 
Section 20.03. - Lighting definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  Average illumination. The overall average of all points on the surface of the illuminated area including the brightest and dimmest points. 
B.  Canopy structure. Any overhead protective structure, which is constructed in a manner to allow pedestrians/vehicles to pass under. 
C.  Flood light. A fixture designed to "flood" a well-defined area with light. 
D.  Footcandle (fc). A unit of illumination produced on a surface all points of which are one foot from a uniform point source equivalent to one candle in brightness of illumination. 
E.  Glare. The sensation produced by a bright source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility; blinding light. The magnitude of glare depends on factors such as the size, position, brightness of the source, and on the brightness level to which the eyes are adapted. 
F.  Lamp. The component of the luminaire that produces the actual light including luminous tube lighting. 
G.  Lamp lumen depreciation (LLD). Factor (between 0.0 and 1.0) used to describe how the lamp output changes with time compared to the initial output. Depends principally on lamp type. Typical LLD factors for outdoor lighting types are as follows: metal halide: 0.84, compact fluorescent: 0.85, high pressure sodium: 0.91 and mercury vapor: 0.79. 
H.  Light loss factor (LLF). Factor (between 0.0 and 1.0) describing light output of a luminaire after losses due to dirt accumulation (luminaire dirt depreciation, LDD) and lamp lumen depreciation (LLD), relative to the output when the lamp and luminaire are new. LLF = LDD x LLD 
I.  Light fixture. The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A light fixture also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting. 
J.  Light pollution. Artificial light which causes a detrimental effect on the environment, enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties. 
K.  Light trespass. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
L.  Luminaire. The complete lighting system including the lamp and light fixture. 
M.  Luminaire dirt depreciation (LDD). Factor (between 0.0 and 1.0) used to describe how much light produced by the lamp is lost to dirt accumulation and other changes in the optical characteristics of the luminaire, relative to the value when the luminaire is new. Depends on the quality of the luminaire, materials used, maintenance, environment. 
N.  Mounting height. The vertical distance between the surface to be illuminated and the bottom of the light source. 
O.  Outdoor light fixtures. Outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or advertisement. 
P.  Shielded fixture. Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted, i.e. a shoebox-type fixture or a cutoff fixture as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. The fixtures almost always have a flat, horizontally oriented lens and opaque (usually metal) sides. A luminaire mounted in a recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure so that the surrounding structure effectively shields the light in the same manner is also considered fully shielded for the purposes of this chapter. 

Lamp Lumens 
Q.  Spot light. A lighting assembly designed to direct the output of a contained lamp in a specific tightly focused direction (a beam) with a reflector located external to the lamp. 
R.  Uniformity. In outdoor lighting, uniformity is a measure indicating how evenly light is distributed across a surface. Typically the measure is expressed as a ratio of one value to another, such as average to minimum, or maximum to minimum. Using ratios, perfect uniformity would be 1:1. 
Section 20.04. - Submittal requirements. 
    The following information must be included for all site plan submissions which include any new exterior lighting and where site plan approval is not required, some or all of the items may be required by the zoning administrator prior to lighting installation: 
A.  Location of all outdoor lighting fixtures, including but not limited to freestanding pole fixtures, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and building elevations; 
B.  Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the light intensity throughout the site (in footcandles). Measurements must be at ground level and shown at ten-foot spacing; 
C.  Manufacturer's specification sheets and details for the type of fixture being proposed including but not limited to the total lumen output, type of lamp, distribution type and method of shielding; 
D.  Maximum footcandle calculation, minimum footcandle calculation, minimum to maximum and minimum to average uniformity ratios and light loss factor used. These statistics shall be provided for areas where vehicular and pedestrian movement is provided for and for other areas as necessary to show compliance with standards of section 20.06; 
E.  Use of fixture(s) proposed; and 
F.  Any other information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
Section 20.05. - General standards. 
A.  Unless otherwise permitted within section 20.06 or 20.08, only shielded fixtures as defined in section 20.03 may be used. Any interior light fixtures that are deemed to be causing glare and therefore not meeting the purpose or intent of this ordinance shall be shielded to prevent glare at the property line. 
B.  Decorative fixtures using lamps with low wattages do not have to be shielded; these include incandescent lamps of 60 watts or less, glass tubes filled with neon, argon and krypton and any other light source of 50 watts or less. Decorative luminaries above 50 watts shall have internal and/or external reflectors that shield the light source. 

Reflector 
C.  It is recognized that metal halide and fluorescent lamps are superior lights for color and object recognition when compared to other lamp types such as low and high pressure sodium or mercury vapor. Therefore, use of metal halide and fluorescent lamps is highly encouraged over low or high pressure sodium or mercury vapor lamps. It is also recognized that as the lighting industry develops, new lamp types are occasionally introduced that may have similar characteristics as the currently preferred types that may also be desirable for use in outdoor lighting. 
D.  The intensity of light on a site shall not exceed three-tenths (0.3) footcandles at any property line that abuts a residential zoned property or 0.5 footcandles for any other zoned property. To encourage energy conservation, it is recognized that some commercial, office and industrial sites may desire to share fixtures along property lines or allow light to trespass onto adjacent sites. Such light trespass shall be allowable if a letter of permission is provided by the property owner where the light trespass is occurring and if the footcandle intensities meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
E.  All exterior lighting shall be designed in a consistent and coordinated manner for the entire site. 
F.  Indirect internal illumination of signs and canopies is permitted provided a maximum 125 watt bulb is utilized and the transmittal surface is of a color and material that effectively shields lamps. 
Section 20.06. - Lighting intensity and uniformity standards. 
    The following lighting intensity and uniformity standards shall be used in designing an outdoor lighting plan as required within section 20.04. 
Light Use Required 
Average to 
Minimum 
Uniformity 
Ratio 2 Required 
Minimum Footcandle Reading 2 Maximum 
Allowable 
Average 
Illumination 2 Maximum Allowable Footcandle Reading 2 Outdoor Display   28th Street or Broadmoor Avenue 4:1 ---- 5.0 footcandles Front ROW no more Than 20 footcandles; Other ROWs no more Than Ten footcandles   All other areas Front Row no more Than Ten footcandles; Other Rows no more Than Five footcandles Pump Islands of Gasoline Stations 4:1 Between 1.0 and 5.0 22.0 footcandles Building Facades and Externally Illuminated Signs 3 ----   Bright Surroundings and Light Surfaces 5   Bright Surroundings and Medium Light Surfaces 7   Bright Surroundings and Dark Surfaces ---- ---- 10 ----   Dark Surroundings and Light Surfaces 2   Dark Surroundings and Medium Light Surfaces 3   Dark Surroundings and Medium Dark Surfaces 4   Dark Surroundings and Dark Surfaces 5 Building Entrances 4:1 ---- 5.0 Footcandles Active ---- 1.0 Footcandles Inactive Parking Lots 4 4:1 Between 0.2 and 0.7 ---- ---- Security Lighting ---- ---- 1.5 Footcandles ---- Exterior Recreational Facilities See Subsection "A"  
Footnotes to chart: 
1 The above statistics should only be applied to the area of each site devoted to the particular use. For example, a gas station/restaurant combination may have an area dedicated as a parking lot for the restaurant patrons and in addition have a pump island canopy. In this scenario two sets of statistics would need to be generated; one set for the parking lot and the other set for the canopy area. 
2 Measurements for average to minimum uniformity ratio, required minimum footcandle reading, maximum allowable average illumination and maximum allowable footcandle reading shall be generated at the surface intended to be illuminated; e.g., pavement or area surface. These statistics shall be provided for areas where vehicular and pedestrian movement is provided for and other areas as necessary to show compliance with standards. 
3 Building facades and signs shall not be illuminated if they are of glass, polished metal or other glossy surface including painted surfaces. Building facades shall also not be entirely illuminated, illumination shall be for architectural ornament and/or the illumination of small areas for visibility and security. For spotlight fixtures, no less than 90 percent of the light beam must be concentrated on the surface intended to be illuminated. For fixtures mounted directly to a wall surface or sign, external shields or dark colored nonreflective surface materials or other appropriate methods shall be used to minimize reflectance glare. 
4 The maximum height of parking lot light fixtures shall be 20 feet when within 150 feet of a residential zone or public or private roadway, fixture heights may be as high as 25 feet on commercial, office and industrial sites when not within 150 feet of a residential zone or public or private roadway. For large developments such as a regional mall, the zoning administrator may approve fixtures mounted as high as 35 feet. 
A.  Exterior recreational facilities. For exterior recreational facilities, sufficient information must be submitted in addition to that required in section 20.04 that demonstrates that the location, selection and aiming of all lighting fixtures will focus light on the playing areas, minimize glare and visibility from adjacent and nearby properties and roadways and minimize sky glow. A written explanation and statements shall be supplied explaining why locations, fixtures types, intensities, orientation of fixtures and other decisions were made. Lighting of sports facilities shall not be operated except during and turned off no later than 45 minutes after the event is over. 
B.  Uses not specifically listed. For uses not specifically listed within this subsection, but determined to be of a type, use and or intensity that may be detrimental to achieving the purpose of this ordinance, the zoning administrator, depending on the purpose of the lighting, shall classify lighting into one of the categories contained in section 20.06. An applicant may appeal an initial classification to the zoning administrator, in writing, detailing why more intense lighting or less lighting is necessary. The zoning administrator shall either approve or deny the appeal based on whether or not sufficient justification has been submitted and whether the proposal meets the intent of city ordinances. Final determinations of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals. 
Section 20.07. - Prohibited outdoor lighting. 
A.  The use of laser light source, searchlights or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment is prohibited. 
B.  Lighting shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. 
Section 20.08. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this chapter, provided that they have no glare or other detrimental effects on adjoining streets or property owners: 
A.  Private swimming pools; 
B.  Holiday decorations; 
C.  Window displays; 
D.  Pedestrian walkway lighting; 
E.  Residential lighting; and 
F.  Street lights. 
Section 20.09. - Lamp or fixture substitution. 
    Should any light fixture regulated under this chapter, or the type of light source therein, be changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the zoning administrator for his approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this code, which must be received prior to substitution. 
Section 20.10. - Administration. 
A.  An outdoor lighting permit shall be issued on a form from the planning department if it is determined by the Planning Commission and/or staff that a proposal fulfills the requirements and intent and purpose of this ordinance. The permit shall list what is being approved and contain copies of relevant documents. 
B.  The zoning administrator has the discretion to require the re-direction of existing light fixtures when it is determined that the fixture is creating off-site glare. 
CHAPTER 21 - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions,  2-121 et seq. 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeals, MCL 125.585 et seq. 

Section 21.01. - Duties. 
A.  There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals, the membership, powers, duties of which are prescribed in Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan for 2006, as amended. 
B.  The Zoning Board of Appeals, in addition to the general powers and duties conferred upon it, by the Act, in specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards shall have the following duties: 
1.  The Board shall have the power to interpret and determine the application of this Ordinance in harmony with its purposes and intent. 
2.  Appeals: 
a.  The Board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals from any person or any governmental department affected or aggrieved, and review any order, requirement, decision or determination where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error or misinterpretation in any order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official or body charged with the enforcement of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the Zoning Act. 
b.  An appeal to the board shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the board of Appeals after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of fact stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
3.  The Board shall hear requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance relating to the constructions, structural changes in equipment, or alterations of buildings or structures. 
4.  The Board shall also have any other duties that may be specifically conferred by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3-12,  10, 6-24-2012) 
Section 21.02. - Composition and term of office. 
A.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members. The city commission shall choose all members from electors residing within the city, one of whom may be a member of the Planning Commission. The city commission may appoint up to two alternate members for the same term as regular members to the zoning board of appeals. An alternate member may be called as specified to serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the member abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of the zoning board of appeals. The presence of a majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. 
B.  The term of each member shall be for three years, and the board as presently constituted shall continue in the manner and for the terms heretofore established. 
(Ord. No. 3-12,  10, 6-24-2012) 
Section 21.03. - Voting requirements. 
    A majority of the membership of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter upon which they are required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect a nonuse variance. 
(Ord. No. 3-12,  10, 6-24-2012) 
Section 21.04. - Granting of variances. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the board, after public hearing shall have the power to decide applications for variances filed as hereafter provided to ensure that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. See section 13.07 relative to: the application and hearing process; the effect of decisions; resubmittal restrictions; and review standards. As provided for in section 125.3604, subsection 604(11) of Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, the zoning board of appeals does not have the authority to grant a use variance. 
B.  Nonuse variance. Before submitting an application for a nonuse variance the applicant must meet with city staff and review the current zoning provisions to determine whether their desired goal could otherwise be achieved. A nonuse variance may be allowed by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates through competent, material and substantial evidence on the record that all of the following exist: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include by way of example: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of the property on the effective date of this ordinance; or 
b.  Exceptional topographic or environmental conditions or other extraordinary situation on the land, building or structure. 
2.  The condition or situation on which the requested variance is based does not occur often enough to make more practical adoption of a new zoning provision. 
3.  The literal application of the provisions of the zoning ordinance would deprive the applicant of property rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zone district. 
4.  The variance will not be detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.  Taken as a whole, the variance will not impair the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance. 
6.  The exceptional conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. Thus, by way of example, the exceptional circumstances result from uses or development on an adjacent property or the exceptional shape of the property is the result of an unrelated predecessor's split of the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 7-03,  16(21.04), 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 3-12,  10, 6-24-2012; Ord. No. 4-18,  5, 3-20-2018) 
Section 21.05. - Conditions of approval. 
    In authorizing a variance or other approval permitted by this ordinance, the board may, in addition to the specific conditions of approval called for in this ordinance, attach other conditions regarding the location, character, landscaping or treatment reasonably necessary to the furtherance of the intent and spirit of this ordinance and the protection of the public interest or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 3-12,  10, 6-24-2012) 
CHAPTER 22. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Section 22.01. - Interpretation. 
A.  In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. 
B.  It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above described zoning ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
C.  Nothing in this ordinance should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
Section 22.02. - Zoning administrator; undesignated uses. 
A.  It is hereby provided that the provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator and designees of the same, The zoning administrator shall, among other duties, interpret this ordinance, and issue all permits and notice of violations, except building permits, provided for in this ordinance. 
B.  Any use, use of land, activity, structure, or development activity not expressly allowed by this ordinance is prohibited, unless the zoning administrator finds that the use is substantially similar in character to a use or item listed in this ordinance. An individual may apply to the Planning Commission for consideration of an amendment to this ordinance to include a proposed use in one or more of the zoning districts of this ordinance, either as a permitted use or a special land use. At their option and discretion, the planning commission and city commission may consider an amendment to this ordinance, but are not required to do so. 
(Ord. No. 4-10,  3, 10-22-2010) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 4-10, effective Oct. 22, 2010, changed the title of  22.02 from "Zoning administrator" to "Zoning administrator; undesignated uses." 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Section 22.03. - Fees. 
A.  The city commission will by resolution establish fees for the administration of this ordinance. A list of current fees will be available for review during office hours at city hall. Fees may be changed at any time by resolution of the city commission. An applicant must pay all applicable fees upon the filing of any application, proposed site plan or other request or application under this ordinance to which a fee is prescribed. 
B.  In addition to regularly established fees, the city commission may also require an applicant to submit (prior to city review of an application or proposed site plan) an amount of money determined by the city to be a reasonable estimate of the fees and costs which may be incurred in reviewing and acting upon such application or related matters. The costs and expenses to be charged or assessed to the applicant, for reimbursement of the city's reasonable costs and expenses, may include, but are not limited to, city attorney fees, city consulting engineering fees, costs and fees for the services of other outside consultants, cost and fees for studies and report, special meeting costs and other similar costs and expenses. These escrow monies shall be retained by the city for reimbursement of such costs and expenses. Any monies paid or deposited by an applicant which are not used or spent by the city will be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 01-07,  1, 3-6-2007) 
Section 22.04. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
    No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city except in compliance with all codes and ordinances including this ordinance. No building permit shall be required for one-story detached accessory structures if the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 5-04,  8, 5-2-2004) 
Section 22.05. - Time limits for planning commission and city commission approvals. 
    The following time limits for acting on proposed projects by the city and/or Planning Commission must be observed unless waived by or a request for an adjournment is received from the applicant in writing. Projects will be considered approved if the city fails to act within the prescribed time limits unless the failure is beyond the reasonable ability of the city/Planning Commission to control. Projects approved as a result of a failure to act must still comply with any applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance or any other applicable ordinance. 
A.  Rezoning, planned unit development, site condominium project. 
1.  Planning commission. 90 days from the setting of a public hearing by the Planning Commission. 
2.  City commission. 120 days from the setting of a public hearing by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Special land use, site plan review. 90 days from the setting of a public hearing by the Planning Commission. 
Section 22.06. - Performance guarantees. 
A.  As a condition of approval of a site plan review, special land use, or variance, the city commission, Planning Commission, zoning administrator, or the zoning board of appeals, may require a performance guarantee of sufficient sum to assure the installation of those features or components of the approved activity or construction which are considered necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and of users or inhabitants of the proposed development. 
B.  The features or components, hereafter referred to as "improvements," may include, but shall not be limited to, survey monuments and irons, streets, curbing, landscaping, fencing, walls, screening, lighting, drainage facilities, sidewalks, paving, driveways, utilities, and similar items. 
C.  Performance guarantees shall be processed in the following manner: 
1.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant or their agent shall submit an itemized estimate of the cost of the required improvements that are subject to the performance guarantee, which shall then be reviewed by the Building Inspector. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be 100 percent of the cost of purchasing of materials and installation of the required improvements, plus the cost of necessary engineering and inspection costs and a reasonable amount for contingencies. 
2.  The required performance guarantee shall be payable to the city and may be in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city. 
3.  Upon receipt of the required performance guarantee, the Building Inspector shall issue a building permit for the subject development or activity, provided it is in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
4.  The Building Inspector, upon the written request of the obligor, shall rebate portions of the performance guarantee upon determination that the improvements for which the rebate has been requested have been satisfactorily completed. The portion of the performance guarantee to be rebated shall be in the same amount as stated in the itemized cost estimate for the applicable improvements. 
5.  When all of the required improvements have been completed, the obligor shall send written notice to the Building Inspector of completion of the improvements. Thereupon, the Building Inspector shall inspect all of the improvements and approve, partially approve, or reject the improvements with a statement of the reasons for any rejections. 
6.  If partial approval is granted, the cost of the improvement rejected shall be set forth. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from liability pursuant to relevant portions of the performance guarantee, except for that portion sufficient to secure completion of the improvements not yet approved. 
7.  The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of required performance guarantees. 
8.  In lieu of providing performance guarantees, the city and the applicant for a development proposal may agree to enter into a development agreement that would be recorded with the register of deeds. 
State Law reference- Performance guarantees for required improvements, MCL 125.584e. 
Section 22.07. - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Unless a section of this ordinance specifically provides otherwise, any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership or other legal entity which violates the zoning ordinance or violates any provision or condition imposed by the planning commission, city commission, or zoning board of appeals in pursuance of any ordinance provision or assigned condition, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to fines, costs and orders as provided by law. 
B.  Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense, and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine and other penalties for each day of violation. 
C.  The owner and co-owner of any building, structure or premises which is in violation of this ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the fines, costs and orders as provided by law. 
D.  Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of any premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of any of this ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
E.  Any person who violates any provision of Section 15.04.I. or 16.05.D. is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be fined not less than $2,500.00 for each violation. Any person who, after having been determined to be responsible for a violation of this article or the act, commits and is found responsible for a subsequent violation within a two-year period, shall be fined double the amount assessed for the immediate preceding violation. 
F.  The rights and remedies provided are cumulative and are in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
G.  Nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit the authority of the city to revoke an approval previously granted for a violation of this ordinance, which right is expressly reserved. 
(Ord. No. 3-09,  7, 6-26-2009) 
State Law reference- Violation, MCL 125.587. 
Section 22.08. - Validity severability. 
    Should any section, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part other than the part declared to be invalid. 
Section 22.09. - Repeal of prior Ordinance No. 15-88. 
    The city of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan, does hereby repeal in its entirety that certain zoning ordinance approved and adopted for the city of Kentwood, Kent County, Michigan on December 20, 1988, as amended. Nothing in this ordinance, however, shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval of the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of the effective date of this ordinance. 
Section 22.10. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect on the seventh day following publication. 
    The foregoing ordinance was offered by Commissioner Brinks, supported by Commissioner Clanton, the vote being as follows: 
YEAS: All 
NAYS: None 
ABSENT: None 
ORDINANCE DECLARED ADOPTED. 
/s/ Mary Bremer 
      Deputy City Clerk   I hereby certify the foregoing to be a true copy of an ordinance adopted at a regular meeting of the Kentwood City Commission held April 16, 2002. 
/s/ Mary Bremer 
      Deputy City Clerk   
CHAPTER 23. - FORM BASED CODE 

Section 23.01. - Form Based Code online. 
    Chapter 23, the Form Based Code for Kentwood, MI, can be found online at the following address: 
http://www.kentwood.us/document_center/city%20departments/Planning/Division%20Avenue%20Form%20Based%20Code.pdf 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - CODE 2004 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2004 Code of Ordinances, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 2004 Code of Ordinances, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the Ordinance table. 
Code 2004 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7, 2-315 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 2-31 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-375 2-61 2-61 2-62 2-283 2-81 2-81 2-82 2-82 2-83 2-83 2-84 2-84 2-85 2-85 2-151 2-151 2-152 2-152 2-153 2-153 2-211 2-211 2-212 2-212 2-213 2-213 2-241 2-241 2-242 2-242 2-243 2-243 2-244 2-244 2-245 2-245 2-246 2-246 2-247 2-247 2-248 2-248 2-249 2-249 2-250 2-250 2-251 2-251 2-252 2-252 2-253 2-253 2-254 2-254 2-281 2-281 2-282 2-282 2-311 2-311 2-312 2-312 2-313 2-313 2-314 2-314 2-315 2-315 2-341 2-341 2-342 2-342 2-371 2-371 2-372 2-372 2-373 2-373 2-374 2-374 2-401 2-401 2-402 2-402 2-403 2-403 2-404 2-404 2-405 2-405 2-406 2-406 2-407 2-407 2-408 2-408 2-409 2-409 6-1 6-1 6-31 6-31 6-32 6-32 6-33 6-33 6-34 6-34 6-35 6-35 6-36 6-36 6-37 6-37 6-61 6-61 6-62 6-62 6-63 6-63 6-64 6-64 6-91 6-91 6-92 6-92 6-93 6-93 10-1 10-1 10-2 10-2 10-3 10-3 10-4 10-4 10-5 10-5 10-6 10-6 10-7 10-7 10-41 10-41 10-61 10-61 10-62 10-62 10-63 10-63 10-64 10-64 10-101 10-101 10-102 10-102 10-103 10-103 10-104 10-104 10-171 10-171 10-172 10-172 10-173 10-173 10-174 10-174 10-175 10-175 10-176 10-176 10-177 10-177 10-178 10-178 10-179 10-179 10-180 10-180 10-181 10-181 14-31 14-31 14-32 14-32 14-33 14-33 18-31 18-31 18-32 18-32 18-33 18-33 18-34 18-34 18-35 18-35 18-36 18-36 18-37 18-37 18-38 18-38 18-39 18-39 18-40 18-40 18-41 18-41 18-42 18-42 18-43 18-43 18-44 18-44 18-81 18-81 18-82 18-82 18-83 18-83 18-84 18-84 22-1 22-1 22-31 22-31 22-61 22-61 22-62 22-62 22-63 22-63 22-64 22-64 22-65 22-65 22-66 22-66 22-101 22-101 22-102 22-102 22-103 22-103 22-104 22-104 22-105 22-105 22-107 22-107 22-108 22-108 22-109 22-109 22-110 22-110 22-111 22-111 22-112 22-112 22-141 22-141 22-142 22-142 22-143 22-143 22-144 22-144 22-145 22-145 22-146 22-146 22-153 22-153 26-1 26-1 26-31 26-31 26-32 26-32 26-33 26-33 26-34 26-34 26-35 26-35 26-36 26-36 26-37 26-37 26-38 26-38 26-39 26-39 26-40 26-40 26-41 26-41 26-42 26-42 26-43 26-43 26-44 26-44 26-45 26-45 26-46 26-46 26-47 26-47 26-48 26-48 26-331 26-331 26-332 26-332 26-333 26-333 26-334 26-334 26-335 26-335 26-336 26-336 26-371 26-371 26-372 26-372 26-373 26-373 26-374 26-374 26-375 26-375 26-376 26-376 26-401 26-401 26-402 26-402 26-404 26-404 26-431 26-431 26-432 26-432 26-433 26-433 26-434 26-434 26-435 26-435 26-436 26-436 26-437 26-437 26-438 26-438 26-439 26-439 26-471-26-503 26-471 26-504 26-504 26-505 26-505 26-506 26-506 26-507 26-507 26-508 26-508 26-509 26-509 26-510 26-510 26-511 26-511 26-512 26-512 26-513 26-513 26-514 26-514 26-515 26-515 26-516 26-516 26-601 26-601 26-602 26-602 26-603 26-603 26-604 26-604 26-605 26-605 26-606 26-606 26-607 26-607 26-608 26-608 26-609 26-609 26-610 26-610 26-611 26-611 30-31 30-31 30-32 30-32 30-33 30-33 34-1 34-1 34-2 34-2 34-3 34-3 34-4 34-4 34-5 34-5 34-6 34-6 34-31 34-31 34-32 34-32 34-33 34-33 34-34 34-34 34-35 34-35 34-71 34-71 34-72 34-72 34-73 34-73 34-74 34-74 34-75 34-75 34-76 34-76 34-77 34-77 34-78 34-78 34-79 34-79 34-80 34-80 34-81 34-81 34-82 34-82 34-83 34-83 34-84 34-84 34-85 34-85 34-86 34-86 34-87 34-87 34-88 34-88 34-89 34-89 34-96 34-96 34-97 34-97 34-98 34-98 34-99 34-99 34-100 34-100 34-101 34-101 34-102 34-102 34-103 34-103 34-104 34-104 34-105 34-105 38-1 38-1 38-2 38-2 38-3 38-3 38-4 38-4 38-5 38-5 38-6 38-6 38-7 38-7 38-8 38-8 38-10 38-9 38-41 38-41 38-42 38-42 38-81 38-81 38-82 38-82 38-83 38-83 38-84 38-84 38-85 38-85 38-86 38-86 38-87 38-87 38-88 38-88 38-89 38-89 38-90 38-90 38-91 38-91 38-92 38-92 38-93 38-93 38-111 38-111 38-112 38-112 38-113 38-113 38-114 38-114 38-115 38-115 38-116 38-116 38-117 38-117 38-118 38-118 38-119 38-119 38-120 38-120 38-121 38-121 38-141 38-141 38-142 38-142 38-143 38-143 38-161 38-161 38-162 38-162 38-163 38-163 38-164 38-164 38-165 38-165 38-191 38-191 38-192 38-192 38-193 38-193 38-194 38-194 38-195 38-195 38-196 38-196 38-197 38-197 38-198 38-198 38-199 38-191 38-200 38-200 38-231 38-231 38-232 38-232 38-233 38-233 38-234 38-234 38-235 38-235 38-236 38-236 38-261 38-261 38-262 38-262 38-263 38-263 38-264 38-264 38-265 38-265 38-266 38-266 38-267 38-267 38-268 38-268 38-301 38-301 38-302 38-302 38-303 38-303 38-321 38-321 38-322 38-322 38-323 38-323 38-324 38-324 38-325 38-325 38-326 38-326 38-327 38-327 38-328 38-328 38-351 38-351 38-352 38-352 38-353 38-353 38-354 38-354 38-355 38-355 38-391 38-391 38-392 38-392 38-395 38-395 38-431 38-431 38-432 38-432 38-433 38-433 38-434 38-434 38-435 38-435 38-436 38-436 38-437 38-437 38-438 38-438 38-439 38-439 42-31 42-31 42-32 42-32 42-33 42-33 42-34 42-34 42-35 42-35 42-36 42-36 42-71 42-71 42-72 42-72 46-1 46-1 46-31 46-31 46-32 46-32 46-33 46-33 46-34 46-34 46-35 46-35 46-36 46-36 46-37 46-37 46-38 46-38 46-61 46-61 46-62 46-62 46-63 46-63 46-64 46-64 50-1 50-1 50-2 50-2 50-3 50-3 50-4 50-4 50-5 50-5 50-6 50-6 50-7 50-7 50-8 50-8 50-9 50-9 50-10 50-10 50-11 50-11 50-12 50-12 50-13 50-13 50-14 50-14 50-15 50-15 50-16 50-16 50-17 50-17 50-19 50-19 54-1 54-1 54-31 54-31 54-32 54-32 54-33 54-33 54-34 54-34 54-71 54-71 54-76 54-76 54-77 54-77 54-111 54-111 54-112 54-112 54-113 54-113 54-114 54-114 54-115 54-115 54-151 54-151 54-152 54-152 54-153 54-153 54-170 54-170 54-171 54-171 54-172 54-172 54-173 54-173 54-174 54-174 54-175 54-175 54-176 54-176 54-177 54-177 54-178 54-178 54-179 54-179 54-180 54-180 54-181 54-181 54-182 54-182 54-183 54-183 54-184 54-184 54-185 54-185 54-186 54-186 54-187 54-187 54-188 54-188 54-189 54-189 54-190 54-190 54-191 54-191 54-192 54-192 54-193 54-193 54-194 54-194 54-195 54-195 58-1 58-1 58-2 58-2 58-31 58-31 58-32 58-32 58-33 58-33 58-34 58-34 58-35 58-35 62-1 62-1 62-31-62-33 62-31 62-61 62-61 62-62 62-62 62-63 62-63 62-64 62-64 62-65 62-65 62-66 62-66 62-67 62-67 62-68 62-68 62-69 62-69 62-70 62-70 62-71 62-71 62-72 62-72 62-73 62-73 62-74 62-74 62-75 62-75 62-76 62-76 62-77 62-77 62-111 62-111 62-112 62-112 62-113 62-113 62-114 62-114 62-115 62-115 62-116 62-116 62-117 62-117 62-118 62-118 62-119 62-119 62-120 62-120 62-121 62-121 62-122 62-122 62-123 62-123 62-124 62-124 62-125 62-125 62-126 62-126 62-127 62-127 62-128 62-128 66-1 66-1 66-2 66-2 66-3 66-3 66-4 66-4 66-31 66-31 66-32 66-32 66-33 66-33 66-61 66-61 66-62 66-62 66-63 66-63 66-64 66-64 66-65 66-65 66-66 66-66 66-67 66-67 66-68 66-68 66-69 66-69 66-70 66-70 66-71 66-71 66-91 66-91 66-92 66-92 66-93 66-93 66-94 66-94 66-95 66-95 66-96 66-96 66-97 66-97 66-131 66-131 66-132 66-132 66-133 66-133 66-134 66-134 66-135 66-135 66-136 66-136 66-137 66-137 66-138 66-138 66-139 66-139 66-201-66-263 66-201 66-301 66-301 66-302 66-302 66-303 66-303 66-304 66-304 66-305 66-305 70-31 70-31 70-32 70-32 70-33 70-33 70-34 70-34 70-35 70-35 70-71 70-71 70-72 70-72 70-73 70-73 70-74 70-74 70-75 70-75 70-76 70-76 70-77 70-77 70-78 70-78 70-79 70-79 70-80 70-80 70-81 70-81 70-82 70-82 70-83 70-83 70-84 70-84 70-111 70-111 70-113 70-113 70-114 70-114 70-115 70-115 70-116 70-116 70-117 70-117 70-118 70-118 70-119 70-119 70-120 70-120 70-141 70-141 70-171 70-171 70-172 70-172 70-173 70-173 70-174 70-174 70-175 70-175 70-176 70-176 70-177 70-177 70-178 70-178 70-179 70-179 70-180 70-180 70-181 70-181 70-182 70-182 70-183 70-183 70-211 70-211 70-212 70-212 70-213.1 70-213.1 70-213 70-213 70-214.1 70-214.1 70-214.2 70-214.2 70-214 70-214 70-215 70-215 70-216 70-216 70-217 70-217 70-218 70-218 70-219 70-219 70-220 70-220 70-221 70-221 70-222 70-222 70-223 70-223 70-224 70-224 70-225 70-225 70-226 70-226 70-227 70-227 70-228 70-228 70-229 70-229 70-230 70-230 70-231 70-231 70-232 70-232 70-233 70-233 70-234 70-234 70-235 70-235 70-236 70-236 70-237 70-237 70-238 70-238 70-239 70-239 70-240 70-240 70-241 70-241 70-242 70-242 70-243 70-243 70-244 70-244 70-245 70-245 70-246 70-246 70-247 70-247 70-248 70-248 70-249 70-249 70-250 70-250 70-251 70-251 70-252 70-252 70-253 70-253 70-254 70-254 70-255 70-255 70-256 70-256 70-257 70-257 70-258 70-258 70-259 70-259 70-260 70-260 70-261 70-261 70-262 70-262 70-341 70-341 70-342 70-342 70-343 70-343 70-344 70-344 70-345 70-345 70-346 70-346 70-347 70-347 70-348 70-348 70-349 70-349 70-350 70-350 70-351 70-351 70-352 70-352 70-360 70-360 70-361 70-361 70-362 70-362 70-363 70-363 70-364 70-364 70-365 70-365 70-366 70-366 70-367 70-367 70-368 70-368 70-369 70-369 70-370 70-370 70-371 70-371 70-372 70-372 70-373 70-373 70-377 70-377 70-378 70-378 70-379 70-379 70-380 70-380 70-381 70-381 70-382 70-382 70-383 70-383 70-384 70-384 70-385 70-385 70-386 70-386 70-390 70-390 70-391 70-391 70-392 70-392 70-393 70-393 70-394 70-394 70-395 70-395 70-396 70-396 70-397 70-397 70-398 70-398 70-399 70-399 70-400 70-400 70-401 70-401 70-402 70-402 70-403 70-403 70-404 70-404 70-405 70-405 70-406 70-406 70-407 70-407 70-410 70-410 70-411 70-411 70-412 70-412 70-413 70-413 70-414 70-414 70-415 70-415 70-416 70-416 70-417 70-417 70-418 70-418 70-419 70-419 70-420 70-420 70-421 70-421 70-422 70-422 70-427 70-427 70-428 70-428 70-429 70-429 70-430 70-430 70-431 70-431 70-432 70-432 70-433 70-433 70-434 70-434 70-435 70-435 70-451 70-451 70-452 70-452 70-453 70-453 70-454 70-454 70-455 70-455 70-481 70-481 70-482 70-482 70-483 70-483 70-484 70-484 70-485 70-485 70-486 70-486 70-487 70-487 70-488 70-488 70-489 70-489 70-490 70-490 70-491 70-491 70-492 70-492 70-493 70-493 70-511 70-511 70-512 70-512 70-513 70-513 70-514 70-514 70-515 70-515 70-516 70-516 70-517 70-517 70-518 70-518 70-519 70-519 70-520 70-520 70-521 70-521 70-522 70-522 70-523 70-523 70-524 70-524 70-525 70-525 70-526 70-526 70-527 70-527 70-528 70-528 70-529 70-529 70-551 70-551 70-552 70-552 70-553 70-553 70-554 70-554 70-560 70-560 70-561 70-561 70-562 70-562 70-563 70-563 70-564 70-564 70-565 70-565 70-566 70-566 70-567 70-567 70-568 70-568 70-569 70-569 70-570 70-570 70-571 70-571 70-572 70-572 74-1 74-1 74-2 74-2 74-31 74-31 74-32 74-32 74-33 74-33 74-34 74-34 74-35 74-35 74-71 74-71 74-72 74-72 74-73 74-73 74-74 74-74 74-75 74-75 74-76 74-76 74-77 74-77 74-78 74-78 74-79 74-79 74-101 74-101 74-102 74-102 74-103 74-103 74-104 74-104 74-141 74-141 74-142 74-142 74-143 74-143 74-144 74-144 74-161 74-161 74-162 74-162 74-163 74-163 74-164 74-164 74-165 74-165 74-166 74-166 74-201 74-201 74-202 74-202 74-203 74-203 74-204 74-204 74-205 74-205 74-206 74-206 74-207 74-207 74-208 74-208 74-209 74-209 78-31 78-31 78-32 78-32 78-33 78-33 78-34 78-34 78-35 78-35 78-36 78-36 78-37 78-37 78-38 78-38 78-39 78-39 78-61 78-61 78-62 78-62 78-63 78-63 78-64 78-64 78-65 78-65 78-66 78-66 78-67 78-67 78-68 78-68 78-69 78-69 78-70 78-70 78-101 78-101 78-102 78-102 78-103 78-103 78-104 78-104 78-121 78-121 78-122 78-122 78-123 78-123 78-124 78-124 78-125 78-125 78-126 78-126 78-131 78-131 78-132 78-132 78-133 78-133 78-134 78-134 78-135 78-135 78-136 78-136 78-137 78-137 78-138 78-138 78-139 78-139 78-140 78-140 78-141 78-141 78-142 78-142 78-143 78-143 78-144 78-144 78-145 78-145 78-146 78-146 78-147 78-147 78-148 78-148 78-149 78-149 78-150 78-150 78-151 78-151 78-152 78-152 78-153 78-153 82-1-82-4 82-1 82-5 82-5 82-41 82-41 82-87 82-87  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - COMPILED ORDINANCES 1987 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1987 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1987 Compiled Ordinances, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the Ordinance table. 
Comp. Ords. 1987 
Section Section 

this Code 12.11 62-31 12.001 2-81 12.003 2-82 12.004 2-84 12.005 2-85 12.006 2-83 12.011 2-151 12.012 2-152 12.013 2-153 12.051-12.053 2-373 12.101 50-1 12.102 50-2 12.103 50-3 12.104 50-4 12.105 50-5 12.106 50-6 12.107 50-7 12.108 50-8 12.109 50-9 12.110 50-10 12.111 50-11 12.112 50-12 12.113 50-13 12.114 50-14 12.115 50-15 12.118 50-16 12.119 50-17 12.161 54-31 12.162, 12.163 54-32 12.164 54-33 12.165 54-34 12.212, 12.11 62-31 12.213 62-1 12.241-12.243 2-371 12.255 82-41 12.264(2) 82-5 12.265 82-87 12.301, 12.302 58-1 12.381 2-211 12.382 2-212 12.383-12.398 2-213 12.752, 12.753 22-31 12.839 86-71 12.841 2-1 12.861 2-61 12.901 2-281 12.902 2-282 12.903 2-311 12.904 2-312 12.905 2-313 12.906 2-314 12.907 2-341 12.908 2-315 12.908 1-7 12.909 2-342 12.910 1-7 12.921 2-283 14.001 86-31 14.002 86-32 14.003 86-33 14.004 86-34 14.005 86-35 14.006 86-36 14.007 86-37 14.008 86-37 14.009 86-38 14.010 86-39 14.011 86-40 14.012 86-41 14.013 86-42 17.001 90-32 17.004 90-31 17.005 90-34 17.006 90-35 17.007 90-36 17.008 90-37 17.009 90-38 17.010 90-33 17.201 90-71 17.202 90-73 17.203 90-75 17.204 90-76 17.205(A) 90-74 17.205(B) 90-72 18.051 58-31 18.052 58-32 18.053 58-34 18.054 58-34 18.055 58-33 18.056 58-35 18.101 74-202 18.102 74-201 18.103 74-205 18.104 74-204 18.105 74-207 18.106 74-206 18.107 74-203 18.108 74-209 18.110 74-208 18.201 2-241 18.202 2-241, 2-242 18.203 2-241, 2-243 18.204 2-241, 2-244 18.205 2-241, 2-245 18.207 2-241, 2-246 18.208 2-241, 2-247 18.209 2-241, 2-248 18.210 2-241, 2-249 18.211 2-241, 2-250 18.212 2-241, 2-251 18.213 2-241, 2-252 18.214 2-241, 2-253 18.215 2-241, 2-254 20.161(A) 66-132 20.161(B) 66-132 20.161(C) 66-131 20.168(2) 66-134 20.168(3) 66-133 - 66-138 20.168(9) 66-136 20.168(10) 66-137 20.168(12) 66-139 20.168(13) 66-135 20.169 66-136 20.201-20.205 38-93 20.231-20.234 54-1 20.245 54-76 20.246 54-77 20.248 54-71 20.251-20.255 66-62 20.261 66-91 20.262 66-92 20.263(A) 66-94 20.263(C) 66-95 20.263(D) 66-96 20.263(E) 66-93 20.263(F) 66-97 20.278 66-61 20.291 66-63 20.292 66-63 20.294 66-63 20.295 66-63 20.301(2) 38-82 20.302 1-2 20.303 1-7 20.304(4) 38-235 20.304(12) 38-5 20.304(13) 38-6 20.305(1) 38-81 20.305(2) 38-81 20.305(3) 38-83 20.305(4) 38-84 20.305(5) 38-85 20.305(6) 38-87 20.305(7) 38-88 20.305(8) 38-91 20.305(9) 38-436 20.305(10) 38-89 20.305(11) 38-90 20.305(12) 38-86 20.306(1) 38-325 20.306(2) 38-323 20.306(3) 38-324 20.306(8) 38-326 20.306(9) 38-327 20.306(10) 38-322 20.306(11) 38-328 20.306(12)-(14) 38-395 20.307(1) 38-231 20.307(2) 38-232 20.307(3) 38-234 20.307(4) 38-233 20.307(5) 38-163 20.307(6) 38-161 20.307(7) 38-7 20.307(8) 38-263, 38-267 20.307(9) 38-82 20.307(10) 38-263 20.308(1) 38-432 20.308(2) 38-431 20.308(3) 38-434 20.308(4) 38-438 20.308(5) 38-435 20.308(6) 38-433 20.308(7) 38-437 20.308(8)-(10) 38-433 20.308(12) 26-1 20.309(1) 38-301 20.309(2) 38-302 20.309(3) 38-4 20.309(4) 38-3 20.309(5) 38-302 20.309(6) 38-2 20.310(1) 38-111 20.310(2) 38-113 20.310(3) 38-115 20.310(4) 38-117 20.310(5) 38-118 20.310(6) 38-116 20.310(7) 38-120 20.310(8) 38-119 20.310(9) 38-112 20.310(10) 38-121 20.310(11) 38-114 20.311 38-9 20.312(1) 38-194 20.312(2) 38-195 20.312(3) 38-195 20.312(4) 38-197 20.312(5) 38-193 20.312(6) 38-198 20.312(7) 38-192 20.312(8) 38-196 20.313(1) 38-303 20.313(2) 38-303 20.313(3) 38-42 20.313(4) 38-303 20.313(5) 38-236 20.313(6) 42-72 20.313(8) 38-164 20.313(9) 38-391 20.341-20.346 38-392 20.401 18-32 20.402 18-33 20.403 18-34 20.421 18-31 20.431-20.433 18-35 20.441, 20.442 18-36 20.451-20.456 18-37 20.461, 20.462 18-38 20.471 18-39 20.481 18-40 20.491, 20.492 18-41 20.501-20.504 18-42 20.511 18-43 20.521 18-44 20.571 18-81 20.572 18-82 20.573 18-83 20.574 18-84 20.601 26-432 20.602 26-431 20.603 26-433 20.604 26-434 20.605 26-435 20.606 26-436 20.607 26-437 20.608 26-438 20.609 26-439 20.701 38-351 20.702 38-353 20.703 38-354 20.704 38-352 20.706 38-355 20.761 54-112 20.762 54-111 20.763 54-114 20.764 54-115 20.765-20.767 54-113 20.771 38-141 20.772 38-142 20.791 38-143 20.792 38-141 20.793 38-143 20.801-20.803 66-201 20.805 66-201 20.807 66-201 20.809 66-201 20.810 66-201 20.812 66-201 20.816 66-201 21.631 54-151 21.632 54-152 21.633 54-153 21.651 6-31 21.652 6-1, 6-61 21.653 6-1, 6-62 21.654 6-1, 6-63 21.655 6-1, 6-92 21.657(A) 6-1, 6-91 21.660 6-1 21.662(F)(1) 6-1, 6-91 21.665 6-1, 6-35 21.666 6-1, 6-36 21.667 6-1, 6-37 21.669 6-1, 6-34 21.670 6-1, 6-64 21.671 6-1, 6-32 21.675 6-1, 6-33 21.752(D) 26-372 21.761 26-371 21.762(A)-(C) 26-401 21.763 26-402 21.765 26-374 21.766 26-375 21.767 26-373 21.768 26-376 21.769 26-404 21.801 38-8 21.802 38-8 21.811 62-61 21.812 62-62 21.813 62-63 21.814 62-64 21.815 62-65 21.816 62-66 21.817 62-67 21.818 62-68 21.819 62-69 21.820 62-70 21.821 62-71 21.822 62-72 21.823 62-73 21.824 62-74 21.825 62-75 21.826 62-76 21.827 62-77 21.851 26-471 21.855-21.859 26-471 21.871 26-331 21.872 26-333 21.873 26-334 21.874 26-335 21.875 26-336 21.876 26-332 22.091 74-31, 74-35 22.096 74-35 22.122 74-2 22.131 74-31, 74-35 22.204 74-161, 74-162 22.205 74-163 22.206 74-164 22.207 74-141 22.208 74-142 22.209 74-143 22.210 74-166 22.211 74-165 22.351 74-31 22.371 74-35 25.171 78-102 25.174 78-101 25.175 78-121 25.176 78-122 25.177 78-123 25.178 78-124 25.179 78-125 25.180 78-126 25.181 78-103 25.182 78-104 25.205 78-63 25.206 78-64 25.302 70-72 25.303 70-71 25.304 70-111 25.305 70-73 25.306 70-179 25.307 70-75 25.308 70-74 25.310 70-77, 70-78 25.311 70-79 25.312 70-75 25.313 70-76 25.314 70-80 25.315 70-81 25.316 70-82 25.318 70-174 - 70-182 25.319 70-113 25.320 70-114 25.321 70-115 25.322 70-116 25.323 70-117 25.324 70-118 25.325 70-119 25.326 70-172 25.327 70-171 25.328 70-171 25.330 70-173 25.331 70-120 25.332 70-181 25.333 70-175 25.334 70-176 25.335 70-177 25.336 70-175 25.337 70-178 25.338 70-178 25.339 70-180 25.340 70-141 25.341 70-84 25.342 70-83 25.372 70-527 25.401 70-32 25.402 70-31 25.403 70-34 25.404 70-35 25.408 70-33 25.601 30-32 25.602 30-31 25.603 30-33 25.651 70-80 25.652 70-80 25.653 70-80 25.701 70-451 25.702 70-452 25.703 70-551 25.704 70-552 25.705 70-553 25.706 70-554 25.707 70-481 25.708 70-513 25.709 70-521 25.710 70-511 25.711 70-512 25.712 70-454 25.713 70-482 25.714 70-482 25.715 70-482 25.716 70-483 25.717 70-484 25.718 70-485 25.719 70-486 25.720 70-524 25.721 70-514 25.722 70-515 25.723 70-516 25.724 70-517 25.725 70-518 25.726 70-519 25.727 70-520 25.728 70-522 25.729 70-523 25.731 70-525, 70-526 25.733 70-528 25.734 70-493 25.735 70-493 25.736 70-455 25.737 70-529 25.738 70-488 25.739 70-489 25.740 70-492 25.741 70-487 25.742 70-491 25.743 70-490 25.744 70-453 35.053 38-162 35.055 38-165 35.056(G) 38-264 35.056(H) 38-265 35.056(I) 38-266 35.056(K) 38-267 35.056(M) 38-268 35.057 38-262 35.058 46-1 35.059(B) 38-92 35.064 38-92 - 38-165 - 38-261 35.101 46-32 35.102 46-31 35.103 46-61 35.104 46-35 35.105 46-36 35.106 46-37 35.107 46-34 35.108 46-62 35.109 46-63 35.110 46-64 35.116 46-33 35.117 46-38 35.131-35.134 2-372 35.151 42-31, 42-32 35.152, 35.153 42-33 35.154 42-34 35.155 42-35 35.157 42-36 35.171 42-71 35.261(1) 14-31 35.261(2) 14-32 35.262 14-33 35.311 10-2 35.313 10-3 35.321-35.332 10-1 35.341 10-101 35.343 10-103 35.344 10-104 35.345 10-102 35.361 10-61 35.362 10-62 35.363 10-63 35.364 10-64 35.371 10-4 35.372 10-5 35.374 10-41 35.381 10-171 35.382 10-175 35.383(a) 10-176 35.383(b) 10-177 35.383(c) 10-178 35.383(d) 10-179 35.383(e) 10-180 35.383(f) 10-181 35.384 10-174 35.385 10-172 35.386 10-173 35.421 74-101 35.422 74-102 35.423 74-103 35.424 74-104 36.373 10-6 40.003 22-141 40.004 22-142 40.005 22-146 40.007(F) 22-153 40.008 22-144 40.009 22-145 40.011 22-143 40.121 22-61 40.122 22-62 40.123 22-63 40.124 22-64 40.125 22-65 40.126 22-1 40.127 22-66 61.660(D) 6-93  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 18-67 9-24-1967 1 38-191 - - 38-200 Ord. No. 12-87 6-26-1987 22-107 22-107 - 22-108 22-108 - 22-109 22-109 - 22-110 22-110 - 22-111 22-111 - 22-112 22-112 Ord. No. 14-90 7-15-1990 1 38-191 - - 38-200 Ord. No. 16-00 12-5-2000 1-3 62-31 Ord. No. 03-01 2-6-2001 1 78-121 - 2 78-104 Ord. No. 10-01 6-19-2001 1 74-31 - 3 74-35 Ord. No. 15-01 10-2-2001 1, 2 66-31 - 3 66-32 - 4 66-4 - 5-7 66-31 - 8 66-33 Ord. No. 02-02 1-7-2002 78-104 Ord. No. 04-02 2-5-2002 25.200 78-35 - 25.201 78-32 - 25.202 78-31 - 25.203 78-37 - 25.204(4.1) 78-61 - 25.204(4.2) 78-62 - 25.207 78-65 - 25.208 78-67 - 25.209 78-69 - 25.210 78-66 - 25.211 78-68 - 25.212 78-70 - 25.213 78-39 - 25.214 78-38 - 25.215 78-34 - 25.216 78-36 - 25.217 78-33 Ord. No. 06-02 4-1-2002 1(1) 38-1 - 1(1(1)) 38-82 - 1(1(3)) 38-321 - 1(1(4)) 38-191 - 1(1(6)) 38-321 - 1(1(10)) 38-83 - 1(1(11)) 38-303 - 1(1(13)) 38-114 - 1(1(14)) 38-391 - 1(1(16)) 38-121 - 1(1(17)) 38-121 - 1(1(18)) 38-391 - 1(7) 38-1 - 1(9) 38-1 - 1(12) 38-1 - 2(4(4)) 38-235 - 2(4(12)) 38-5 - 2(4(13)) 38-6 - 3(10(1)) 38-111 - 3(10(2)) 38-113 - 3(10(3)) 38-115 - 3(10(4)) 38-117 - 3(10(5)) 38-118 - 3(10(6)) 38-116 - 3(10(7)) 38-120 - 3(10(8)) 38-119 - 3(10(9)) 38-112 - 3(10(10)) 38-121 - 3(10(11)) 38-114 Ord. No. 10-02 5-7-2002 54-71 Ord. No. 12-02 5-7-2002 1 90-32 - 4 90-31 - 5 90-34 - 6 90-35 - 7 90-36 - 8 90-37 - 9 90-38 - 10 90-33 - 10(a) 90-39 Ord. No. 13-02 5-21-2002 1 82-87 Ord. No. 14-02 7-2-2002 1 2-81 - 2 2-83 Ord. No. 16-02 7-2-2002 1 74-34 Ord. No. 20-02 9-3-2002 1 74-34 Ord. No. 21-02 10-15-2002 1(1) 62-112 - 1(2) 62-113 - 1(3) 62-111 - 1(4), 2 62-114 - 1(5) 62-115 - 1(6) 62-116 - 1(7) 62-117 - 1(8) 62-118 - 1(9) 62-119 - 1(10) 62-120 - 1(11) 62-121 - 1(12) 62-122 - 1(13) 62-123 - 1(14) 62-124 - 1(15) 62-125 - 1(16) 62-126 - 1(17) 62-127 - 1(18) 62-128 - 2 62-114 Ord. No. 01-03 2-4-2003 1-3 66-1 - 4-6 66-2 - 7 66-3 Ord. No. 5-03 4-1-2003 1-7 - 2-315 Ord. No. 7-03 4-1-2003 1(1.04) App. A, 1.04 - 1(1.07) App. A, 1.07 - 2(2.02) App. A, 2.02 - 3(3.03) App. A, 3.03 - 3(3.12) App. A, 3.12 - 3(3.15) App. A, 3.15 - 3(3.20) App. A, 3.20 - 3(3.25) App. A, 3.25 - 4(5.02) App. A, 5.02 - 4(5.03) App. A, 5.03 - 5(6.02) App. A, 6.02 - 5(6.03) App. A, 6.03 - 6(7.01) App. A, 7.01 - 6(7.03) App. A, 7.03 - 6(7.04) App. A, 7.04 - 7(8.03) App. A, 8.03 - 8(10.03) App. A, 10.03 - 9(12.03) App. A, 12.03 - 9(12.04) App. A, 12.04 - 9(12.05) App. A, 12.05 - 9(12.06) App. A, 12.06 - 9(12.07) App. A, 12.07 - 9(12.08) App. A, 12.08 - 10(13.04) App. A, 13.04 - 10(13.06) App. A, 13.06 - 11(14.02) App. A, 14.02 - 11(14.04) App. A, 14.04 - 12(15.02) App. A, 15.02 - 12(15.03) App. A, 15.03 - 12(15.04) App. A, 15.04 - 13(16.03) App. A, 16.03 - 13(16.04) App. A, 16.04 - 15(19.03) App. A, 19.03 - 16(21.04) App. A, 21.04 Ord. No. 9-03 7-1-2003 38-41 Ord. No. 10-03 7-1-2003 1, 2 66-201 Ord. No. 11-03 9-2-2003 25.175 78-121 Ord. No. 12-03 9-2-2003 25.200 78-35 - 25.201 78-32 - 25.202 78-31 - 25.203 78-37 - 25.204(4.1) 78-61 - 25.204(4.2) 78-62 - 25.205 78-63 - 25.206 78-64 - 25.207 78-65 - 25.208 78-67 - 25.209 78-69 - 25.210 78-66 - 25.211 78-68 - 25.212 78-70 - 25.213 78-39 - 25.214 78-38 - 25.215 78-34 - 25.216 78-36 - 25.217, 25.218 78-33 Ord. No. 14-03 10-7-2003 1-3 66-1 Ord. No. 16-03 11-10-2003 18.051 58-31 - 18.052 58-32 - 18.053, 18.054 58-34 - 18.055 58-33 Ord. No. 17-03 12-2-2003 1 2-401 - 2 2-402 - 3 2-403 - 4 2-404 - 5 2-405 - 6 2-406 - 7 2-407 - 8 2-408 - 9 2-409 Ord. No. 5-04 5-2-2004 1 App. A, 2.02 - 2 App. A, 3.03 - - App. A, 3.17 - - App. A, 3.28 - 3 App. A, 8.02 - 4 App. A, 10.03 - 5 App. A, 12.03 - - App. A, 12.10 - 6 App. A, 16.05 - 7 App. A, 19.03 - 8 App. A, 22.04 Ord. No. 11-04 10-24-2004 1.01 78-131 - 1.02 78-132 - 1.03 78-133 - 1.04 78-134 - 1.05 78-135 - 2.01 78-136 - 2.02 78-137 - 2.03 78-138 - 2.04 78-139 - 3.01 78-140 - 3.02 78-141 - 3.03 78-142 - 3.04 78-143 - 4.01 78-144 - 4.02 78-145 - 4.03 78-146 - 4.04 78-147 - 4.05 78-148 - 4.06 78-149 - 4.07 78-150 - 4.08 78-151 - 4.09 78-152 - 5.01 78-153 Ord. No. 13-04 12-27-2004 1 38-439 Ord. No. 7-05 5-1-2005 1 54-170-54-194 Ord. No. 8-05 5-1-2005 1 74-141 - 2 74-142 - 3 74-143 - 4 74-144 - 5 74-161 - 6 74-162 - 7 74-163 - 8 74-164 - 9 74-165 - 10 74-166 Ord. No. 3-05 6-1-2005 1 66-64 - 2 66-65 - 3 66-66 Ord. No. 4-05 6-1-2005 1 66-67-66-71 Ord. No. 11-05 7-17-2005 1 App. A, 3.06 - 2 App. A, 5.03 - 3 App. A, 6.03 - 4 App. A, 8.02 - 5 App. A, 9.02 - 6 App. A, 12.03 - - App. A, 12.04 - - App. A, 12.05 - - App. A, 12.06 - - App. A, 12.07 - - App. A, 12.08 - 7 App. A, 13.04 - 8 App. A, 16.05 - 9 App. A, 19.03 Ord. No. 14-05 7-28-2005 1 10-7 Ord. No. 10-05 7-31-2005 1 26-435 Ord. No. 17-05 10-23-2005 1 74-34 Ord. No. 18-05 10-23-2005 1 22-101 - 2 22-102 - 3 22-103 - 4 22-104 - 5 22-105 Ord. No. 20-05 11-20-2005 1 66-64 Ord. No. 02-06 1-29-2006 1 82-41 Ord. No. 6-06 4-30-2006 1 App. A, 2.02 - 2 App. A, 3.29 - 3 App. A, 9.02 - 4 App. A, 13.04 - 5 App. A, 15.04 - 6 App. A, 19.03 Ord. No. 7-06 4-30-2006 1 26-431 - 2 26-433 - 3 26-438 Ord. No. 8-06 4-30-2006 1 54-193 Ord. No. 9-06 4-30-2006 1 1-2 Ord. No. 11-06 7-30-2006 1 38-439 Ord. No. 12-06 7-30-2006 1 70-560-70-572 Ord. No. 14-06 7-30-2006 1 2-374 Ord. No. 15-06 10-20-2006 1 App. A, 7.03 - 2 App. A, 8.03 - 3 App. A, 12.03 - - App. A, 12.04 - - App. A, 12.07 - 4 App. A, 13.03 - - App. A, 13.04 - - App. A, 13.05 - - App. A, 13.07 Ord. No. 17-06 10-20-2006 1 App. A, 10.02 - 2 App. A, 13.04 - 3 App. A, 15.04 Ord. No. 20-06 1-12-2007 1 74-71-74-74 - 2 74-75-74-79 Ord. No. 01-07 3-6-2007 1 App. A, 22.03 Ord. No. 02-07 5-15-2007 1 2-375 Ord. No. 3-07 10-2-2007 1 54-184 - 2 54-193 - 3 54-195 Ord. No. 3-08 2-5-2008 1 66-92 Ord. No. 2-08 2-29-2008 1 2-405 - 2 2-407 Ord. No. 4-08 3-4-2008 1 54-174 Ord. No. 5-08 3-28-2008 1 50-19 Ord. No. 6-08 3-28-2008 1 26-31-26-48 Ord. No. 7-08 4-25-2008 1 34-1-34-3 - - 34-5 - - 34-31-34-35 - - 34-71-34-89 - - 34-96-34-100 - - 34-102-34-105 Ord. No. 8-08 7-25-2008 1 6-1, 6-31 - 2 6-1, 6-63 - 3 6-1, 6-92 Ord. No. 10-08 8-29-2008 1 86-31 - 2 86-32 - 3 86-43 - 4 90-34 - 5 90-36 Ord. No. 11-08 8-29-2008 1 App. A, 2.02 - 2 App. A, 3.16 - - App. A, 8.02 - - App. A, 9.02 - - App. A, 10.02 - 3 App. A, 3.30 - 4 App. A, 5.03 - - App. A, 7.03 - - App. A, 9.03 - - App. A, 10.03 - - App. A, 11.03 - 5 App. A, 8.02 - 6 App. A, 10.03 - 7 App. A, 12.03 - - App. A, 12.04 - - App. A, 12.05 - - App. A, 12.06 - - App. A, 12.07 - - App. A, 12.08 - 8 App. A, 12.03 - 9 App. A, 14.05 - 10 App. A, 17.06 Ord. No. 12-08 9-26-2008 1 App. A, 2.02 - - App. A, 5.02 - - App. A, 6.02 - - App. A, 8.02 - - App. A, 15.03 - - App. A, 15.04 - 2 App. A, 16.02 - - App. A, 16.05 - 3 App. A, 8.03 Ord. No. 13-08 10-31-2008 2-82 Ord. No. 15-08 11-25-2008 1 2-374 Ord. No. 16-08 12-26-2008 1 22-101 - 2 22-102 - 3 22-104 - 4 22-108 Ord. No. 1-09 3-7-2009 1 26-504-26-516 Ord. No. 2-09 3-7-2009 1 34-97 - 2 34-99 Ord. No. 3-09 6-26-2009 1 App. A, 8.02 - 2 App. A, 15.04 - 3 App. A, 16.02 - 4 App. A, 16.04 - 5 App. A, 16.05 - 6 App. A, 16.05 - 7 App. A, 22.07 Ord. No. 4-09 8-28-2009 1 38-392 Ord. No. 5-09 8-28-2009 1 26-601-26-611 Ord. No. 6-09 9-25-2009 1 2-407 Ord. No. 7-09 9-25-2009 1 15.04 Ord. No. 8-09 12-4-2009 1 74-34 Ord. No. 9-09 12-25-2009 1 86-101-86-109 Ord. No. 10-09 12-25-2009 1 App. A, 16.02 - 2 App. A, 16.03 - 3 App. A, 3.14 Ord. No. 02-10 4-9-2010 1 58-34 Ord. No. 3-10 6-18-2010 54-192 Ord. No. 4-10 10-22-2010 1 App. A, 2.02 - 2 App. A, 3.31 - 3 App. A, 22.02 - 4 App. A, 3.19 - 5 App. A, 17.08 Ord. No. 6-10 1-14-2011 1 78-31 - 2 78-35 Ord. No. 1-11 2-11-2011 1 8.02 - 2 App. A, 10.02 - 3 App. A, 15.03 - - App. A, 15.04 - 4 App. A, 16.01 - - App. A, 16.03 - - App. A, 16.05 Ord. No. 3-11 5-13-2011 1 74-34 Ord. No. 4-11 5-13-2011 1 58-1 - 2 58-2 Ord. No. 5-11 9-2-2011 1 70-341-70-352 - - 70-360-70-373 - - 70-377-70-386 - - 70-390-70-407 - - 70-410-70-422 - - 70-427-70-435 Ord. No. 6-11 9-2-2011 1 70-211-70-213 - - App. A, 70-213.1 - - App. A, 70-214 - - App. A, 70-214.1 - - App. A, 70-214.2 - - App. A, 70-215-70-262 Ord. No. 1-12 5-23-2012 1 38-163 Ord. No. 2-12 6-11-2012 1 6-1 - - 6-61 Ord. No. 3-12 6-24-2012 1 V3.15 - 2, 3 App. A, 3.16 - 4 App. A, 3.15 - 5 App. A, 10.02 - 6 App. A, 10.03 - 7 App. A, 13.07 - 8 App. A, 15.03 - 9 App. A, 15.04 - 10 App. A, 21.01 - - App. A, 21.02 - - App. A, 21.03 - - App. A, 21.04 - - App. A, 21.05 Ord. No. 4-12 6-24-2012 1 38-163 Ord. No. 5-12 7-1-2012 1 App. A, 8.02 - 2 App. A, 15.04 Ord. No. 6-12 7-25-2012 1 74-34 Ord. No. 7-12 7-25-2012 1 22-101 - 2 22-102 - 3 22-104 - 5 22-108 Memo of 8-2-2012 8-2-2012 6-1 - 6-61 - 18-84 - 22-145 - 26-45 - 26-511 - 34-98 - 34-99 - 34-100 - 34-102 - 34-103 - 46-62 - 74-79 - 78-34 - 78-103 - 78-150 Ord. No. 8-12 9-26-2012 1 38-327 Ord. No. 11-12 12-16-2012 1 70-183 Ord. No. 1-13 1-13-2013 1 34-31 Ord. No. 2-13 1-13-2013 1 2-31 Ord. No. 3-13 3-13-2013 1, 2 App. A, 2.02 - 3 App. A, 12.05 - 4 App. A, 15.03 - 5, 6 App. A, 15.04 Ord. No. 8-13 6-30-2013 1, 2 38-163 Ord. No. 9-13 9-21-2013 1 38-41 - 2 38-235 Ord. No. 10-13 10-29-2013 1 26-471 Ord. No. 12-13 12-17-2013 1 70-213 - 2 70-217 - 3 70-218 - 4 70-219 - 5 70-220 - 6 70-227 - 7 70-229 - 8 70-230 - 9 70-231 - 10 70-234 - 11 70-251 - 12, 13 70-253 - 14 70-258 - 15 70-260 - 16 70-262 Ord. No. 2-14 5-14-2014 1-6 6-1, 6-31 - 2 6-1, 6-62 - 3 6-1, 6-63 - 4 6-1, 6-64 - 5 6-1, 6-91 - 6 6-1, 6-92 Ord. No. 3-14 5-14-2014 1, 2 App. A, 13.04 - 3 App. A, 15.03 - 4 App. A, 15.04 Ord. No. 4-14 5-14-2014 1-3 App. A, 2.02 - 4 App. A, 8.02 - 5 App. A, 10.02 Ord. No. 5-14 8-6-2014 1 66-301-66-305 Ord. No. 6-14 8-19-2014 1 App. A, 10.02 - 2 App. A, 15.03 - 3 App. A, 15.04 - 4 App. A, 2.02 - 5 App. A, 3.19 Ord. No. 7-14 12-2-2014 1 22-101 - 2 22-102 - 3 22-104 Ord. No. 9-14 12-16-2014 1 26-371 - 2 26-372 - 3 26-401 Ord. No. 1-16 3-1-2016 1 18-90 Ord. No. 3-16  5-17-2016 1 6-31 - 2 6-92(tit.), (b) - -       Added 6-92(g) - -       Rnbd 6-92(g) - -       as 6-92(h) Ord. No. 4-16  7-19-2016 1       Added 62-129 Ord. No. 6-16  8- 8-2016 1 ch. 70, art. 7,  70-560-70-572 Ord. No. 7-16 12-20-2016 1 62-129 Ord. No. 9-16 12-20-2016 1, 2 App. A, 8.03 D. - 3 App. A, 15.05 D.1. - 4 App. A, 17.08 A. - 5       Added App. A, 3.16 A.11. - 6 App. A, 3.05 A. - 7 App. A, 10.03 B. - 8 App. A, 3.11 A. - 9 App. A, 3.13 B. - 10 App. A, 19.02 - 11 App. A, 15.04 BB.1. - 12       Rpld App. A, 16.02 W. - 13       Added App. A, 2.02 S. - 14, 15       Added App. A, 8.03 E., F. Ord. No. 2-17  2- 7-2017 1       Added App. A, 1.07 F. - 2 App. A, 2.02 E. - 3 App. A, 3.02 - 4 App. A, 15.04 U. Ord. No. 5-17  6-20-2017 1, 2 22-101, 22-102 - 3 22-104 - 4       Rpld 22-106 Ord. No. 7-17  7-10-2017 1-7 74-72-74-78 Ord. No. 9-17  9- 5-2017 1 6-92(c)-(f) - -       Added 6-92(i) Ord. No. 10-17  9-19-2017 1 App. A, 2.02 C. - 2 App. A, 3.08 - 3 App. A, 3.16 B.3. - 4 App. A, 3.20 A. - 5 App. A, 8.02 - 6 App. A, 10.03 E. - 7 App. A, 11.03 D. - 8 App. A, 15.03 - 9 App. A, 15.04 T.10. - 10       Added App. A, 15.04 T.14. - 11 App. A, 15.04 T.13. - 12 App. A, 16.06 A.2.c. Ord. No. 1-18  1- 8-2018 1       Added 38-361-38-363 Ord. No. 2-18  1-16-2018 1 App. A, 2.02 A. - 2       Added App. A, 3.16 A.12. - -       Added App. A, 3.16 C.9. - 3       Rnbd App. A, 13.08 - -       as App. A, 13.09 - -       Added App. A, 13.08 Ord. No. 4-18  3-20-2018 1 App. A, 8.03 B.2. - 2 App. A, 10.03 C.1. - 3 App. A, 12.05 C.7.h. - - App. A, 12.07 C.9.g. - 4 App. A, 12.08 E.5.e. 5 App. A, 21.04 B Ord. No. 7-18  5- 1-2018 1-5 App. A, 2.02 - 6 App. A, 3.12 - 7       Added App. A, 3.16 A.13. - 8 App. A, 8.03 C.1. - 9 App. A, 15.04 FF.1. - 10 App. A, 15.04 FF.3. Ord. No. 11-18 10-16-2018 1 2-81 Ord. No. 12-18 11-12-2018 1 26-601 - 2 26-602 - 3 26-606 Ord. No. 13-18 11-12-2018 1 38-235(b) Ord. No. 14-18 11-12-2018 1       Added 26-700-26-702 Ord. No. 15-18 11-20-2018 1, 2 22-104 Ord. No. 16-18 11-20-2018 1 App. A, 3.15 A.6 - 2 App. A, 3.15 B - 3 App. A, 3.15 C.1.a., b. - 4 App. A, 3.15 C.2.b. - 5 App. A, 3.15 D - 6       Added App. A, C.9 - 7       Added App. A, D.8 Ord. No. 17-18 12- 4-2018 1 App. A, 3.31  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL). 
MCL 
Section Section 

this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.3u 1-9 8.4a 1-4 8.4b 1-3 8.5 1-8 10.31 et seq. 18-31 15.181 et seq. Char.  15.11 15.231 et seq. Char.  2.3 - Char.  4.6 - Ch. 2 (note) - 2-243 - 62-114 15.261 et seq. Char.  4.2 - Char.  4.3 - Char.  4.6 - Ch. 2 (note) - 2-243 15.321 et seq. Char.  14.12 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 28.451 et seq. 22-104 - 38-163 29.1 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) - Ch. 22, Art. 4 - 22-104 29.361 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. 2 29.41 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) - 22-104 29.417 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 30.401 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. 2 - 18-33 30.402 18-31 30.409 18-38 30.410 18-38 30.411(2) 18-41 37.2101 et seq. 26-334 37.2501 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. 6 38.501 et seq. Char.  14.15 117.1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - 66-1 - 78-131 117.1 et seq. Char.  3.1 117.1 Char.  1.1 117.3(a) Char.  5.2 - Char.  6.1 - Char.  6.6 - Char.  6.7 - Char.  6.8 - Char.  15.3 117.3(e) Char.  1.3 117.3(f) Char.  8.2 117.3(g) Char.  8.1 117.3(k) Char.  5.1 - Char.  5.4 - Char.  5.5 - Char.  5.6 - Char.  5.7 - 1-7 - 22-101 - 22-107 - 66-1 - 74-34 117.3(l) Char.  2.3 - Char.  4.3 - Char.  4.6 117.3(n) Char.  6.5 117.4a Char. Ch. X 117.4a(2) Char. Ch. IX - Char.  9.2 117.4c et seq. Char.  3.2 117.4f Char. Ch. XII - Char. Ch. XIII 117.4i(k) Char.  5.7 117.4l 1-7 - Ch. 2, Art. 5 117.5 Char. Ch. X 117.5(a) Char.  8.1 117.5(f) Char.  14.1 - 2-1 117.5(i) Char. Ch. XIII - Char.  13.1 117.5b Char.  5.4 - 1-1 117.5c Char.  6.3 - Ch. 2, Art. 4, 
Div. 2 117.5c(a) 2-151 117.5c(b) 2-152 117.5c(c) 2-153 117.5e Char. Ch. XII 117.5h 38-303 117.6 et seq. Char.  1.2 117.9 Char.  1.2 117.21 et seq. Char.  2.9 123.51 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) 123.361 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 123.731 et seq. 46-31 123.1001 et seq. Char.  1.2 123.1101 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. 4, 
Div. 2 124.1 et seq. Char.  3.3 - 70-352 124.281 et seq. Ch. 70 (note) 125.31 et seq. 90-31 - App. A,  2.02 125.32 86-31 125.33 86-32 125.34 86-33 125.35 86-34 125.36 86-35 125.37b(3) 86-36 125.38 86-36 125.39 86-37 125.40 86-38 125.41 86-39 125.43 86-40 125.44 86-41 125.45 86-42 125.51 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. 3 125.581 et seq. App. A (note) - App. A,  1.02 - App. A,  2.02 125.583a App. A,  3.24 125.583c App. A,  3.18 125.584 App. A,  13.03 125.584a App. A,  13.04 125.584b App. A, Ch. 12 - App. A,  13.06 125.584c App. A,  13.09 - App. A,  14.05 - App. A, Ch. 15 125.584d App. A,  12.09 - App. A,  12.10- 
App. A,  12.12 - App. A,  13.05 - App. A, Ch. 14 125.584e App. A,  22.06 125.585 et seq. App. A, Ch. 21 125.585a App. A,  13.07 125.586 App. A,  1.04 125.587 App. A,  22.07 125.651 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 4, 
Div. 5 - 2-241 125.653 2-241 125.654(1) 2-242 125.655 2-243 125.656 2-244 125.657 2-245 - 2-247 125.659 2-246 125.660 2-247 125.661 2-249 125.661(1) 2-248 125.663 2-250 125.664 2-251 125.665 2-252 125.666 2-253 125.667 2-254 125.782 38-8 125.1415a Ch. 58, Art. 2 125.1415a(1) 58-31 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. 2 - 74-35 125.1508b 74-31 125.1510 74-33 125.1513 74-33 125.1514 74-32 125.1523 74-35 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 4, 
Div. 4 - 2-211 125.1604 2-211 125.2301 et seq. App. A,  7.01 - App. A,  7.02 125.2301 App. A,  7.04 125.3101 et seq. Char.  6.14 - Ch. 74 (note) 125.3801 et seq. Char.  6.14 - Subpt. B 125.3881(2) 86-31 128.1 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 129.11 et seq. Char.  6.8 - Char.  7.6 129.91 et seq. Char.  7.7 129.111 et seq. Char.  7.7 129.141 et seq. Char.  7.7 141.101 et seq. Char. Ch. IX - 70-180 - 78-131 - 78-148 141.210 et seq. Char. Ch. IX 141.421 et seq. Char. Ch. VII - Ch. 2, Art. 6 141.424 Char.  7.8 141.425 et seq. Char.  7.8 141.2101 et seq. Char. Ch. VII - Ch. 2, Art. 6 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. XV 168.322 Char.  15.8 168.322a Char.  15.12 168.323 Char.  15.16 168.327 Char.  14.4 168.492 Char.  15.1 168.544c Char.  15.9 168.552 Char.  15.10 168.647 et seq. Char.  15.7 168.684 et seq. Char.  15.15 168.719 Char.  15.14 168.851 et seq. Char.  15.17 168.861 et seq. Char.  15.18 206.501 et seq. 58-2 211.1 et seq. Char.  6.9 - Char. Ch. VIII - Ch. 58 (note) 211.7 et seq. Char.  8.3 211.10 et seq. Char.  6.6 211.24 et seq. Char.  8.4 211.28 et seq. Char.  8.5 - Char.  8.6 211.29(6) Char.  8.8 211.30 Char.  8.7 211.30a Char.  8.9 211.40 et seq. Char.  8.13 211.43b Ch. 2, Art. 6 211.44(7) 58-1, 58-2 211.107 Char.  8.7 211.107a Char.  8.1 211.741 et seq. Char. Ch. X - Ch. 50 (note) 211.741 50-5 211.746 Char.  10.4 211.761 et seq. Char. Ch. X - Ch. 50 (note) 247.171 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 247.291 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 247.321 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 247.651 et seq. 62-123 (note) 252.201 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. 3 257.1 et seq. Ch. 66 (note) - 66-1 257.252a et seq. Ch. 34, Art. 3 257.252a 34-71 257.605 Ch. 66 (note) 257.606 Ch. 66 (note) 257.606(1)(a) Ch. 66, Art. 3 257.606(1)(i) Ch. 66, Art. 5 257.610 Ch. 66 (note) - 66-33 257.625 et seq. 38-326 257.656 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. 5 257.672 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. 3 257.676b(2) 38-235 257.720 46-35 257.726 Ch. 66, Art. 4 257.941 et seq. 66-4 257.951 66-2 259.432 et seq. App. A,  3.30 259.481 et seq. App. A,  3.30 259.781 et seq. 22-104 280.1 et seq. 78-131 280.461 et seq. 78-101 286.841 et seq. 26-700 287.261 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) - Ch. 10, Art. 3 287.262 et seq. 10-101 287.270b 10-102 287.279 Ch. 10, Art. 5 287.288 Ch. 10, Art. 5 287.290 Ch. 10 (note) 287.321 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) - Ch. 10, Art. 5 287.351 Ch. 10, Art. 5 289.801-289.810 38-363 289.7101-289.7137 38-363 324.101 et seq. 22-104 - Ch. 30 (note) - Ch. 78 (note) - 78-131 324.3101 et seq. 70-213 - 70-217, 70-218 324.3108 Ch. 78, Art. 3 - 78-126 324.4301 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) - Ch. 70 (note) 324.8501 et seq. 46-31 324.8901 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. 4 - 38-164 - Ch. 46 (note) - 46-1 324.9101 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. 2 - 78-31 - 78-35 324.9105 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. 2 324.9301 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. 3 324.11101 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) - 46-31 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) - 46-31 - 46-34 324.14501 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 324.19101 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 324.20101 et seq. 2-372 - 78-147 324.20120c 46-31 324.30101 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. 3 324.30101 78-101 324.40101 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 324.80176 et seq. 38-326 324.81134 et seq. 38-326 324.82127 et seq. 38-326 330.1286 38-325 333.1101 et seq. 38-351 - App. A,  2.02 333.7101 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. 5 - Ch. 38, Art. 6, 
Div. 2 - 38-321, 38-322 333.7303 et seq. 38-323 333.7451 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. 6, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. 2 333.13101 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. 6 - 26-471 333.13801 et seq. 70-217 333.16631 70-217 333.17707 38-363 333.17951 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. 4 - 26-372 - 26-401 333.20901 et seq. 18-90 333.26201 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 338.881 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. 3 - 74-2 338.886 74-2 338.1051 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. 3 338.2301 et seq. 22-104 338.3511 et seq. 70-84 339.101 et seq. 22-104 380.1561 et seq. 38-391 399.1 et seq. Ch. 82 (note) 399.201 et seq. Ch. 82 (note) - 82-1 399.203 82-87 399.204 et seq. Ch. 82, Art. 2 399.204 82-41 400.701 et seq. 22-104 - App. A,  2.02 408.681 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) 408.1001 et seq. 70-213 436.1101 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) - 6-1 26-376 436.1501 Ch. 6, Art. 2, 
Div. 2 436.1703 6-37 436.1707 38-324 445.401 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. 8 446.201 et seq. 26-604 456.521 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 460.701 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 480.11 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. 6 - 66-201 484.2101 et seq. Ch. 62 (note) 484.2102 62-111 484.2251 62-114 484.3101 et seq. Ch. 62 (note) - Ch. 62, Art. 4 - 62-111 484.3104(2) 62-126 484.3105(3) 62-114 484.3106(2) 62-114, 62-115 484.3106(8) 62-118 484.3108 62-120-62-122 484.3110(4), 484.3110(5) 62-123, 62-124 484.3113(4), 484.3113(5) 62-121, 62-122 484.3113(6) 62-125 484.3115(2) 62-128 484.3115(3) 62-115 484.3201 et seq. Ch. 62 (note) 484.3301 et seq. Ch. 62 (note) - Ch. 62, Art. 2 - 62-31 559.101 et seq. App. A,  2.02 - App. A,  7.02 - App. A,  13.05 559.171 App. A,  2.02 560.101 et seq. 78-131 - Ch. 90, Art. 2 - 90-31 - App. A,  3.25 - App. A,  13.05 - App. A,  13.06 560.102 90-31 560.105 et seq. 90-34 560.106 90-35 560.111 et seq. 90-34 560.131 et seq. 90-35 560.138 Ch. 78, Art. 3 560.194 Ch. 78, Art. 3 560.263 90-39 600.101 et seq. 2-281 - 78-144 600.2940 Ch. 34 (note) 600.3801 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 600.8396 2-281 - 2-311 600.8701 et seq. 1-7 - Ch. 2, Art. 5 600.8703 2-282 600.8705 2-342 600.8707 2-282 - 2-342 600.8707(6) 2-281 600.8709 2-342 691.1401 et seq. Char.  2.2 691.1402 Ch. 54 691.1416 et seq. 70-387 722.111 et seq. App. A,  2.02 722.112 et seq. 22-104 722.641 et seq. 38-395 722.673 38-303 722.751 et seq. 38-392 750.1 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 750.49 et seq. 10-4, 10-5 750.81 et seq. 38-41 750.131 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. 3, 
Div. 3 750.141a 38-328 750.147b 38-5 750.167(1)(c) 38-42 750.167(1)(e) 38-325 750.167(1)(h) 38-235 750.167(1)(j) 38-4 750.169 38-233 750.170 38-233 750.174 38-116 750.183 et seq. 38-434 750.200 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 750.215 18-44 - 38-438 750.218 et seq. 38-113 750.219a 38-115 750.222 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. 4, 
Div. 2 750.226a 38-194 750.227 38-195 750.240 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 750.240 38-7 - 38-431 750.241 22-153 750.292 38-112 750.301 et seq. 38-302 750.335a 38-303 750.352 38-6 750.356 et seq. 38-111 750.356d 38-114 750.360a 38-121 750.362a 38-118 750.377a et seq. 38-9 - 38-88 - 38-90 750.394 38-198 750.411a 38-7 - 38-431 750.411h et seq. 38-41 750.422 et seq. 38-437 750.448 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. 5 - 38-301 750.452 38-2 750.459 38-3 750.479 18-44 - 38-432 750.479a 38-433 750.493d 38-162 750.508 38-439 750.535 38-117 750.540e 38-7 750.546 et seq. 38-9 - 38-81, 38-82 752.91 10-5 752.362 38-303 764.9c 2-61 764.15a 38-41 769.1f 2-372, 2-373 - 78-147  
